OceanofPDF.com

ALSO BY CLIFFORD A. PICKOVER
The Alien IQ Test
Archimedes to Hawking
A Beginner’s Guide to Immortality
Black Holes: A Traveler’s Guide
The Book of Black
Brain Strain: A Mental Muscle Workout That’s Fun!
Calculus and Pizza
Chaos and Fractals (ed.)
Chaos in Wonderland
Computers and the Imagination
Computers, Pattern, Chaos, and Beauty
Cryptorunes: Codes and Secret Writing
Death and the Afterlife
Dreaming the Future
Egg Drop Soup
Fractal 3D Magic
Future Health (ed.)
Fractal Horizons: The Future Use of Fractals (ed.)
Frontiers of Scientific Visualization (ed.)
The Girl Who Gave Birth to Rabbits
The Heaven Virus
Jews in Hyperspace
Keys to Infinity
Liquid Earth

The Lobotomy Club
The Loom of God
The Math Book
The Mathematics Devotional
The Mathematics of Oz
Mazes for the Mind: Computers and the Unexpected
The Medical Book
The Möbius Strip
The Paradox of God and the Science of Omniscience
A Passion for Mathematics
The Pattern Book: Fractals, Art, and Nature (ed.)
The Physics Book
The Physics Devotional
The Science Book
The Science of Aliens
Sex, Drugs, Einstein, and Elves
Spider Legs (with Piers Anthony)
Spiral Symmetry (ed., with Istvan Hargittai)
The Stars of Heaven
Strange Brains and Genius
Surfing through Hyperspace
Sushi Never Sleeps
Time: A Traveler’s Guide
Visions of the Future (ed.)
Visualizing Biological Information (ed.)
Wonders of Numbers
The Zen of Magic Squares, Circles, and Stars

OceanofPDF.com

OceanofPDF.com

UNION SQUARE & CO. and the distinctive Union Square & Co. logo are trademarks of
Sterling Publishing Co., Inc.
Union Square & Co., LLC, is a subsidiary of Sterling Publishing Co., Inc.
Text © 2019, 2024 Clifford A. Pickover
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval
system, or transmitted in any form or by any means (including electronic, mechanical,
photocopying, recording, or otherwise) without prior written permission from the publisher.
ISBN 978-1-4549-5578-8
For information about custom editions, special sales, and premium purchases, please
contact specialsales@unionsquareandco.com.
unionsquareandco.com
Cover design by Pete Garceau
Cover image: gadost/iStock/Getty Images Plus
For image credits, see page 215

OceanofPDF.com

“An attempt will be made to find how to make machines use
language, form abstractions and concepts, solve the kinds of
problems now reserved for humans, and improve themselves.… For
the present purpose, the artificial intelligence problem is taken to be
that of making a machine behave in ways that would be called
intelligent if a human were so behaving.”
—John McCarthy, Marvin Minsky, Nathaniel Rochester, and
Claude Shannon, “Proposal for the Dartmouth Summer
Research Project on Artificial Intelligence,” 1955
“Artificial Intelligence can drive cars, trade stocks and shares, learn
to carry out complex skills simply by watching YouTube videos,
translate across dozens of different languages, recognize human
faces with more accuracy than we can, and create original
hypotheses to help discover new drugs for curing disease. That’s just
the beginning.”
—Luke Dormehl, Thinking Machines, 2017
“Not until a machine can write a sonnet or compose a concerto
because of thoughts and emotions felt, and not by the chance fall of
symbols, could we agree that machine equals brain—that is, not only
write it but know that it had written it.”
—Professor Geoffrey Jefferson, “The Mind of Mechanical
Man,” 1949
“Whether we are based on carbon or on silicon makes no
fundamental difference; we should each be treated with appropriate
respect.”
—Arthur C. Clarke, 2010: Odyssey Two, 1984
“Emerging as it does from many fields—philosophy, mathematics,
psychology and even neurology—AI raises basic questions about
human intelligence, memory, the mind/body problem, the origins of

language, symbolic reasoning, information processing, and so forth.
AI researchers are—like alchemists of old who sought to create gold
from base metal—seeking to create thinking machines from
infinitesimal small bits of silicon oxyde.”
—Daniel Crevier, AI: The Tumultuous History of the Search
for Artificial Intelligence, 1993

OceanofPDF.com

CONTENTS
Cover
Title Page
Copyright
Introduction
C. 1300 BCE Tic-Tac-Toe
C. 400 BCE Talos
C. 350 BCE Aristotle’s Organon
C. 250 BCE Ktesibios’s Water Clock
C. 190 BCE Abacus
C. 125 BCE Antikythera Mechanism
1206 al-Jazari’s Automata
C. 1220 Lancelot’s Copper Knights
C. 1300 Hesdin Mechanical Park
C. 1305 Ramon Llull’s Ars Magna
1352 Religious Automata
C. 1495 da Vinci’s Robot Knight
1580 Golem
1651 Hobbes’s Leviathan
1714 The Consciousness Mill
1726 Lagado Book-Writing Engine
1738 de Vaucanson’s Duck Automaton

1770 Mechanical Turk
1774 Jaquet-Droz Automata
1818 Frankenstein
1821 Computational Creativity
1822 Babbage’s Mechanical Computer
1844 “The Artist of the Beautiful”
1854 Boolean Algebra
1863 “Darwin among the Machines”
1868 The Steam Man of the Prairies
1883 Tower of Hanoi
1893 Electric Bob’s Big Black Ostrich
1898 Tesla’s “Borrowed Mind”
1907 Tik-Tok
1907 Searches for the Soul
1913 Optical Character Recognition (OCR)
1920 Rossum’s Universal Robots
1927 Metropolis
1939 Elektro the Moto-Man
1939 Speech Synthesis
1942 Asimov’s Three Laws of Robotics
1942 Lethal Military Robots
1943 Artificial Neural Networks
1946 ENIAC
1949 Giant Brains, or Machines That Think
1950 Turing Test
1950 The Human Use of Human Beings

1951 Reinforcement Learning
1952 Speech Recognition
1954 Natural Language Processing
1956 Dartmouth AI Workshop
1957 Perceptron
1957 Transhumanism
1959 Machine Learning
1959 Knowledge Representation and Reasoning
1960 Licklider’s “Man-Computer Symbiosis”
1964 ELIZA Psychotherapist
1964 Face Recognition
1965 Intelligence Explosion
1965 Expert Systems
1965 Fuzzy Logic
1965 Deep Learning
1966 Shakey the Robot
1967 Living in a Simulation
1968 Cybernetic Serendipity
1968 HAL 9000
1970 Mastermind
1970 Colossus: The Forbin Project
1971 SHRDLU
1972 Paranoid PARRY
1975 Genetic Algorithms
1976 Ethics of AI
1979 Backgammon Champion Defeated

1980 Chinese Room
1982 Blade Runner
1984 Autonomous Vehicles
1984 The Terminator
1986 Artificial Life
1986 Swarm Intelligence
1988 Moravec’s Paradox
1988 Connect Four
1990 “Elephants Don’t Play Chess”
1993 Leakproof “AI Box”
1994 Checkers and AI
1996 Tamagotchi
1997 Deep Blue Defeats Chess Champion
1997 Othello
1999 AIBO Robot
2000 ASIMO and Friends
2001 Spielberg’s A.I. Artificial Intelligence
2002 Solving the Game of Awari
2002 Roomba
2003 Paperclip Maximizer Catastrophe
2006 Quackle’s Scrabble Win
2011 Watson on Jeopardy!
2015 Computer Art and DeepDream
2015 “Call Them Artificial Aliens”
2015 AI on Mars
2016 AlphaGo Go Champion

2016 Autonomous Robotic Surgery
2017 AI Poker
2018 Adversarial Patches
2018 Rubik’s Cube Robots
2019 AI Death Predictor
2020 AlphaFold 2
2021 DALL-E
2022 ChatGPT
2023 Slowing the AI Race?
Notes and References
Image Credits
About the Author

OceanofPDF.com

INTRODUCTION
“The period of time occupied by organic intelligence is just a thin
sliver between early life and the long era of the machines.”
—Martin Rees, The Conversation, April 2017 interview

AI and Beyond
“A lot of cutting edge AI has filtered into general applications, often
without being called AI, because once something becomes useful
enough and common enough, it’s not labeled AI anymore.”
—Nick Bostrom, “AI Set to Exceed Human Brain Power,”
CNN.com, 2006
THROUGHOUT HISTORY, THE MYSTERIES OF the mind, the nature of thought, and
the possibility of artificial beings have captivated artists, scientists,
philosophers, and even theologians. Symbols and stories involving
automata—moving mechanical devices made in imitation of living beings
—permeate myth, art, music, and literature. Our fascination with artificial
intelligence (AI)—apparently intelligent behavior by machines—is also
reflected in the spooky or transcendent themes of blockbuster films or video
games involving emotional robots and advanced intelligences that we can
barely comprehend.
In this book, we’ll embark on a vast chronological journey from ancient
games to advanced modern computing approaches involving artificial
neural networks that learn and improve their performance, often with little
or no task-specific programming and rules. Along the way, we’ll encounter
odd and perplexing marvels like the mysterious copper knights of Arthurian
legend. We’ll also encounter French inventor Jacques de Vaucanson’s

Canard Digérateur, a hyper-realistic duck automaton that inspired American
author Thomas Pynchon’s historical novel Mason & Dixon more than 250
years later, and the thirteenth-century Catalan philosopher Ramon Llull,
who was among the first to explore a systematic approach to artificially
generating ideas using a mechanical device. Skip forward to 1893, and we
encounter the quirky and entertaining Electric Bob’s Big Black Ostrich, a
story that—along with the series The Steam Man of the Prairies—is notable
for reflecting the growing fervor for all things mechanical during the
Victorian-era steampunk movement.
In more recent times, we encounter Arthur Samuel of IBM, who
implemented one of the earliest computer programs for playing checkers in
1952, followed in 1955 by a program that learned to play the game without
outside interference. Today, the term artificial intelligence often refers to
systems designed to learn, solve problems, and interact with humans using
natural-language processing. Intelligent personal assistants like Amazon’s
Alexa, Apple’s Siri, and Microsoft’s Cortana all reflect some aspect of AI.
In this book, we’ll also address fascinating issues concerning the ethical
use of AI and even the challenges of placing advanced AI entities, should
they become dangerously super-intelligent, into a “leakproof” box in order
to isolate them from the outside world. Of course, the boundaries and scope
of AI morph through time, and some experts suggest inclusive definitions
that admit a range of technologies that have helped human beings perform
cognitive tasks. Thus, to give a richer understanding of AI history, I have
also included several devices or machines that have provided answers to
problems that typically require human thinking and human computation,
including the abacus, the Antikythera Mechanism (125 BCE), ENIAC
(1946), and more. After all, without these early technologies, we would not
have the advanced chess-playing and vehicle-driving systems that exist in
our modern world.
As you read this book, remember that even if we consider some of the
historical ideas or predictions concerning artificial beings to be far-fetched,
old ideas may become suddenly viable when implemented on faster, more
advanced computer hardware. Our technical predictions—and even our
myths—are, at a minimum, fascinating models of human understanding and
creativity—and of how we reach across cultures and time to understand one
another and learn about what we hold sacred or beneficial for society.

However, even as we celebrate human imagination and ingenuity, it is vital
to discuss unintended consequences, including the possible dangers of AI.
As theoretical physicist Stephen Hawking told the BBC in a 2014 interview,
“The development of full artificial intelligence could spell the end of the
human race.… It would take off on its own, and redesign itself at an everincreasing rate.” In other words, there’s a chance that AI entities will
become so smart and capable that they will be able to continually improve
themselves, creating a kind of superintelligence that could pose a great risk
to humanity. This form of runaway technology growth, sometimes referred
to as the technological singularity, could result in unimaginable changes to
civilization, society, and human life.
So while the potential benefits of AI are numerous—self-driving cars,
efficient business processes, and even companionship in countless arenas—
humanity will need to be particularly cautious when developing
autonomous weapons systems and over-relying on AI technologies with
sometimes inscrutable mechanisms. For example, studies show the ease
with which some AI (neural net) imaging systems can be “tricked” into
misidentifying animals as rifles, or a picture of a plane as a dog, by altering
images in ways that humans cannot perceive. If a terrorist can make a mall
or a hospital look like a military target to a drone, the consequences could
be dire. On the other hand, perhaps armed machines with appropriate
sensors and rules of ethics could also reduce civilian casualties. Informed
policy-making is needed to ensure that the potential dangers of AI entities
do not overshadow their amazing benefits.
As we increasingly put our trust in AIs with many complex deep learning
neural networks, one interesting area of research is developing AI systems
that can explain to humans how they arrived at certain decisions. However,
forcing AIs to explain themselves could potentially cripple them, at least in
certain applications. Many of these machines can create far more intricate
models of reality than humans could possibly understand. AI expert David
Gunning has even suggested that the highest-performing system will be the
least explainable.

Book Organization and Purpose
I HAVE HAD A LONGTIME FASCINATION WITH computing and topics at the
borderlands of science, and my goal in writing this book is to provide a
wide audience with a brief guide to both curious and important practical
ideas in the history of artificial intelligence, a term that wasn’t coined until
1955 by computer scientist John McCarthy. Each book entry is only a few
paragraphs in length, allowing readers to jump in at any point in the book
without having to sort through a lot of verbiage. Of course, this meant I
couldn’t go into any depth on a subject. However, in the “Notes and
References” section, there are suggestions for further reading and sourcing
for various quotes or credentials of cited authors.
Touching on fields of study as diverse as philosophy, popular culture,
computer science, sociology, and theology, the entries in this book also
include topics that interested me personally. In fact, when I was younger, I
became fascinated with Jasia Reichard’s Cybernetic Serendipity: The
Computer and the Arts, published in 1968; the book featured computergenerated poetry, paintings, music, graphics, and more. I’m also particularly
fascinated by the strides AI experts have made in the realm of art, using
generative adversarial networks (GANs) to produce amazing photorealistic
images of simulated faces, flowers, and birds. GANs make use of two
neural networks pitted against each other—one network generating ideas
and patterns, the other judging the results.
Today, the applications of AI seem limitless, and billions of dollars are
invested in the development of AI each year. Such technologies have been
used to decipher the Vatican’s Secret Archives in an attempt to resolve the
complicated handwritten texts in this huge historical collection. AI has also
been used for predicting earthquakes, interpreting medical images and
speech, and for predicting a person’s time of death based on patient
information in a hospital’s electronic health records. AI has been deployed
for generating jokes, mathematical theorems, US patents, games and
puzzles, innovative designs for antennas, new paint colors, new fragrances,
and more. Today, as many of us talk to our phones and other devices, our
relationship with machines will continue to become even more intimate and
humanlike in the future.

Organized chronologically according to the year associated with a key
event, publication, or discovery, the dating of book entries is a question of
judgment. Some dates are approximate; whenever possible, I tried to give a
justification for the dates used.
You’ll also notice an increase in the number of entries after the year
1950. Daniel Crevier, author of AI: The Tumultuous History of the Search
for Artificial Intelligence (1993), notes that in the 1960s, “AI blossomed in
a thousand flowers. AI researchers applied their new programming
techniques to many problems that, although real, had been carefully
simplified, partly to isolate the problems to be addressed, but partly also to
fit into the tiny memories of the computers available in those days.”
The mystery of consciousness, the limits of artificial intelligence, and the
nature of the mind will be studied for years to come and have actually
intrigued people from ancient times. The author Pamela McCorduck
suggested in her book Machines Who Think that AI began with an ancient
wish to “forge the gods.”
Future AI discoveries will be among humanity’s greatest achievements.
The story of AI is not only about how we will shape our future but also
about how humans will mesh with a landscape of accelerating intelligence
and creativity all around us. What will it mean to be “human” a hundred
years from now? What will society be like, given the increasing use of AI
agents? How will jobs be affected? Will we fall in love with robots?
If AI methods and models are already being used to help determine who
gets hired for a job, who we date, who makes parole, who is likely to
develop a psychiatric disorder, and how to autonomously drive cars and
drones, then how much control over our lives will we give to AIs of the
future? As they increasingly make decisions for us, will AI units be easily
fooled into making critical errors? How can AI researchers better
understand why some machine-learning algorithms and architectures are
more effective than others, while also making it easier for AI researchers to
reproduce one another’s results and experiments?
Moreover, how can we ensure that AI-driven devices behave in an
ethical manner, and will machines ever have mental states and feelings in
the same sense that humans do? Surely, AI machines will help us think new
thoughts and dream new dreams, functioning as prosthetics for our feeble
brains. For me, AI cultivates a perpetual state of wonder about the limits of

thought, the future of humanity, and our place in the vast space-time
landscape that we call home.

Since the publication of the first edition of this book in 2019, the
breakthroughs in AI continue to surprise the world. AI has touched
countless facets of life—from molecular biology to language and art, as
well as discussions on the nature of machine consciousness and what it
means to be human. Benefits and risks of AI abound, as these latest
technologies increasingly penetrate our everyday lives.
One important breakthrough in the arena of health and biology includes
AlphaFold 2, the AI program developed by the DeepMind laboratory in
2020, which astounded scientists by its ability to accurately predict a wide
range of protein molecular structures. AlphaFold 2 may help scientists
design new proteins with specific functions, discover new drugs, and better
understand diseases. Like many breakthroughs in the AI field, this advance
in addressing the protein-folding problem occurred years or even decades
before many people in the field would have thought possible.
AI is also altering creative processes through applications such as
DALL-E that create images from textual descriptions. The OpenAI
laboratory debuted DALL-E in 2021, and it can function as a collaborator
and source of inspiration to artists. It can also be used to edit existing
images or expand them beyond their original spatial borders. Of course, the
implications of art-generating programs are great, and one wonders how our
world will be changed when the programs begin to create a significant
amount of compelling art, movies, and virtual realities. Note that even lesssophisticated systems that people use to augment images of themselves—
for example, social-media filters that instantly make a face more
symmetrical, thinner, with smooth skin, etc.—may be distorting our notion
of beauty and normality as we view humanity through a misleading lens.
Research on such filters suggests that they may be decreasing our selfesteem and increasing our addiction to social media validation, along with
amplifying a concern that our actual appearances are inferior and
insufficient.

On November 30, 2022, OpenAI launched ChatGPT (chat generative
pre-trained transformer), an application that uses large language models
(LLMs) to converse with humans. By January 2023, ChatGPT had more
than 100 million users, making it one of the fastest-growing consumer
software applications in history. Other LLM chatbots soon followed, such
as Google’s Bard. These chatbots can write natural prose on a seemingly
endless variety of topics. Interestingly, 2022 was also the year in which
Google fired one of its engineers after he publicly raised ethical concerns
about their use of AI chatbots that he believed had achieved sentience.
Google responded that the engineer had violated its policies “to safeguard
product information,” and Google dismissed his claims of AI sentience as
“wholly unfounded.”
Public policy and our legal system are only just starting to address the
new challenges posed by AI. There is ongoing debate about “guardrails”
that companies might place on chatbots to control and limit what the tools
can say (e.g., preventing the tools from advising users on how to commit
suicide or make bombs, or describing pornographic and violent acts). Even
if companies continue to refine such guardrails, users may be able to
develop their own uncensored, unrestricted chatbots—and such chatbots
could be customized for different segments of society, such as Democrats,
Republicans, Christians, or Muslims. This personalization may create “echo
chambers” in which users amplify or reinforce their preexisting beliefs in a
manner that encourages societal polarization. As an additional concern, if
increasingly more AI-generated texts appear on the Internet, we may reach a
point in which the majority of what we read online and elsewhere is AIgenerated. Are AI systems training themselves on their own effluent,
feeding on themselves in a carnivorous route to the Singularity?
These confusions and fears are shared by many people, including the
very ones who launched these technologies and continue to develop them.
In 2023, the Future of Life Institute (FLI) published a letter calling for a
pause on the development of increasingly powerful AI systems and large
language models, like those used to power the ChatGPT chatbot. The FLI
letter emphasized the need to create plans for ensuring AI safety, with
possible government intervention, noting that “recent months have seen AI
labs locked in an out-of-control race to develop and deploy ever more

powerful digital minds that no one—not even their creators—can
understand, predict, or reliably control.”
Many of these developments in the field of AI have implications for the
future, and debate continues as to whether these kinds of systems will ever
be considered as conscious. In 2023, philosopher David Chalmers
suggested that within the next decade, it’s possible that humanity will
develop augmented LLM systems with senses, embodiment in robotic
forms, memory, and other features that enable them to be considered
conscious. Chalmers’s April 2023 paper “Could a Large Language Model
Be Conscious?” provides additional details on the workings of such alien
minds.
Creative use of chatbots continues to soar. Already, researchers like
Brian Roemmele have developed prompts that coax ChatGPT to “imagine”
that it is psychic and perform remote viewing of faraway targets, while also
speculating on specialized chatbots trained on the Bible, the Vedas, or
cuneiform texts—enabling users to ask questions of these texts, as if
conversing with the spirits of the ancient authors.
Whatever the future holds, filled with risks but also supreme delights, I
see many bright avenues ahead, as AI entities help humanity reason beyond
the limits of its own intuitions, amplifying our ability for reasoning in a
direction not naturally pointed to by a scientific discipline or traditional
understanding. AI will increasingly facilitate the deliberate drift of our
thinking, feelings, learning, and visions in new directions that humans
otherwise might never discover on their own.

OceanofPDF.com

Tic-tac-toe can be made more challenging for humans and AI-based machines by extending
the 3 × 3 game to higher dimensions and array sizes, such as in this 4 × 4 × 4 version, and
by introducing gravity effects, as each piece slides to the bottom available position.

TIC-TAC-TOE

c. 1300 BC
ARCHEOLOGISTS CAN TRACE WHAT APPEARS to be “three-in-a-row games” to
around 1300 BCE in ancient Egypt. For tic-tac-toe (TTT), two players, O
and X, take turns marking their symbols in the spaces of a 3 × 3 grid. The
player who first places three of his own marks in a horizontal, vertical, or
diagonal row wins.
We’re interested in TTT for this book because it has often been used as
an introduction to aspects of artificial intelligence and computer
programming, due to the simplicity of searching its game trees (where
nodes are positions in a game, and edges represent moves). TTT is a
“perfect information” game, as all players know all the moves that have
taken place. It is also a sequential game without randomization, with the
players taking turns and avoiding the use of dice.
TTT may be considered an “atom” upon which the molecules of more
advanced games of position were built through the centuries. With the
slightest of variations and extensions, the simple game of TTT becomes a
fantastic challenge, requiring significant time to master. Mathematicians
and puzzle aficionados have extended TTT to larger boards, higher
dimensions, and strange playing surfaces such as rectangular or square
boards connected at their edges to form a torus (doughnut shape) or Klein
bottle (a surface with just one side).
Consider some TTT curiosities. Players can place their Xs and Os to fill a
TTT board in 362,880 (or 9!) ways. However, there are 255,168 possible
games in TTT when considering all possible games that end in 5, 6, 7, 8,
and 9 moves. In 1960, the MENACE AI system (a contraption of colored
beads and matchboxes) learned to play TTT using reinforcement learning.
In the early 1980s, computer geniuses Danny Hillis, Brian Silverman, and
friends built a Tinkertoy® computer that played TTT from 10,000 Tinkertoy

pieces. In 1998, researchers and students at the University of Toronto
created a robot to play three-dimensional (4 × 4 × 4) TTT with a human.

SEE ALSO The Consciousness Mill (1714), Reinforcement Learning (1951), Connect Four (1988),
Othello (1997), Solving the Game of Awari (2002)

OceanofPDF.com

A depiction of Talos from Thomas Bulfinch’s Stories of Gods and Heroes (1920), drawn by
English artist Sybil Tawse (1886–1971).

TALOS

c. 400 BCE
“MANY PEOPLE ARE FAMILIAR WITH THE figure of Talos,” writes author Brian
Haughton, “through his depiction as a bronze giant in the 1963 movie Jason
and the Argonauts.… But where did the idea for Talos come from, and
could he have been the first robot in history?”
According to Greek mythology, Talos was a huge bronze automaton
whose job was to protect Europa—the mother of King Minos of Crete—
from invaders, pirates, and other enemies. Talos was programmed to patrol
the island’s shores by circling the entirety of Crete three times each day.
One way of deterring foes involved throwing huge boulders down on them.
At other times, the giant robot would leap into a fire until he glowed with
heat, then hug the enemy’s body to burn him to death. Talos is sometimes
depicted as a winged creature, as was discovered on coins in Phaistos,
Crete, from around 300 BCE; other vase paintings date to around 400 BCE.
Various explanations have been given regarding the creation and death of
Talos. In one myth, he is made by Hephaestus—the Greek god of
metalworking, metallurgy, fire, blacksmiths, and other artisans—at the
request of Zeus. Because Talos was an automaton, his internal structure was
less complex than a human’s; in fact, Talos had just one vein that ran from
his neck to his ankle. The vein was sealed and protected from leaking by a
bronze nail at the ankle. According to one legend, the sorceress Medea
drove him mad with death spirits (Keres) and caused him to dislodge the
nail. The ichor (i.e., divine blood) then gushed out of him “like molten
lead,” killing him.
Talos is just one example showing how the ancient Greeks thought about
robots and other automata. For another, consider the work of mathematician
Archytas (428–347 BCE), who may have designed and built an automaton

driven by steam in the form of a self-propelled flying bird called “The
Pigeon.”

SEE ALSO Ktesibios’s Water Clock (c. 250 BCE), Lancelot’s Copper Knights (c. 1220), Golem
(1580), Frankenstein (1818)

OceanofPDF.com

This impressive bust of Aristotle is a Roman copy of a bronze original by Greek sculptor
Lysippos, who lived in the fourth century BCE.

ARISTOTLE’S ORGANON

c. 350 BCE
THE GREEK PHILOSOPHER ARISTOTLE (384–322 BCE) touched upon several
influential topics during his life that are still of interest to AI researchers
today. In his book Politics, Aristotle speculated that automatons could
someday replace human slaves: “There is only one condition in which we
can imagine managers not needing subordinates, and masters not needing
slaves. This condition would be that each instrument could do its own work,
at the word of command or by intelligent anticipation, like the statues of
Daedalus or the tripods made by Hephaestus, of which Homer relates that
‘of their own motion they entered the conclave of Gods on Olympus,’ as if a
shuttle should weave of itself, and a plectrum should do its own harp
playing.”
Aristotle also pioneered the systematic study of logic. In his Organon
(Instrument) writings, he provides approaches for how to investigate truth
and how to make sense of the world. The primary tool in Aristotle’s tool kit
is the syllogism, a three-step argument such as, “All women are mortal;
Cleopatra is a woman; therefore Cleopatra is mortal.” If the two premises
are true, we know that the conclusion must be true. Aristotle also makes a
distinction between particulars and universals (i.e., general categories).
Cleopatra is a particular term, whereas woman and mortal are universal
terms. When universals are used, they are preceded by the words all, some,
or no. Aristotle analyzed many possible kinds of syllogisms and showed
which of them are valid.
Aristotle extended his analysis to syllogisms that involved modal logic—
that is, statements containing the words possibly or necessarily. Modern
mathematical logic can depart from Aristotle’s methodologies or extend his
work into other kinds of sentence structures, including ones that express
more complex relationships and ones that involve more than one quantifier,

as illustrated by this sentence: “No men like all men who dislike some
men.” Nevertheless, Aristotle’s deep study of logic is considered to be one
of humankind’s greatest achievements, providing an early impetus for many
developments in mathematics and AI.

SEE ALSO Talos (c. 400 BCE), Boolean Algebra (1854), Fuzzy Logic (1965)

OceanofPDF.com

The water clock shown here does not have all of Ktesibios’s features, but it provides an
illustration regarding how these devices operate. This is from The Cyclopaedia or Universal
Dictionary of Arts, Sciences and Literature by Abraham Rees in 1820.

KTESIBIOS’S WATER CLOCK

c. 250 BCE
“KTESIBIOS’S WATER CLOCK WAS SIGNIFICANT because it forever changed our
understanding of what a man-made object could do,” writes journalist Luke
Dormehl. “Before Ktesibios’s clock, only a living thing was thought to be
capable of modifying its behavior according to changes in the environment.
After Ktesibios’s clock, self-regulating feedback control systems became a
part of our technology.”
The Greek inventor Ktesibios, or Tesibius (fl. 285–222 BCE), was
famous in Alexandria, Egypt, for his devices involving pumps and
hydraulics. His water clock, or clepsydra (lit. “water thief”), is of particular
interest because it employed a regulator in the form of a feedback-control
float that maintained a constant water-flow rate, thus allowing his timepiece
to provide reasonable estimates of time according to the level of water in a
receiving container. In one version of his clock, units of time are marked on
a column that a humanoid figure points to as he rises with the changing
water level in the reservoir. According to some reports, the humanoid figure
was accompanied by other mechanisms, such as turning pillars and falling
stones or eggs, along with trumpet-like sounds. Ktesibios’s clepsydras were
used to allocate time to speakers in court proceedings and to limit time
spent by patrons in Athenian brothels.
Ktesibios was likely the first head of the Museum of Alexandria, an
institution that included the Library of Alexandria and that attracted leading
scholars of the Hellenistic world. Although he is famous for his particular
kinds of clepsydras, other related water clocks were also built in ancient
China, India, Babylon, Egypt, Persia, and elsewhere. Ktesibios was also
reported to have invented an eerie robotic statue of a deity that was featured
in processions (e.g., the famous Grand Procession parade of Ptolemy
Philadelphus). This automaton was able to stand up and sit down via the

rotation of cams (non-circular wheels that convert circular motion to linear
motion) that were perhaps linked to the movement of a cart.

SEE ALSO Al-Jazari’s Automata (1206), Hesdin Mechanical Park (c. 1300), da Vinci’s Robot
Knight (c. 1495)

OceanofPDF.com

The abacus has had a huge impact on human civilization. For many centuries, this device
served as a tool to allow people to perform fast calculations in commerce and in
engineering. Abacuses were employed by Europeans long before they used the HinduArabic numeral system.

ABACUS

c. 190 BCE
“ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE STARTED WITH the calendar and abacus,” writes
engineer and author Jeff Krimmel. “Artificial intelligence is any technology
that helps a human being perform a cognitive task. In this light, a calendar
is a piece of artificial intelligence. It supplements or replaces our memory.
Likewise, an abacus is a piece of artificial intelligence.… We have no need
to perform complex arithmetic in our head.”
There is evidence of instruments used for performing calculations in
ancient Mesopotamia and Egypt, but the oldest surviving counting board
dates to around 300 BCE in Greece with the Salamis Tablet, a marble slab
with several groups of parallel line markings. Other boards used in antiquity
were usually wood, metal, or stone, and they contained lines or grooves
along which beads or stones were moved.
Around 1000 CE, the Aztecs invented the nepohualtzintzin (referred to
by aficionados as the “Aztec computer”), an abacus-like device that made
use of corn kernels threaded through wooden frames to help operators
perform computations. The modern abacus, which contains beads that move
along rods, dates at least as far back as 190 CE in China, where it is called
the suanpan. In Japan, the abacus is called the soroban.
In some sense, the abacus may be considered the ancestor of the
computer; and like the computer, the abacus serves as a tool to allow
humans to perform fast calculations in commerce and in engineering. With
slight variations in design, abacuses are still used in China, Japan, parts of
the former Soviet Union, and Africa. Although the abacus is generally used
for fast addition and subtraction operations, experienced users are able to
quickly multiply, divide, and calculate square roots. In 1946, a calculating
competition was held in Tokyo between a Japanese soroban operator and a
person using an electric calculator to see which method yielded faster

results to several problems of arithmetic. In most cases, the soroban
operator beat the electric calculator.
So important is the abacus that, in 2005, Forbes.com readers, editors, and
a panel of experts ranked the abacus as the second most important tool of all
time in terms of its impact on human civilization. First and third on the list
were the knife and the compass, respectively.

SEE ALSO Antikythera Mechanism (c. 125 BCE), Babbage’s Mechanical Computer (1822), ENIAC
(1946)

OceanofPDF.com

A modern reconstruction of the Antikythera mechanism showing the gears and hand cranks.

ANTIKYTHERA MECHANISM

c. 125 BCE
IN HIS BOOK ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE, psychologist Alan Garnham discusses
the Antikythera mechanism and notes: “Perhaps the principal line of
development that led to AI was the attempt to produce machines that took
the drudgery out of human intellectual endeavor and, at the same time,
eliminated some of the errors to which it is prone.” The Antikythera
mechanism is an ancient geared computing device that was used to
calculate astronomical positions. Discovered by sponge divers around 1900
in a shipwreck off the coast of the Greek island Antikythera, the device is
thought to have been built around 150–100 BCE. As described by journalist
Jo Marchant: “Among the salvaged hoard subsequently shipped to Athens
was a piece of formless rock that no one noticed at first, until it cracked
open, revealing bronze gearwheels, pointers, and tiny Greek inscriptions.…
A sophisticated piece of machinery consisting of precisely cut dials,
pointers, and at least thirty interlocking gear wheels, nothing close to its
complexity appears again in the historical record for more than a thousand
years, until the development of astronomical clocks in medieval Europe.”
A dial on the front of the device probably carried at least three hands—
one indicating the date and the other two indicating the positions of the sun
and the moon. The device was also probably used to track dates of ancient
Olympic games, predict solar eclipses, and indicate other planetary motions.
The Moon mechanism uses a special train of bronze gears, two of which
are linked with a slightly offset axis to indicate the position and phase of the
moon. As is known today from Kepler’s Laws of Planetary Motion, the
moon travels at different speeds as it orbits Earth (e.g., faster when it is
closer to Earth), and this speed differential is modeled by the Antikythera
mechanism, even though the ancient Greeks were not aware of the actual
elliptical shape of the orbit. Marchant writes: “By turning the handle on the

box you could make time pass forward or backward, to see the state of the
cosmos today, tomorrow, last Tuesday or a hundred years in the future.
Whoever owned this device must have felt like master of the heavens.”

SEE ALSO Ktesibios’s Water Clock (c. 250 BCE), Abacus (c. 190 BCE), Babbage’s Mechanical
Computer (1822)

OceanofPDF.com

An intricate peacock basin from al-Jazari’s Book of Knowledge of Ingenious Mechanical
Devices (opaque watercolor, gold, and ink on paper).

AL-JAZARI’S AUTOMATA

1206
THE POLYMATH, INVENTOR, ARTIST, AND ENGINEER Ismail al-Jazari (1136–1206)
lived during the height of the Islamic Golden Age, following his father as
the chief engineer at the Artuklu Palace in Anatolia (present-day Diyarbakır,
Turkey). Al-Jazari’s Book of Knowledge of Ingenious Mechanical Devices
—written at the request of his royal employer and published the year alJazari died—contains descriptions of numerous mechanical devices that alJazari had built, including moving human and animal automata as well as
water-raising machines, fountains, and clocks. During his research and
engineering, al-Jazari employed camshafts, crankshafts, escapement wheels,
segmental gears, and other sophisticated mechanisms.
Among his automata are moving peacocks driven by water, a waitress
that serves drinks, and a musical robot band of four automatic musicians in
a boat with changing facial expressions that were controlled by rotating
shafts. Some researchers have speculated that the movements of the robot
band may have been programmable, indicating an extra degree of technical
sophistication. His elephant clock featured a humanoid robot striking a
cymbal at regular intervals, along with a robotic bird that chirped as a scribe
rotated, marking out time with his pen. Al-Jazari’s 11-foot-tall (3.4 m)
castle clock featured five automaton musicians.
According to English engineer and historian Donald R. Hill (1922–
1994), who is famous for his English translation of al-Jazari’s work, “It is
impossible to over-emphasize the importance of al-Jazari’s work in the
history of engineering. Until modern times there is no other document from
any cultural area that provides a comparable wealth of instructions for the
design, manufacture, and assembly of machines. No doubt this is partly due
to the fact that there was usually a social and cultural divide between those
who made and those who wrote. When a scholar described a machine that

had been constructed by an illiterate craftsman, he was usually interested in
the finished product; he neither understood nor cared about the messy
business of construction.… We therefore owe a great debt to [al-Jazari’s
employer] for our possession of a unique document.”

SEE ALSO Ktesibios’s Water Clock (c. 250 BCE), Hesdin Mechanical Park (c. 1300), Religious
Automata (1352), Jaquet-Droz Automata (1774)

OceanofPDF.com

Lancelot battles the copper knight automata in order to enter the Doloreuse Garde castle.
The humanoid knights are often depicted without clothing. (From Lancelot do lac, France,
15th century. Paris, BnF, MS Fr. 118, fol. 200v.)

LANCELOT’S COPPER KNIGHTS

c. 1220
SIMPLE EXAMPLES OF AI, IN THE FORM OF mechanical men and creatures,
became COMMON IN EUROPEAN medieval times, when, as historian Elly
Truitt writes, “Golden birds and beasts, musical fountains, and robotic
servants astound and terrify guests.… Automata stood at the intersection of
natural knowledge (including magic) and technology, and … were troubling
links between art and nature.” Both actual and fictional devices in ancient
literature provide a fascinating glimpse of an “interdependence of science,
technology, and the imagination.”
One famous example of fictional medieval robots occurs in Lancelot du
lac (Lancelot of the Lake, c. 1220), an old French prose tale that recounts
the adventures of King Arthur and his Knights of the Round Table,
including the secret romance of Sir Lancelot and Arthur’s wife, Guinevere.
While outside Doloreuse Garde, a frightening enchanted castle, Lancelot
encounters a small army of robotic copper knights. After entering the castle,
he defeats two more sword-wielding copper knights as they guard an
internal chamber where a young copper woman holds the keys to the
enchantment. He uses the keys to open a box that contains thirty copper
tubes, from which come terrifying cries—and he quickly falls asleep. Upon
awakening, he finds that the copper woman has collapsed to the ground, and
the copper knights are shattered.
Historian Jessica Riskin writes: “The automaton knights and damsels of
Arthurian legend were accompanied by gold, silver and copper children,
satyrs, archers, musicians, oracles, and giants. These fictional artificial
beings had plenty of real counterparts. Actual mechanical people and
animals thronged the landscape of late medieval and early modern Europe.”
As one example, around the same time as the tale of Lancelot’s copper
knights, French artist and engineer Villard de Honnecourt (c. 1225–c. 1250)

created a mechanical eagle that was designed to turn its head toward the
deacon when he read from the Gospel. Riskin notes that these lifelike
automata provide a context for scientific and philosophical models of living
beings as machines that emerged in the seventeenth century.

SEE ALSO Talos (c. 400 BCE), Hesdin Mechanical Park (c. 1300), da Vinci’s Robot Knight (c.
1495), Golem (1580), Tik-Tok (1907)

OceanofPDF.com

Hesdin park. Depiction of the walled garden at Hesdin (at top). The gear image (at bottom)
is the personification of Fortune, turning a mechanism that may represent the automata at

Hesdin. (From Guillaume de Machaut’s Le remede de fortune, France, c. 1350–1356. Paris
BnF, MS Fr. 1586, fol. 30v.)

HESDIN MECHANICAL PARK

c. 1300
STARTING AROUND 1300, THE PARK AT Hesdin, in northeastern France,
evolved into a famous site for lifelike simulations of humans and animals.
The Hesdin automata included androids, monkeys, birds, and a timekeeping
device. The earliest Hesdin machines were built at the request of Robert II
(1250–1302), Count of Artois. Examples included a bridge with six groups
of mechanical monkeys covered in badger fur, to make them appear
realistic. A mechanized boar head adorned the wall of a pavilion. When
Robert died, his daughter Mahaut (1268–1329) became the patron of
innovation and continued with the upkeep of his “engines of amusement.”
For example, in 1312, the monkeys were covered with new fur, and horns
were added to make them appear demonic.
The idea of the automaton park may have been kindled from Islamic
culture and engineers, along with automata in French romance literature.
Historian Scott Lightsey writes: “Hesdin’s centrality in the European idea of
artificial marvels is indicative of the way this new phenomenon of wonder
was replacing supernatural contingencies with the motives of court life.…
Technological innovations allowed them to begin reenacting even the
traditional supernatural themes of romance in their elaborate halls and
pleasure gardens.”
Over the years, work continued in Hesdin, with upgrades to various
mechanical marvels, including a wooden hermit who spoke to onlookers, a
talking owl, and fountains with mechanical birds. The waving monkeys and
other automata were most likely operated by weight-driven mechanisms,
with clockwork parts and/or hydraulics.
These robotic installations offered visitors a glimpse of a future with
more widespread automation. As historian Silvio A. Bedini writes: “The
role of automata in the progress of technology is … of considerable

importance. Efforts to imitate life by mechanical means resulted in the
development of mechanical principles and led to the production of complex
mechanisms that have fulfilled technology’s original aims—the reduction or
simplification of physical labor. ”

SEE ALSO Ktesibios’s Water Clock (c. 250 BCE), Al-Jazari’s Automata (1206), Lancelot’s Copper
Knights (c. 1220), Religious Automata (1352), de Vaucanson’s Duck Automaton (1738), Jaquet-Droz
Automata (1774)

OceanofPDF.com

One set of rotating wheels and combinations of the Ars Magna of Ramon Llull. (From
Illuminati sacre pagine p. fessoris amplissimi magistri Raymundi Lull, 1517.)

RAMON LLULL’S ARS MAGNA

c. 1305
“THE QUEST FOR ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE (AI) begins with dreams—as all
quests DO,” WRITES computer scientist Nils Nilsson. “People have long
imagined machines with human abilities—automata that move and devices
that reason.” One of the earliest devices in the history of AI is the Lullian
Circle. In his book Ars Magna (The Great Art, c. 1305), Catalan
philosopher Ramon Llull (c. 1232–c. 1315) included a paper construction of
rotating concentric circles with letters and words written along their
circumference. Much like a mechanical lock, the characters and words
could be lined up in novel combinations, but in this case the combinations
generated a fountain of new ideas and logical explorations. Author Martin
Gardner writes: “It was the earliest attempt in the history of formal logic to
employ geometrical diagrams for the purpose of discovering
nonmathematical truths, and the first attempt to use a mechanical device—a
primitive logic machine—to facilitate the operation of a logic system.”
Llull’s devices for combinatorial creativity provided an early method of
using “logical means to produce knowledge,” writes author Georgi Dalakov.
“Llull demonstrated in an extremely elementary, but nevertheless workable,
way that human thought can be described and even imitated by a device.
This was a small step toward the thinking machine.” Let us imagine Llull,
sitting at a table by candlelight, turning his disks to combine words. He
believed, according to author Krystina Madej, “a higher knowledge would
be revealed and would provide logical answers to questions about religion
and creation.… [He wanted] to investigate truths and produce new proofs
through these combinatory devices.”
The research on formal logic by German polymath and calculus
cofounder Gottfried Leibniz (1646–1716), as well as his invention of the
“stepped reckoner,” was stimulated by Llull’s work. As data researcher and

professor Jonathan Gray writes: “The initial trickles of Llull’s and Leibniz’s
arcane combinatorial fantasies have gradually given way to ubiquitous
computational technologies, practices, and ideals that are interwoven into
the fabric of our worlds—the broader consequences of which are still
unfolding around us … regardless of whether or not the machines operate in
the ways that we imagine.”

SEE ALSO Lagado Book-Writing Engine (1726), Computational Creativity (1821), Cybernetic
Serendipity (1968)

OceanofPDF.com

The Strasbourg astronomical clock in the Cathédrale Notre-Dame of Strasbourg, Alsace,
France. The automaton rooster is at the upper left.

RELIGIOUS AUTOMATA

1352
VARIOUS AUTOMATA ASSOCIATED WITH THE Christian Church appeared in late
medieval and early modern Europe, ranging from automaton Christs to
mechanical devils and Satan machines that made noises and stuck out their
tongues. For example, during the fifteenth century, the “Rood of Grace” in
the Boxley Abbey in Kent, England, was a mechanized likeness of Jesus on
the Cross that moved his eyes, lips, and other parts of his body. Automaton
angles and automaton simulations of biblical events also became common
in the late fifteenth century. As recounted by history professor Jessica
Riskin, “Automata were familiar features of daily life, originating in
churches and cathedrals and spreading from there. Jesuit missionaries
carried them to China as offerings to dramatize the power of Christian
Europe.”
Particularly interesting is the Strasbourg astronomical clock in the
Cathédrale Notre-Dame de Strasbourg in Alsace, France. Construction of
the clock began in 1352, and it featured a rooster automaton that moved its
head, flapped its wings, and crowed at particular times (using bellows and a
reed). The clock also featured moving angels. Around 1547, this clock was
replaced and upgraded, while retaining the bird automaton. The second
clock stopped working in 1788. It wasn’t until 1838 that the current clock
came into being with new mechanisms to replace the old ones.
Aside from the automata, the Strasbourg clock features a perpetual
calendar (including a means to determine the calendar date of Easter), a
display of solar and lunar eclipses, and more. In 1896, author Fanny Coe
wrote that the Strasbourg clock “is almost like a small theater, there are so
many people and animals that have their little part to play.… The hours are
struck by angels, and at midday and midnight life-size figures of Christ and

his twelve disciples come from a door.… Then a gilded cock upon the upper
turret of the clock flaps its wings and crows.”
The scholar Julius Fraser writes: “Calendrical science and clock
craftsmanship evolved to make artifacts that explained and praised the
Christian universe.… [They were] forerunners of the later desires to put the
skills of scientists and artisans to use for the earthly benefit of people.”

SEE ALSO Al-Jazari’s Automata (1206), Hesdin Mechanical Park (c. 1300), Jaquet-Droz Automata
(1774)

OceanofPDF.com

Model of Leonardo’s robot knight, alongside its internal gears, pulleys, and cables.

DA VINCI’S ROBOT KNIGHT

c. 1495
“DA VINCI’S ARMORED ROBOT KNIGHT SAT up; opened its arms and closed
them, perhaps in a grabbing motion; moved its head via a flexible neck; and
opened its visor,” writes robotics engineer Mark Rosheim, “perhaps to
reveal a frightening physiognomy. Fabricated of wood, brass, or bronze and
leather, it was cable operated.”
Leonardo da Vinci (1452–1519), the Italian Renaissance polymath, had
interests that ranged from painting and architecture to anatomy and
engineering. His journals include depictions and studies of musical
instruments, crank mechanisms, and the aforementioned mechanical knight,
drawn around the year 1495 in his Codex Atlanticus (Atlantic Codex), a
twelve-volume bound set of drawings and writings. The mechanism of the
Leonardo robot design—which featured articulated joints and movable
arms, jaw, and head—used a pulley system for moving the robot’s parts.
The android wore German-Italian medieval armor, could sit up and down,
and had more than one gear system that operated separately to control the
upper and lower body. Leonardo sketched models for other automatons that
included birds and carts.
Although we do not know if Leonardo’s mechanical knight was ever
built, similar robots may have inspired other engineers, such as the ItaloSpanish engineer Juanelo Turriano (c. 1500–1585), who built a mechanical
monk that used cables and pulleys for King Philip II of Spain, who
attributed his son’s miraculous recovery from a serious head injury to the
divine intervention of a Franciscan missionary named Didacus. Driven by a
key-wound spring, the clockwork Didacus walks while moving his mouth
and arms in silent prayer. Today he is exhibited at the Smithsonian
Institution in Washington, DC, and is still operational.

Reflecting on da Vinci’s robot knight, authors Cynthia Phillips and
Shana Priwer write “Leonardo’s robot design was a culmination of his
research into anatomy and geometry. What better way to combine
mechanical science and human form? He took the proportions and
relationships inherent in Roman architecture and applied them to the
movement and life inherent in all living beings. In a way, the robot was
Vitruvian Man brought to life.”

SEE ALSO Talos (c. 400 BCE), Lancelot’s Copper Knights (c. 1220), Tik-Tok (1907), Elektro the
Moto-Man (1939)

OceanofPDF.com

The Prague Golem. In this artwork by Czech painter Eugene Ivanov, we see the golem (large
central figure) and rabbi Loew ben Bezalel (perched atop the monster’s shoulder).

GOLEM

1580
ACCORDING TO THE FORWARD NEWSPAPER, “Long before Stephen Hawking
warned us about the dangers of artificial intelligence, the legend of the
Golem conveyed to Jews the same subliminal message.” A golem from
Jewish folklore is an animated creature, crafted from clay or mud, that
exhibits several forms of artificial intelligence in a man-made automaton
that is difficult to control once the technology is activated and set loose in
the world. Probably the most famous golem is the one that Prague rabbi
Judah Loew ben Bezalel (c. 1520–1609) allegedly created in 1580 to defend
the Jews of the Prague ghetto from anti-Semitic attacks. The story of this
Prague golem was recorded by several authors of the 1800s.
A golem is usually inscribed with magical or religious words that keep it
animated. For example, according to legend, golem creators sometimes
wrote the name of God on the golem’s forehead, or on a clay tablet or paper
under its tongue. Other golems were animated by the word emet (“truth” in
the Hebrew language) written on their foreheads. By erasing the first letter
to form met (“death” in Hebrew), the golem can be deactivated.
Some other old Jewish recipes for creating a golem required a person to
combine each letter of the Hebrew alphabet with each letter from the
YHVH tetragrammaton (i.e., the Hebrew name of God), and then
pronounce each of the resulting letter pairs with every possible vowel
sound. The tetragrammaton serves as an “activation word” to pierce reality
and energize the being.
The word golem appears only once in the Bible (Psalm 139:16), where it
refers to an imperfect or unformed body. The New International Version
translates the verse as: “Your eyes saw my unformed body. All the days
ordained for me were written in your book before one of them came to be.”
In Hebrew, golem can signify a “shapeless mass” or “brainless” entity, and

the Talmud uses the word to imply “imperfect.” As such, most golems in
literature are depicted as dumb, but they can be made to perform simple,
repetitive tasks. In fact, the challenge for the golem creator was to
determine how to finally stop the golem from carrying out or repeating a
task.

SEE ALSO Talos (c. 400 BCE), Lancelot’s Copper Knights (c. 1220), Frankenstein (1818)

OceanofPDF.com

The frontispiece of Leviathan by Thomas Hobbes, with an engraving by French artist
Abraham Bosse (1604–1676).

HOBBES’S LEVIATHAN

1651
IN 1651, ENGLISH PHILOSOPHER THOMAS Hobbes (1588–1679) wrote
Leviathan, a book that focuses on the structure of society and its
relationship with government. In the book, Hobbes makes several
statements that have caused science historian George Dyson to refer to
Hobbes as the “patriarch of artificial intelligence.” For example, in his
introduction, Hobbes compares the body to a mechanical engine: “Nature
(the art whereby God hath made and governs the world) is by the art of man
… imitated, that [man] can make an artificial animal. For seeing life is but a
motion of limbs, the beginning whereof is in some principal part within;
why may we not say, that all automata (engines that move themselves by
springs and wheels as doth a watch) have an artificial life? For what is the
heart but a spring; and the nerves but so many strings; and the joints but so
many wheels, giving motion to the whole body …?”
When a human reasons, according to Hobbes, the person performs
symbolic calculations and manipulations, something akin to addition and
subtraction: “By ratiocination [thinking], I mean computation. Now, to
compute is either to collect the sum of many things that are added together,
or to know what remains when one thing is taken out of another.”
Dyson asks: “If reasoning can be reduced to arithmetic, which, even in
Hobbes’s time could be performed by mechanism, then is a mechanism
capable of reasoning? Can machines think?” Computer architect Daniel
Hillis offers his own speculation on the possibility of creating an artificial
mind that can think for itself: “For those who fear mechanistic explanations
of the human mind, our ignorance of how local interactions produce
emergent behavior offers a reassuring fog in which to hide the soul.
Although individual computers and individual computer programs are
developing the elements of artificial intelligence, it is in the larger networks

(or the network at large) that we are developing a more likely medium for
the emergence of the Leviathan of artificial mind.”

SEE ALSO The Consciousness Mill (1714), “The Artist of the Beautiful” (1844), “Darwin among
the Machines” (1863), Giant Brains, or Machines That Think (1949), The Human Use of Human
Beings (1950)

OceanofPDF.com

If we believe that consciousness is the result of patterns and dynamic interrelationships of
neurons and other cells in the brain, then our thoughts, emotions, and memories might be
replicated in the movements of twigs and leaves or in the flocking of birds. (Watercolor
painting by Benjavisa Ruangvaree.)

THE CONSCIOUSNESS MILL

1714
IF WE BELIEVE THAT CONSCIOUSNESS IS THE result of patterns and dynamic
inter-relationships of brain cells and their components, then our thoughts,
emotions, and memories might be replicated in moving assemblies of
Tinkertoys®. The Tinkertoy minds would need to be very big to represent
the complexity of our minds, but perhaps a very complex mechanism could
be created, in the same way researchers have made tic-tac-toe playing
computers out of 10,000 Tinkertoys. In principle, our minds could be
hypostatized in the movements of leaves and twigs or in the flocking of
birds. In 1714, the German philosopher and mathematician Gottfried
Leibniz in his treatise The Monadology imagined an AI-infused machine as
big as a mill that was capable of thinking and feeling. He also realized that
if we could explore inside, we would find “nothing but pieces that push one
against the other and never anything to account for a perception.” Similarly,
it’s possible that conscious AI entities could be developed in the future,
even if they are not formed from wet organic matter.
Philosopher Nick Bostrom (b. 1973) considers a single electronic brain
cell: “The brain cell is a physical object with certain characteristics. If we
come to fully understand these characteristics and learn to replicate them
electronically, then surely our electronic brain cell can perform the same
function as an organic one. And if it can be done with a brain cell, why
wouldn’t the resulting system be just as conscious as a brain?”
As roboticist Hans Moravec (b. 1948) writes: “We’re a conscious being
simulated on a bunch of neural hardware, and the conscious being is only
found in an interpretation of things that go on in the neural hardware. It’s
not the actual chemical signals that are squirting around, it’s a certain highlevel interpretation of an aggregate of those signals, the only thing that

makes consciousness different from other interpretations, like the value of a
dollar bill.”
Similarly, perhaps your brain could function even if partitioned into a
hundred little boxes, separated by great distances and connected by wires or
optical fibers. To understand this better, imagine your left and right brain
hemispheres a mile apart and connected by an artificial corpus callosum.
You would still be you, right?

SEE ALSO Tic-Tac-Toe (c. 1300 BCE), Hobbes’s Leviathan (1651), de Vaucanson’s Duck
Automaton (1738), Searches for the Soul (1907), Giant Brains, or Machines That Think (1949),
Living in a Simulation (1967)

OceanofPDF.com

The writing machine of Lagado, illustrated by French artist J. J. Grandville (1803–1847),
which appeared in a French translation of Gulliver’s Travels from 1856.

LAGADO BOOK-WRITING ENGINE

1726
GULLIVER’S TRAVELS, A POPULAR NOVEL published in 1726 by Anglo-Irish
author Jonathan Swift (1667–1745), describes a mechanical creativity
engine that may be the first AI device extensively discussed in a novel.
While Gulliver is in the fictional city of Lagado, a professor shows him a
device for generating literature, technical books, and interesting ideas.
Gulliver explains how, “By his contrivance, the most ignorant person, at a
reasonable charge, and with a little bodily labor, might write books in
philosophy, poetry, politics, laws, mathematics, and theology, without the
least assistance from genius or study.”
Gulliver is led to the device, which occupies twenty square feet in area
and has various wooden surfaces “linked together by slender wires.” The
tile-like surfaces are covered with paper on which “were written all the
words of their language, in their several moods, tenses, and declensions; but
without any order.”
Gulliver described the device’s operation: “The pupils, at his command,
took each of them hold of an iron handle, whereof there were forty fixed
round the edges of the frame; and giving them a sudden turn, the whole
disposition of the words was entirely changed. He then commanded [the
pupils] to read the several lines softly, as they appeared upon the frame; and
where they found three or four words together that might make part of a
sentence, they dictated to the four remaining boys, who were scribes.… At
every turn, … the words shifted into new places, as the square bits of wood
moved upside down.”
Author Eric A. Weiss writes: “[The machine’s] purpose, the claims of its
illustrious professor-inventor, his call for public funding, and the operation
of the device by students clearly classify it as an early attempt at artificial
intelligence and have caused it to be cited often as typical of this

discipline.” Later forms of combinatorial, random, or artificial creativity in
the real world include Racter, a computer program that generated prose for
the book The Policeman’s Beard Is Half Constructed, published in 1984.

SEE ALSO Ramon Llull’s Ars Magna (c. 1305), Computational Creativity (1821), Cybernetic
Serendipity (1968)

OceanofPDF.com

Popular illustration of de Vaucanson’s duck automaton, which appeared in the January 21,
1899 issue of Scientific American. Although the mechanism portrayed here does not closely
resemble the actual internal structure, the arrow is nicely placed to indicate the exit route.

DE VAUCANSON’S DUCK
AUTOMATON

1738
“IN 1738, THE 29-YEAR-OLD FRENCH WATCHMAKER Jacques de Vaucanson
[1709–1782] exhibited in the garden of the Tuileries what may be one of the
most celebrated robots of all time,” writes American neuroscientist Paul
Glimcher. The de Vaucanson duck had hundreds of moving parts and
feathers. It moved its head, muddled water with its bill, flapped its wings,
quacked, gulped food from the exhibitor’s hand, and carried out many more
realistic actions. After a few minutes, remains of digested food would be
excreted below. Of course, the duck was not really digesting food, and the
tail end of the duck was secretly preloaded with simulated excrement.
Nevertheless, such a versatile automaton triggered discussions about the
line between the living and the purely mechanical, as well as the degree to
which such boundaries might be blurred as robotic entities became even
more versatile.
Through time, fascination with the famous digesting duck has grown,
and the odd creature even makes an appearance in Thomas Pynchon’s
highly acclaimed 1997 novel Mason & Dixon, where the creature becomes
conscious and follows and terrorizes a French chef with its bec de la mort
(“beak of death”).
De Vaucanson also created a marvelous automaton flute player, driven
by several bellows attached to three windpipes. Gears and cams triggered
levers that controlled the flute-player’s fingers, tongue, and lips. The
mechanized flautist “was the first example of what Diderot’s Encyclopédie
defines as an androïde, that is, a human figure performing human
functions,” writes historian Jessica Riskin. More immediately practical, in

the 1740s de Vaucanson designed machines to weave silk—that, alas,
caused (human) silk workers to rebel and pelt him with stones in the street.
As Glimcher writes: “Vaucanson’s duck, raised for eighteenth-century
audiences ancient questions that still haunt modern neuroscience: Are the
mechanical interactions that occur inside each of us sufficient to generate
the complex patterns of behavior that we actually produce? What is it that
defines us as human beings, the complexity of the behavior that we produce
or the specific patterns of interacting matter that appear to generate our
behavior?”

SEE ALSO Hesdin Mechanical Park (c. 1300), da Vinci’s Robot Knight (c. 1495), The
Consciousness Mill (1714), The Steam Man of the Prairies (1868), Electric Bob’s Big Black Ostrich
(1893)

OceanofPDF.com

A peek inside the Turk, from Joseph von Racknitz (1744–1818), hypothesizing how the Turk
operated. (From Über den schachspieler des herrn von Kempelen und dessen nachbildung
[About the Chess-Player of Mr. von Kempelen and its Replica], Leipzig und Dresden 1789.)

MECHANICAL TURK

1770
THE MECHANICAL TURK WAS A CHESS-PLAYING android created in 1770 by
Hungarian inventor Wolfgang von Kempelen (1734–1804) and presented to
the Habsburg empress Maria Theresa of Austria. The machine appeared to
play an excellent game of chess, as it defeated players in Europe and the
Americas, including such notables as Napoleon Bonaparte and Benjamin
Franklin. The life-size android, adorned with a robe, turban, and black
beard, sat at a large cabinet with a chessboard on top and actually used its
hand to move chess pieces. The secret of its operation was not well known
for many years, but today we understand that the complex cabinet cleverly
concealed a human chess expert who used magnets to move the pieces and
various levers to move parts of the android. To deepen the mystery,
Kempelen would actually open the cabinet doors before play to reveal
clockwork machinery inside and apparently no visible space for a human to
hide. Even if many people understood the Turk to be a sophisticated “trick,”
it nevertheless caused people to wonder what kinds of work machines were
capable of—and what human capabilities machines might replace.
Many inaccurate articles were written about how the Turk could have
operated. For example, Edgar Allan Poe suggested, incorrectly, that the
player sat inside the Turk android’s body. Interestingly, Charles Babbage,
one of the fathers of the modern computer, was likely inspired by the Turk,
as Babbage wondered about whether machines could “think,” or at least
perform highly sophisticated computations, when he began to work on his
mechanical computing machines.
Author Ella Morton notes: “Though the [Turk] ultimately relied on
human behavior and a bit of old-fashioned magic, its convincingly
mechanical nature was cause for both wonder and concern. Arriving smackbang in the middle of the industrial revolution, the Turk raised unsettling

questions about the nature of automation and the possibility of creating
machines that could think. The fact that the Turk appeared to operate on
clockwork mechanisms … contradicted the idea that chess was … ‘the
province of intellect alone’.”

SEE ALSO Babbage’s Mechanical Computer (1822), “Elephants Don’t Play Chess” (1990),
Checkers and AI (1994), Deep Blue Defeats Chess Champion (1997)

OceanofPDF.com

The Jaquet-Droz writer android, at the Musée d’Art et d’Histoire (Museum of Art and History)
in Neuchâtel, Switzerland.

JAQUET-DROZ AUTOMATA

1774
“THEY MIGHT HAVE BEEN HUGE MARIONETTES,” writes novelist Jean Lorrain
(1845–1906), “or tall mannequin dolls left behind in panic—for I divined
that some plague … had swept through the town and emptied it of its
inhabitants. I was alone with these simulacra of love … obsessed by the
fixed and varnished eyes of all those automata.”
Such eerie thoughts of lifelike automata remind us of our long
fascination with robot-like beings and of a particular set of eighteenthcentury automata that might serve as examples of early ancestors of
computers, given the complexity and programmability of these androids.
Created by watchmaker Pierre Jaquet-Droz (1721–1790) between 1768 and
1774, these three automata—the boy writer android (made from
approximately 6,000 parts), the female musician (2,500 parts), and the child
draftsman (2,000 parts)—drew large crowds of admirers. The boy android
dipped his writing quill in ink and could be programmed with a series of
cams to write messages of up to forty characters in length. He periodically
reinked the pen, and his eyes followed his words as he wrote.
The musician automaton played an organ by actually pressing the keys
with her fingers. She seemed to come alive, making natural body and head
motions and following her fingers with her eyes. She was designed to
continue “breathing” before and after her performances, and her body
heaved with seeming emotion in time with the music. The draftsman could
sketch four different figures: a dog, a portrait of Louis XV, cupid driving a
chariot, and a royal couple.
These automata are notable in that their mechanisms reside inside their
bodies (and not, for example, in a nearby piece of furniture), making the
programmability, miniaturization, and haunting lifelike quality all the more
impressive. Jaquet-Droz was helped by his son Henri-Louis and mechanic

(and adopted son) Jean-Frédéric Leschot, and he is said to have later
constructed two artificial hands for a man with congenital deformities. The
hands were clothed in white gloves and were reportedly versatile enough to
enable the user to write and draw.

SEE ALSO al-Jazari’s Automata (1206), Hesdin Mechanical Park (c. 1300), Religious Automata
(1352), de Vaucanson’s Duck Automaton (1738)

OceanofPDF.com

Frontispiece from the 1831 edition of Frankenstein, published in London by Colburn and
Bentley.

FRANKENSTEIN

1818
“FRANKENSTEIN WAS WRITTEN DURING THE FIRST Industrial Revolution,” writes
Paolo Gallo, “the Chief Human Resources Officer at World Economic
Forum, “a period of enormous changes that provoked confusion and anxiety
for many. It asked searching questions about man’s relationship with
technology: Are we creating a monster we cannot control, are we losing our
humanity, our compassion, our ability to feel empathy and emotions?”
The dangers of a special kind of artificial intelligence is a prominent
theme in the novel Frankenstein; or, The Modern Prometheus (1818) by
Mary Shelley (1797–1851). In the novel, scientist Victor Frankenstein robs
slaughterhouses and cemeteries in order to construct a creature from various
parts, which he then animates with “a spark of life.” Meanwhile, he reflects
on his creation as an experiment in achieving immortality: “Life and death
appeared to me ideal bounds, which I should first break through, and pour a
torrent of light into our dark world. A new species would bless me as its
creator.… I thought, that if I could bestow animation upon lifeless matter, I
might … renew life where death had apparently devoted the body to
corruption.”
By the time Mary Shelley finished her novel at age nineteen, Europeans
were fascinated by theories about the role of electricity in biology and the
potential for reanimation of dead tissue. The basic story idea came to her in
a dream. As it happens, Italian physicist Giovanni Aldini (1762–1834) had
participated in many public attempts at human reanimation through
electricity around 1803 in London.
Death and destruction lurk everywhere in the novel, as numerous
characters meet their ends. Notably, Victor destroys the unfinished female
companion for his monster, and the monster (who is never actually referred
to by the name “Frankenstein”) kills Elizabeth, the scientist’s wife. By the

end of the novel, Victor has pursued his creation to the North Pole, where
Victor dies, and the creature vows to kill himself on his own funeral pyre.
Journalist Daniel D’Addario notes: “Frankenstein relies on the notion
that humans will inherently reject artificial intelligence as unnatural and
bizarre. A great deal of that is owed to the particularly odd appearance of
Frankenstein’s monster.… But what about when A.I. comes in a more
attractive package, one that has real utility?”

SEE ALSO Talos (c. 400 BCE), Golem (1580), The Steam Man of the Prairies (1868), Rossum’s
Universal Robots (1920)

OceanofPDF.com

Electric Sheep artwork. “Electric Sheep” refers to a collaborative abstract artwork system
developed by Scott Draves. The more popular sheep live longer and reproduce according to
a genetic algorithm with mutation and crossover.

COMPUTATIONAL CREATIVITY

1821
“AS A SOCIETY, WE ARE JEALOUS OF OUR creativity,” write Simon Colton and
Geraint Wiggins of the Computational Group at Goldsmiths College.
“Creative people and their contributions to cultural progression are highly
valued. Moreover, creative behavior in people draws on a full set of
intelligent abilities, so simulating such behavior represents a serious
technical challenge for Artificial Intelligence research. As such, we believe
it is fair to characterize Computational Creativity as a frontier for AI
research beyond all others—maybe, even, the final frontier.”
“Computational creativity,” or CC, has several meanings. Here, we refer
to a subfield of AI that simulates creativity using a computer or other
machine. The results often seem to be novel and potentially useful. “CC”
can also refer to programs that enhance human creativity. For example,
using artificial neural networks (ANNs) and other methods, researchers
have produced beautiful music or paintings in the style of previous artists.
In particular, generative adversarial networks (GANs) may employ two
contesting ANNs to produce photorealistic images of simulated faces,
flowers, birds, and room interiors. Other CC approaches are used for
formulating tasty cooking recipes, producing new kinds of visual art,
creating poetry and stories, and for generating jokes, mathematical
theorems, US patents, new games, novel chess puzzles, innovative designs
for antennas and heat exchangers, and more. In short, by some form of
computational or artificial means, a computer can generate designs and
output that, if any human produced them, would be deemed to be a creative
act.
For an early, simple example of CC, consider that in 1821 Dietrich
Winkel (1777–1826) invented the componium, an automatic mechanical
musical organ that could produce seemingly endless variations on a musical

theme. It had two barrels that took turns performing two measures of
randomly chosen music. A flywheel acted as a kind of programmer to
determine the selections. Winkel said that if each performance lasted five
minutes, the componium would require more than 138 trillion years to
produce every possible combination of music!

SEE ALSO Ramon Llull’s Ars Magna (c. 1305), Lagado Book-Writing Engine (1726), Cybernetic
Serendipity (1968), Genetic Algorithms (1975), Computer Art and DeepDream (2015)

OceanofPDF.com

Working model of a portion of Charles Babbage’s Difference Engine, currently located at the
London Science Museum.

BABBAGE’S MECHANICAL
COMPUTER

1822
CHARLES BABBAGE (1791–1871) WAS AN English analyst, statistician, and
inventor who, in 1819, saw the Mechanical Turk, as this mechanical man
toured England and defeated human chess players. Of course, Babbage
must have known that the Turk was some kind of trick, but many have
suggested that the android device inspired Babbage to ponder other kinds of
more practical thinking machines, as an early step on the journey toward
artificial intelligence.
Babbage is often considered the most important mathematician-engineer
involved in the “prehistory” of computers. In particular, he is famous for
conceiving an enormous hand-cranked mechanical calculator, an early
progenitor of our modern computers. Babbage thought the device would be
most useful in producing mathematical tables, but he worried about
mistakes that would be made by humans who transcribed the results from
its thirty-one metal output wheels. Today we realize that Babbage was
around a century ahead of his time and that the politics and technology of
his era were inadequate for his lofty dreams.
Babbage’s Difference Engine, begun in 1822 but never completed, was
designed to compute values of polynomial functions, using about 25,000
mechanical parts. He also had plans to create a more general-purpose
computer, the Analytical Engine, which could be programmed using punch
cards and had separate areas for number storage and computation. Estimates
suggest that an Analytical Engine capable of storing one thousand 50-digit
numbers would be over one hundred feet in length. Ada Lovelace (1815–
1852), the daughter of the English poet Lord Byron, gave specifications for

a program for the Analytical Engine. Although Babbage provided assistance
to Ada, many consider Ada to be the first computer programmer.
In 1990, novelists William Gibson and Bruce Sterling wrote The
Difference Engine, which asked readers to imagine the consequences of
Babbage’s mechanical computers becoming available to Victorian society.
In fact, at the end of the novel, we encounter an alternate, fictional 1991, in
which a self-aware computer has evolved and appears to be the narrator of
the book.

SEE ALSO Abacus (c. 190 BCE), Mechanical Turk (1770), ENIAC (1946)

OceanofPDF.com

“The Artist of the Beautiful” describes the creation of a delicate and beautiful butterfly
automaton with mystical and lifelike qualities.

“THE ARTIST OF THE BEAUTIFUL”

1844
“THE ARTIST OF THE BEAUTIFUL” BY NATHANIEL Hawthorne (1804–1864) is
the first robotic-insect short story, and a personal favorite for both its
haunting beauty and questions it raises about AI and humanity’s response.
Published in 1844, well before the invention of the electric lightbulb, the
story centers on the life of genius Owen Warland, who works in a watch
shop. Owen is a sensitive young man who is secretly in love with Annie
Hovenden, the shopkeeper’s daughter, and wonders if it is possible to
“imitate the beautiful movements of Nature, as exemplified in the flight of
birds or the activity of little animals.”
Owen eventually succeeds in making a mechanical butterfly. The
shopkeeper discovers an early model and accidentally almost crushes the
“mechanical something, as delicate and minute as the system of a butterfly’s
anatomy.” He screams “Owen! there is witchcraft in these little chains, and
wheels, and paddles.”
In the closing scene of the story, Owen decides to show Annie a new
version he has created: “A butterfly fluttered forth, and, alighting on her
finger’s tip, sat waving the ample magnificence of its purple and goldspeckled wings, as if in prelude to a flight. It is impossible to express by
words the glory, the splendor, the delicate gorgeousness, which were
softened into the beauty of this object. Nature’s ideal butterfly was here
realized in all its perfection; not in the pattern of such faded insects as flit
among earthly flowers, but of those that hover across the meads of Paradise,
for child-angels and the spirits of departed infants to disport themselves
with.”
“‘Beautiful! Beautiful!’ exclaimed Annie. ‘Is it alive? Is it alive?’”
The insect flies into the air and flutters around Annie’s head. The story
appears to have a sad ending for the butterfly, as it is crushed by an

uncaring child into a “small heap of glittering fragments,” but Owen has an
epiphany of sorts, realizing that the butterfly’s beauty is eternal.
As a curious aside, in 2015, US patent 9,046,884 was granted for robotic
butterflies that sense, respond, and move according to the emotional states
of humans to help improve our moods.

SEE ALSO de Vaucanson’s Duck Automaton (1738), Jaquet-Droz Automata (1774), Tik-Tok (1907),
Spielberg’s A.I. Artificial Intelligence (2001)

OceanofPDF.com

When considering Boolean algebra, George Boole wrote that one of his purposes was to
“investigate the fundamental laws of those operations of the mind by which reasoning is
performed.”

BOOLEAN ALGEBRA

1854
ON THE 200TH ANNIVERSARY OF THE birth of English mathematician George
Boole (1815–1864), journalist James Titcomb celebrated him as “an early
thinker on the theory of artificial intelligence, believing that all human
thought could be reduced to a series of mathematical rules, and advocating
machinery as a way to replace human drudgery.”
In his most important work, Boole wrote that his purpose was to
“investigate the fundamental laws of those operations of the mind by which
reasoning is performed and … to collect … some probable intimations
concerning the nature and constitution of the human mind.” His influential
1854 book was titled An Investigation into the Laws of Thought, on Which
Are Founded the Mathematical Theories of Logic and Probabilities. Boole
was interested in reducing logic to a simple algebra involving just two
quantities, 0 and 1, and three basic operations: and, or, and not. In modern
times, Boolean algebra has had vast applications in telephone switching and
the design of modern computers.
In his landmark book, Boole also wrote that his goal was to “unfold the
secret laws and relations of those high faculties of thought by which all
beyond the merely perceptive knowledge of the world and of ourselves is
attained or matured.” Fellow British mathematician Augustus De Morgan
(1806–1871), who coined the term mathematical induction, praised Boole’s
work in his posthumously published book A Budget of Paradoxes: “Boole’s
system of logic is but one of many proofs of genius and patience
combined.… That the symbolic processes of algebra, invented as tools of
numerical calculation, should be competent to express every act of thought,
and to furnish the grammar and dictionary of an all-containing system of
logic, would not have been believed until it was proved.”

Approximately seventy years after Boole’s death, American
mathematician Claude E. Shannon (1916–2001) was introduced to Boolean
algebra while still a student, and he showed how Boolean algebra could be
used to optimize the design of systems of telephone routing switches. He
also demonstrated that circuits with relays could solve Boolean algebra
problems. Thus, Boole, with Shannon’s help, provided one of the
foundations for our Digital Age.

SEE ALSO Aristotle’s Organon (c. 350 BCE), Abacus (c. 190 BCE), Fuzzy Logic (1965)

OceanofPDF.com

In “Darwin among the Machines,” Samuel Butler wrote “We are ourselves creating our own
successors.… In the course of ages, we shall find ourselves the inferior race.”

“DARWIN AMONG THE MACHINES”

1863
ENGLISH AUTHOR AND POLYMATH SAMUEL Butler (1835–1902) provided early
insights into possible AIs of the future, presaging concepts such as selfimproving machine superintelligence and its potential risk. In his
astounding 1863 essay “Darwin among the Machines,” Butler discusses the
future of “mechanical life”: “We are ourselves creating our own successors;
we are daily adding to the beauty and delicacy of their physical
organization; we are daily giving them greater power and supplying by all
sorts of ingenious contrivances that self-regulating, self-acting power that
will be to them what intellect has been to the human race. In the course of
ages, we shall find ourselves the inferior race.”
With startling perceptivity, Butler envisions the gradual takeover of
human endeavor by machines: “We are becoming more subservient to them;
more men are daily bound down as slaves to tend them … devoting the
energies of their whole lives to the development of mechanical life.… The
time will come when the machines will hold the real supremacy over the
world and its inhabitants.…”
In The Book of the Machines (1872), Butler muses that a mollusk does
not appear to have much consciousness, yet human consciousness evolved.
Similarly, machines will develop consciousness, and he asks us to “reflect
upon the extraordinary advance that machines have made during the last
few hundred years, and note how slowly the animal and vegetable
kingdoms are advancing. The more highly organized machines are creatures
not so much of yesterday, as of the last five minutes.…”
Butler’s ideas echoed into the twentieth century when Norbert Wiener
(1894–1964), father of the field of cybernetics, wrote: “If we move in the
direction of making machines which learn and whose behavior is modified
by experience, we must face the fact that every degree of independence we

give the machine is a degree of possible defiance of our wishes. The genie
in the bottle will not willingly go back in the bottle, nor have we any reason
to expect them to be well disposed to us.”
With twenty-first-century technology now interweaved in all aspects of
human life, both Butler’s and Wiener’s musings on AI appear particularly
prophetic.

SEE ALSO Hobbes’s Leviathan (1651), The Human Use of Human Beings (1950), Intelligence
Explosion (1965), Leakproof “AI Box” (1993), Paperclip Maximizer Catastrophe (2003)

OceanofPDF.com

Cover of The Steam Man of the Prairies by Edward S. Ellis (1868).

THE STEAM MAN OF THE PRAIRIES

1868
ONE OF THE FIRST DEPICTIONS OF A mechanical human in US “dime novels”
(inexpensive paperbacks) occurs in The Steam Man of the Prairies by Ohioborn author Edward S. Ellis (1840–1916), which was reissued numerous
times between 1868 and 1904. In Ellis’s novel, a teenage inventor named
Johnny Brainerd creates a ten-foot-tall robot and takes it around the
American Midwest. The steam man wears a stovepipe hat, pulls a wagon,
and walks or runs on carefully tooled legs as fast as sixty miles per hour.
Johnny, his friends, and his robot have adventures on the prairie chasing
buffalo, frightening Indians, and assisting in gold mining.
Ellis describes the steam man as “exceedingly corpulent, swelling out to
aldermanic proportions, which, after all, was little out of harmony with its
immense height.” The robot was fat so as to provide sufficient room for all
of its machinery. Furthermore, the “face was made of iron … with a pair of
fearful eyes, and a tremendous grinning mouth.… The step was natural,
except when running, at which time, the bolt uprightness in the figure
showed different from a human being.”
The Steam Man was inspired by an actual steam-powered humanlike
robot, patented in 1868 by American inventors Zadoc P. Dederick and Isaac
Grass. The fascinating Ellis series is also an early example of the
“Edisonade” genre of stories that generally featured a young male inventor
who uses his ingenuity to escape from dangers. As noted by historian
Andrew Liptak: “Ellis, in writing about adventures on the American
frontier, was exploring the lives of people living on the edge of the
unknown, much like modern stories set far out in the solar system.… Ellis’s
works serve as a good window into the attitudes of the time, and provide
some context for how the future was viewed, as well as how much the
world was changing.”

SEE ALSO Electric Bob’s Big Black Ostrich (1893), Tik-Tok (1907), Elektro the Moto-Man (1939)

OceanofPDF.com

In the Tower of Hanoi game, a player can move one disk at a time to another peg by
removing the top disk in any stack and placing it on the top of any other stack. A disk cannot
be placed on top of a smaller disk.

TOWER OF HANOI

1883
THE TOWER OF HANOI HAS INTRIGUED THE world since it was invented by
french mathematician Édouard Lucas (1842–1891) in 1883 and sold as a
toy. This mathematical puzzle consists of several disks of different sizes that
slide onto any of three pegs. The disks are initially stacked on one peg in
order of size, with the smallest disk at the top. When playing the game, one
can move one disk at a time to another peg by removing the top disk in any
stack and placing it on the top of any other stack. A disk cannot be placed
on top of a smaller disk. The goal is to move the entire starting stack
(usually with seven or eight disks) to another peg. The minimum number of
moves turns out to be 2n − 1, where n is the number of disks.
The original game was said to be inspired by a legendary Indian temple
in which Brahmin priests continually moved 64 golden disks, using the
same rules as in the Tower of Hanoi. According to this legend, when the last
move of the puzzle is completed, the world will end. Note that if the priests
were able to move disks at the rate of one per second, then 264 − 1, or
18,446,744,073,709,551,615, moves would require roughly 585 billion
years—about 42 times the current estimated age of our universe.
The Tower of Hanoi puzzle, and many variations, have been used in
various robotics challenges, as the puzzle provides a useful standardized
test to evaluate the robot’s integration of high-level reasoning capabilities
together with perception and manipulation. Task planning and motion
planning (involving one or more robot arms) play key roles in such
challenges.
Simple algorithms exist for solutions involving three pegs, and the game
is often used in computer programming classes to teach recursive
algorithms. However, the optimal solution for the Tower of Hanoi problem

(and variations) with large numbers of pegs has been an active area of
research. For multi-armed robots, collision-free trajectories must also be
computed.

SEE ALSO Tic-Tac-Toe (c. 1300 BCE), Mechanical Turk (1770), Connect Four (1988), Rubik’s
Cube Robots (2018)

OceanofPDF.com

Illustration for “Electric Bob’s Big Black Ostrich,” a story by Robert T. Toombs in the New
York Five Cent Library, 1893.

ELECTRIC BOB’S BIG BLACK
OSTRICH

1893
THE ELECTRIC BOB SERIES OF STORIES BY Robert T. Toombs, along with THE
STEAM MAN OF THE Prairies series, are notable for showing a growing
fascination at the end of the nineteenth century in the United States with
mechanical devices that resemble humans or animals. In Electric Bob’s Big
Black Ostrich (1893), Electric Bob is a ten-year-old engineering genius who
lives near New York City and is a descendant of telegraph inventor Samuel
Morse (1791–1872). Aside from his electronic ostrich, Bob is also an
inventor of a giant mechanical white alligator and other mechanized
animals that could be used for transport. Generally, the various robots are
well stocked with supplies, have armor, and are capable of traversing
difficult environments.
During the course of the story, Electric Bob reasons that a large
electronic ostrich could carry him and his friends across a rocky desert in
the American Southwest, while avoiding snakes. Bob carefully studies
anatomy and physiology from live ostrich specimens and designs the
perfect conveyance: “The ostrich towered thirty feet in the air to the top of
his great head. The center of the body was twenty feet from the ground, the
neck was about eight feet long.… The power is furnished by powerful
storage batteries placed in the body just between the thighs of the bird, and
are capable of giving us a speed of twenty to forty miles an hour—
depending on the nature of the ground we travel over.”
The novel is notable for the engineering details it provides to readers.
For example, it breaks down all the various materials and components of
the mechanical bird, including its hollow steel legs and the bulletproof
aluminum wings and tail. Bob continues: “Here are the water tank, storage

placed for provision, ammunition, etc., and here is our machine gun …
[which] consists of an enlarged revolved cylinder, holding twenty-five
Winchester rifle cartridges, and a short, heavy barrel, and is fired by turning
this crank.”
Although such fictional treatments do not really address philosophical
issues revolving around the creation of such mechanical life forms,
Edisonades like this one provide a glimpse into the thinking of the time,
along with all its prejudices, hopes, and aspirations.

SEE ALSO de Vaucanson’s Duck Automaton (1738), The Steam Man of the Prairies (1868), Tik-Tok
(1907)

OceanofPDF.com

Nikola Tesla’s 1898 patent for his wirelessly controlled robotic boat, which contained a
battery, motor-driven propeller, rudder, and lights. He believed that intelligent
“teleautomatons” would be created in the future, causing a revolution in society.

TESLA’S “BORROWED MIND”

1898
IN 1898, SERBIAN-AMERICAN INVENTOR NIKOLA Tesla (1856–1943) gave a
remarkable demonstration of a radio-controlled boat, which he maneuvered
in front of awestruck spectators, some of whom thought magic, telepathy, or
a trained monkey might be involved. When a New York Times reporter
learned of this world’s-first radio-controlled vessel, he suggested that
Tesla’s invention could serve as a weapon of war, carrying dynamite. Tesla
told the reporter to think beyond wireless torpedoes and realize that this
represented the first of a race of automatons (the word robot was not yet
used)—mechanical men that would perform the laborious work of the
human race.
In his 1900 essay “The Problem of Increasing Human Energy,” Tesla
wrote about his aquatic automatons: “The knowledge, experience, judgment
—the mind, so to speak—of the distant operator was embodied in that
machine, which was thus enabled to move and to perform all its operations
with reason and intelligence.… The automatons so far constructed had
‘borrowed minds,’ so to speak, as each merely formed part of the distant
operator.”
Tesla went even further to suggest that “an automaton may be contrived
that will have its ‘own mind’ [and be] able, independent of any operator, left
entirely to itself, to perform, in response to external influences affecting its
sensitive organs, a great variety of acts and operations as if it had
intelligence.”
Tesla is often considered a great prophet of our modern technological
age, where realistic androids (i.e., humanoid robots) like Nadine and Sophia
baffle spectators with their ability to carry on conversations. In fact, Tesla
believed that humans were mere automatons that responded to external
stimuli and thought and acted accordingly, and among his grand ideas was

the construction of “an automaton which would mechanically represent me,
and which would respond, as I do myself, but, of course, in a much more
primitive manner, to external influences. Such an automaton evidently had
to have motive power, organs for locomotion, directive organs, and one or
more sensitive organs so adapted as to be excited by external stimuli.…
Whether the automaton be of flesh and bone, or of wood and steel, it
mattered little, provided it could perform all the duties required of it like an
intelligent being.”

SEE ALSO Lethal Military Robots (1942), The Human Use of Human Beings (1950), Autonomous
Vehicles (1984)

OceanofPDF.com

Cover of Tik-Tok of Oz by L. Frank Baum, 1914, illustrated by John R. Neill (1877–1943).

TIK-TOK

1907
WHEN WE STUDY ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE, “we are immediately con-fronted
with the most fundamental inquiries into the nature of life, death, sex, work,
and the mechanisms of the mind,” write authors Paul Abrahm and Stuart
Kenter, “… a large order requiring exhausting pilgrimages into literature,
philosophy, and an impressive array of scientific and technical realms.” One
of the earliest thinking machines in literature to raise questions regarding
the fine line between machines and people is Tik-Tok, an intelligent copper
robot introduced in the 1907 novel Ozma of Oz by American author L.
Frank Baum (1856–1919). To power the clockwork robot, someone must
periodically wind up his three clockwork springs that separately energize
his thoughts, actions, or speaking. For example, it is possible to energize his
thoughts but not his actions or speech, creating an isolated “AI in a Box.”
Or his speech may be energized, but not his thoughts, allowing him to
create crude vocal output but not having adequate natural languageprocessing facilities. Even when fully activated, his language-processing
modules are not entirely natural, as evidenced by his monotonous-sounding
voice and strict literal interpretation of many questions and commands.
According to Baum, Tik-Tok “does everything but live” and feels no
emotions. When punished with whips, Tik-Tok is not harmed, as the
whipping merely kept his copper body “well polished.”
Tik-Tok realizes his place in the universe. For example, when thanked
for his kindness, he replies “I am only a machine. I cannot be kind any more
than I can be sorry or glad.” Even though the novel appears to be targeted to
a youthful readership, Baum makes us wonder about the future of AI. Is
emotion the main differentiator between humans and machines? To what
degree do literature and movies shape AI designs and the limitations we
may place on thinking machines?

“Cyborgs, robots and other mechanical beings are key figures for
understanding the technophilic and technophobic dreams of a century,”
writes Professor Alex Goody, “embodying fears about technological
encroachment, suggesting to some the chance for technological
transcendence, and challenging the idea of the individual, differentiated,
human subject.”

SEE ALSO Lancelot’s Copper Knights (c. 1220), The Steam Man of the Prairies (1868), Asimov’s
Three Laws of Robotics (1942), Natural Language Processing (1954), Leakproof “AI Box” (1993)

OceanofPDF.com

Alan Turing wrote that humans would not be irreverently usurping God’s power of creating
souls when we someday create advanced thinking machines—any more than we do when
we produce children.

SEARCHES FOR THE SOUL

1907
IN HIS 1950 PAPER “COMPUTING MACHINERY and Intelligence,” computer
scientist Alan Turing (1912–1954) wrote that when we attempt to construct
AI machines, we are not “irreverently usurping” God’s “power of creating
souls, any more than we are in the procreation of children; rather we are, in
either case, instruments of His will, providing mansions for the souls that
He creates.” Some futurists believe that, as we learn more about the
structure of the brain, conscious AIs might be created by simulating a mind
or by uploading aspects of our minds to a computer. These speculations
assume a materialist view in which the mind arises from brain activity. On
the other hand, in the mid-seventeenth century French philosopher René
Descartes (1596–1650) supposed that the mind, or “soul,” exists separately
from the brain. In his view, this “soul” is connected to the brain via an organ
like the pineal body, which acts as a portal between brain and mind.
The various views concerning the separation of soul and matter represent
a philosophy of mind-body dualism. In 1907, American physician Duncan
MacDougall (1866–1920) placed dying tuberculosis patients on a scale in
an attempt to demonstrate this concept. He reasoned that at the moment of
death, the scale should indicate a drop in weight as the soul disembarked.
As a result of his experiments, MacDougall measured the soul to be 21
grams (0.7 ounces). Alas, MacDougall and other researchers were never
able to duplicate this finding.
A more materialist view of the mind and body may be supported by
experiments that suggest our thoughts, memory, and personality can be
altered by damage to regions of the brain, and brain-imaging studies can
map both feelings and thoughts. As just one curious example, injury to the
brain’s right frontal lobe can lead to a sudden, passionate interest in fine
restaurants and gourmet foods—a condition called gourmand syndrome. Of

course, the dualist Descartes might have argued that damage to the brain
alters behavior because it is through the brain that the mind operates. If we
excise the car’s steering wheel, for example, the car behaves differently, but
this does not mean that there is no separate driver.

SEE ALSO The Consciousness Mill (1714), Transhumanism (1957), Living in a Simulation (1967),
Spielberg’s A.I. Artificial Intelligence (2001)

OceanofPDF.com

Illustrated here is a reading machine by Austrian engineer Gustav Tauschek (1899–1945),
from US Patent 2,026,329. The comparison device (disk 6) had cutouts for letters. When
images of a character and a letter-shaped hole coincided, the appropriate letter was printed.

OPTICAL CHARACTER RECOGNITION
(OCR)

1913
PRESIDENT JOHN ADAMS IS OFTEN CREDITED with saying “The only thing most
people do better than anyone else is read their own handwriting.” Indeed,
the quest for automated systems that could read printed letters of the
alphabet has had a long history. Optical character recognition, or OCR, has
involved several fields of research and development: computer vision,
artificial intelligence, pattern recognition, and more. OCR refers to the
conversion of images of text in numerous varieties (e.g., handwritten,
printed, typed) into machine-encoded text. For example, the text on a
mailing envelope, license plate, book page, street sign, or passport might be
scanned and recognized by a machine. Sometimes OCR is used to convert
text to speech for blind people.
One early inventor in the area of OCR is Russian-born scientist Emanuel
Goldberg (1881–1970), who patented a document-search device in 1931
that used photoelectric cells and pattern recognition to search for
information on microfilmed documents. Even earlier, around 1913, Irish
physicist Edmund Fournier d’Albe (1868–1933) invented the optophone,
which assisted blind readers by using photosensors to scan text and generate
tones that corresponded to letters. In 1974, American inventor Ray
Kurzweil (b. 1948) created a reading machine for the blind that could scan
text in numerous different fonts and produce speech output.
OCR often requires a number of interesting processing steps, such as
mathematically tilting the text as needed, removing noise, and smoothing
edges. In order to recognize characters, the system may make comparisons
to stored characters and/or consider particular graphical features (e.g., loops
and lines).

A closely related field includes handwriting recognition (HWR), which
may also involve the monitoring and analysis of the movements of a pen in
recognizing the word being written. HWR usually employs OCR, but may
also involve determining the most plausible words in a given context to
increase accuracy. Artificial neural networks can also be used to facilitate
OCR and HWR.

SEE ALSO Artificial Neural Networks (1943), Speech Recognition (1952), Machine Learning
(1959)

OceanofPDF.com

Poster for a production of R.U.R., directed by the puppeteer Remo Bufano in New York, in
1939. The performance was funded by the Federal Theatre Project (1935–1939), a New
Deal program to fund art in the United States during the Great Depression.

ROSSUM’S UNIVERSAL ROBOTS

1920
WRITTEN BY THE CZECH ART CRITIC AND playwright Karel Čapek (1890–
1938), the 1920 play R.U.R. (Rossum’s Universal Robots) introduced the
word robot to the English language.
In R.U.R, the robots are made of flesh and blood but assembled in vats.
They serve humankind as factory workers—essentially as inexpensive
appliances—which allows humans a tremendous amount of leisure time.
However, debates take place about their rights and humanity. Helena, one of
the main characters, desires to free the robots. Alas, the robots, which are
being used worldwide, eventually destroy the human race; but because the
robots do not possess the secret formula to reproduce themselves, they too
will eventually die out. At the end of the play, two special robots fall in
love, representing a kind of Adam and Eve for the future of our planet.
The word robot comes from the Czech robota, which refers to forced
labor. The play is a milestone in that it forced people to consider the
implications of the continued evolution of AI technology—not only in the
area of jobs and possible dehumanization effects on society, but also
regarding the general safety of the human race. Where do we draw the line
between humans and thinking machines? When do such machines become
so advanced that they deserve rights or become a threat? According to
author Rebecca Stefoff, R.U.R. suggests that the “indefinable spark of
humanity dwells in how beings feel and act, not in how they are created.”
“Philosophically rich and controversial, R.U.R. was unanimously
acknowledged as a masterpiece from its first appearance, and has become a
classic of technologically dystopian literature,” writes Luciano Floridi (b.
1964), Professor of Philosophy and Ethics of Information at Oxford
University. The ideas in the play were so powerful that, by 1923, the play
had been translated into more than thirty languages. In 1922, the American

premiere of the play took place in New York City, where it had more than a
hundred performances.

SEE ALSO Metropolis (1927), The Human Use of Human Beings (1950), Intelligence Explosion
(1965), Leakproof “AI Box” (1993)

OceanofPDF.com

Maria from the film Metropolis, on display at the Robot Hall of Fame at the Carnegie
Science Center in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.

METROPOLIS

1927
IN THE 1927 SILENT FILM METROPOLIS—directed by Fritz Lang (1890–1976)
and scripted by Thea von Harbou (1888–1954)—the inventor C. A.
Rotwang explains that his robots never tire or make a mistake and that these
workers of the future will not be distinguishable from human beings. Set in
a futuristic city, humankind is divided into a leisure class that rules the city
and the underclass that runs the vast machinery, toiling below ground.
Maria, the heroine, is a young woman who cares about the workers and
the difficulty of their lives. As the visually impressive film progresses,
Rotwang creates a robot that resembles Maria in an attempt to ruin her
reputation among the workers and discourage any rebellion. The simulated
Maria actually urges the workers to revolt, but she is later captured and
burned at the stake. As she burns, the human-like exterior melts away,
revealing the metallic-looking robot within.
The film’s motto is “The mediator between the brain and muscle must be
the heart,” and as such it probes the essential differences between humans
and AI. Considering the ramifications of Metropolis, the futurist Thomas
Lombardo writes: “The robot, in fact, in science fiction emerged as a
symbolic synthesis of humanity and the machine—equally the human
becoming machine-like, being assimilated by its technological creation, as
well as the machine becoming human, embodying our worst qualities and
characteristics.… It personifies our fear of science and technology, as well
as our fear of what we may become.”
The themes of Metropolis echo in more modern science fiction films like
the cult classic Blade Runner (1982) with its synthetic humans. Of course,
overreliance on technology, and the future of labor in an AI age, are hot
topics of discussion today. Metropolis will continue to be relevant in the
future, as AI entities are increasingly mistaken for humans. When AIs are

developed with the ability to impersonate people we trust or respect, or to
become “simulated beings” with whom we fall in love, the consequences
will be far-reaching.

SEE ALSO Rossum’s Universal Robots (1920), Turing Test (1950), Ethics of AI (1976), Blade
Runner (1982)

OceanofPDF.com

Elektro, the “Moto-Man,” from the Westinghouse Exhibit at the 1939–1940 New York
World’s Fair.

ELEKTRO THE MOTO-MAN

1939
ELEKTRO DESERVES A PLACE IN THIS BOOK because he has been hailed as one
of the world’s first “celebrity robots” and “America’s oldest surviving
robot.”
He was built by the Westinghouse Electric Corporation and exhibited at
the 1939 New York World’s Fair, where he was an instant hit. This 7-foottall (2.1-m) humanoid could move in response to voice commands, could
speak hundreds of words, and even smoked cigarettes. His photoelectric
eyes could distinguish red and green light. In 1940, he was accompanied by
Sparko, a robot dog that could bark and move. Countless visitors to the
World’s Fair stood in line to see his twenty-minute performances.
Realizing that many people would mistakenly consider his capabilities to
be a result of a hidden man inside a robot costume, his designers
deliberately cut a hole in his body to show that this was not the case. In
actuality, he was created with camshafts, gears, and motors that moved his
head, mouth, and arms. Engineer Joseph Barnett invented him, making use
of a series of 78-rpm record players connected to relay switches to generate
his 700-word vocabulary. The robot could say things like “My brain is
bigger than yours,” and he responded to speech based on the number of
words or syllables he heard. For example, three words (no matter what they
were) activated relays to stop Elektro’s motion. Alas, he and Sparko could
not wander very far, as they were actually controlled by nearby operators
via electrical cables connected near the feet.
Elektro has inspired a number of children to pursue careers in
engineering over the years. He also appeared in the 1960 comedy film Sex
Kittens Go to College and then was promptly dismantled, with his head
given as a retirement gift to a Westinghouse employee. In 2004, his various
pieces were rediscovered, and he was finally reassembled.

SEE ALSO da Vinci’s Robot Knight (c. 1495), The Steam Man of the Prairies (1868), Shakey the
Robot (1966), ASIMO and Friends (2000)

OceanofPDF.com

The VODER, which simulated effects of the human vocal tract, fascinated crowds at the
1939 New York World’s Fair. The VODER employed a console from which an operator could
create speech.

SPEECH SYNTHESIS

1939
PERHAPS MANY OF YOU HAVE HEARD THE synthesized voice of astrophysicist
Stephen Hawking (1942–2018), who for many years used a speech
synthesizer with a robotic voice to speak on his behalf after his motor
neuron disease led to his inability to speak naturally. In fact, the ability of
computer systems to convert text to speech has served many useful
purposes, including reading text out loud for the visually impaired, young
children, or people with various reading difficulties. Synthetic speech can
also allow computer systems to create the impression of human intelligence
and interaction when interfaced with digital personal assistants of all kinds.
New approaches using neural nets can now simulate the specific natural
speech of selected people, and thus we live in a world where it will be
increasingly difficult to know when the voice of someone we trust (e.g., a
business partner, a parent, a child) is being generated by the actual person.
What happens when someone can “steal” anyone else’s voice and have
them speak anything desired?
Speech synthesis systems have been implemented by various means. For
example, engineers can store digitized speech units and concatenate them
(i.e., string them together) during playback, or they can utilize distinctive
frequency components of the acoustic signal (i.e., formants) in a method
called formant synthesis. With articulatory synthesis, models of the human
vocal tract are simulated. Of course, simple systems like talking clocks,
cars, toys, and calculators, need only store a few pre-recorded words for
playback.
Many challenges exist for converting text to natural and understandable
speech. For example, consider the various pronunciations in the English
language of words like tear, bass, read, project, desert, and so on, which
change depending on the context in which they are spoken.

One of the early landmarks in the history of synthetic speech involves
the work of engineer Homer Dudley (1896–1980), who invented the
vocoder (i.e., “voice encoder”), which could electronically produce speech
using various electronic filters, and the VODER (i.e., “voice operation
demonstrator”), which used a console from which an operator could create
speech. The latter, which simulated effects of the human vocal tract, was
exhibited at the 1939 New York World’s Fair.

SEE ALSO Speech Recognition (1952), Natural Language Processing (1954), Ethics of AI (1976)

OceanofPDF.com

Author Isaac Asimov, famous for his “Three Laws of Robotics,” is shown here in 1977 on the
cover of his science fiction magazine, in which he further develops the idea of artificial
intelligence in his story “Think!”

ASIMOV’S THREE LAWS OF
ROBOTICS

1942
AS AI AND ROBOTICS ADVANCE IN THE COMING decades, what constraints or
codified laws should be developed to ensure that such entities do not take
actions that harm humans? In 1942, author and educator Isaac Asimov
(1920–1992) introduced his famous “Three Laws of Robotics” in a short
story called “Runaround,” which features a smart robot’s interactions with
people. The Three Laws are (1) a robot may not injure a human being or,
through inaction, allow a human being to come to harm; (2) a robot must
obey the orders given it by human beings except where such orders would
conflict with the First Law; (3) a robot must protect its own existence as
long as such protection does not conflict with the First or Second Laws.
Asimov went on to write many stories that illustrated how these simple laws
could have unintended consequences.
Later, he provided an additional law: “A robot may not harm humanity,
or, by inaction, allow humanity to come to harm.” These laws have been
influential, not only for science fiction writers, but also for AI experts. AI
researcher Marvin Minsky (1927–2016) noted that after encountering
Asimov’s laws, he “never stopped thinking about how minds might work.
Surely we’d someday build robots that think. But how would they think and
about what? Surely logic might work for some purposes, but not for others.
And how to build robots with common sense, intuition, consciousness, and
emotion? How, for that matter, do brains do those things?”
The laws are notable and useful for the countless questions they raise.
What other laws might we add to the Asimov set? For example, should
robots never pretend they are human? Should robots “know” that they are
robots? Should they always be able to explain why they acted as they have?

What if a terrorist used multiple robots to harm people, without each robot
knowing the entire plan, and thus not violating the First Law? We may also
consider how these laws may have an impact on robot army medics who
must perform triage when they cannot tend to multiple injured soldiers, or
autonomous vehicles that must determine whether to crash into playing
children or drive off a cliff and kill a passenger. Finally, could a robot really
decide what it means to “harm humanity,” given that its interactions could
have repercussions for years into the future?

SEE ALSO Lethal Military Robots (1942), Ethics of AI (1976), Blade Runner (1982), Autonomous
Vehicles (1984)

OceanofPDF.com

Artist’s conception of a lethal autonomous drone, attacking enemy tanks after visual
recognition and AI confirmation.

LETHAL MILITARY ROBOTS

1942
ROBOTS USED IN WARFARE INCLUDE MANY examples in the 1900s, such as the
tank-like Goliath used by the Germans beginning in 1942, during World
War II, on all fronts where the Wehrmacht fought. The unmanned Goliaths
were remote-controlled via a connecting cable and carried high explosives
so that the machines could blow up along with their intended targets.
Today, drones (unmanned flying vehicles) can be armed with missiles to
serve as an effective weapons system, but they usually require remote
human input and authorization before being “allowed” to destroy a target.
Of historical note, an MQ-1 Predator drone launched the first-ever deadly
airstrikes from a drone in 2001 in Afghanistan. Debates continue regarding
the possible future use of lethal autonomous weapons that could actually
select and attack military targets without human intervention. Automatic
defensive systems do exist today, including machines that can
autonomously identify and attack incoming missiles.
Possible advantages of military robots are many: they never tire or show
fear; they can rapidly perform maneuvers that would injure human pilots;
and they could potentially save lives of soldiers and reduce collateral
damage and civilian casualties. In principle, machines might be instructed
to follow various rules, such as not to fire when unsure if a target is a
civilian or a combatant, or whether lethal force is permitted. Perhaps
damage potential to civilians might be programmed and restricted to be
proportional to the size of a military target. Facial-recognition software
could be used to enhance accuracy, and military robots could work side by
side with soldiers, enhancing their abilities much like software or robotics
may be used today to assist with surgeries. But how much independence
should such fighting machines be given? Who is at fault if a robot
accidentally attacks a school?

In 2015, a large group of AI experts signed a letter warning of the
dangers of military use of offensive autonomous weapons beyond human
control, which could lead to a global AI arms race. The letter was presented
at the International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence and signed by
such intellectuals as Stephen Hawking, Elon Musk, Steve Wozniak, and
Noam Chomsky.

SEE ALSO Tesla’s “Borrowed Mind” (1898), Asimov’s Three Laws of Robotics (1942), Colossus:
The Forbin Project (1970), Ethics of AI (1976), Autonomous Robotic Surgery (2016), Adversarial
Patches (2018)

OceanofPDF.com

Artificial neural networks are loosely inspired by biological neural networks, such as
interconnected neurons in the brain that transmit signals to one another.

ARTIFICIAL NEURAL NETWORKS

1943
ARTIFICIAL NEURAL NETWORKS (ANNs) ARE often schematically represented
like layer cakes, made from icing and stacked sheets of cake. For our
purposes, the layers contain neurons in the form of simple computational
units that become “excited” and propagate that excitement to other
connected neurons. A weight, or strength, factor determines how much
excitement should get passed along. Through a training period, as various
weights and thresholds are adjusted from an initially random state, these
systems can learn to perform tasks, such as recognizing an image of an
elephant—by first analyzing numerous images that have been labeled as
“elephant” and “not elephant.” Various embellishments to the basic neural
net function include “backpropagation,” which can pass information in a
reverse direction. Neural networks are now used in a wide variety of
research and practical applications, including game playing, vehicle control,
drug design, cancer detection in medical images, and language translation.
Some of the basic computational models in neural nets were discussed
by neurophysiologist Warren McCulloch (1898–1969) and logician Walter
Pitts (1923–1969) in their 1943 paper “A Logical Calculus of the Ideas
Immanent in Nervous Activity,” published in the Bulletin of Mathematical
Biophysics. In 1957, Frank Rosenblatt (1928–1971) created the perceptron
algorithm for pattern recognition, which was subsequently implemented in
computer hardware. In the twenty-first century, the utility of ANNs
dramatically improved through the use of distributed computing (e.g., on
different networked computers) and GPU (graphical processing unit)
hardware.
ANNs are inspired by biological neural networks and are one means of
implementing machine learning, in which computers exhibit the ability to
learn without being explicitly programmed for a task. The concept of “deep

learning” in computer science includes ANNs with several layers, which
allow rich intermediate representations to be built. One challenge associated
with ANNs is that input can sometimes be intentionally manipulated so that
the ANNs are deceived into giving obviously incorrect answers. Also, it is
difficult to understand how and why an ANN is providing a particular
answer. Nevertheless, reflecting upon the recent useful applications of
neural nets, Google AI expert Jeff Dean (b. 1968) said “The portion of
evolution in which animals developed eyes was a big development. Now
computers have eyes.”

SEE ALSO Reinforcement Learning (1951), Perceptron (1957), Machine Learning (1959), Deep
Learning (1965), Computer Art and DeepDream (2015)

OceanofPDF.com

ENIAC was among the first electronic, reprogrammable, digital computers that could be
used to solve a large range of computing problems. The machine contained more than
17,000 vacuum tubes.

ENIAC

1946
THE 1946 NEWSPAPER HEADLINES WERE ecstatic about ENIAC and the future
of thinking machines. “Mechanical Brain Enlarges Man’s Horizons,” wrote
The Philadelphia Inquirer, and The Cleveland Plain Dealer proclaimed
“Calculator Puts Humans to Shame”—and also said it heralded “a new
epoch in the scope of human thought.” All this media attention about
progress in electrically embodied “thinking,” along with the technological
advancements, naturally led the world to consider further possibilities for
AI.
ENIAC, short for Electronic Numerical Integrator and Computer, was
built at the University of Pennsylvania by American scientists John
Mauchly (1907–1980) and J. Presper Eckert (1919–1995). This device was
among the first electronic, reprogrammable, digital computers that could be
used to solve a large range of computing problems. The original purpose of
ENIAC was to calculate artillery firing tables for the US Army. However,
its first important application involved the design of the hydrogen bomb.
ENIAC was unveiled in 1946, having cost nearly $500,000, and it was in
nearly continuous use until it was turned off on October 2, 1955. The
machine contained more than 17,000 vacuum tubes and around five million
hand-soldered joints. An IBM card reader and card-punch machine were
used for input and output. In 1995, a team of engineering students led by
Professor Jan Van der Spiegel created a “replica” of the 30-ton ENIAC on a
single integrated circuit!
Other important electrical computing machines of the 1930s and 1940s
include the American Atanasoff–Berry Computer (demonstrated in October
1939), the German Z3 (demonstrated in May 1941), and the British
Colossus computer (demonstrated in December 1943). In contrast to

ENIAC, however, these machines were either not fully electronic or not
general-purpose.
The authors of the ENIAC patent (No. 3,120,606, filed in 1947) write:
“With the advent of everyday use of elaborate calculations, speed has
become paramount to such a high degree that there is no machine on the
market today capable of satisfying the full demand of modern
computational methods.… The present invention is intended to reduce to
seconds such lengthy computations.…”

SEE ALSO Abacus (c. 190 BCE), Babbage’s Mechanical Computer (1822), Giant Brains, or
Machines That Think (1949)

OceanofPDF.com

A “giant brain.” Shown here are the sequence indicators and switches of the IBM Automatic
Sequence Controlled Calculator (ASCC), or Harvard Mark I Computer, in a science building
at Harvard University.

GIANT BRAINS, OR MACHINES THAT
THINK

1949
IN 1949, THE AMERICAN COMPUTER SCIENTIST Edmund Berkeley (1909–
1988) published what may be the first popular book on computers for a
general audience. It was titled Giant Brains, or Machines That Think, and it
was notable in that it raised questions about the appropriateness of using the
term brain and the word thinking applied to computers. Many of these
questions echo to this day. In the book, he writes: “Recently there has been
a good deal of news about strange giant machines that can handle
information with vast speed and skill. They calculate and they reason. Some
of them are cleverer than others—able to do more kinds of problems …
they can solve problems that a man’s life is far too short to permit him to
do.… These machines are similar to what a brain would be if it were made
of hardware and wire instead of flesh and nerves. It is therefore natural to
call these machines mechanical brains.”
It is fascinating to realize that when the book was written, electronic
computers were virtually unknown to the public. There were only a small
number of these “giant brains” in existence, and Berkeley discusses several
of them in the book, including the Differential Analyzer Number 2 at MIT,
the Mark I at Harvard University (also known as the IBM Automatic
Sequence Controlled Calculator), ENIAC at the Moore School, the GeneralPurpose Relay Calculator at Bell Laboratories, and the Kalin-Burkhart
Logical-Truth Cal-culator built by Harvard students, to name a few. In
Berkeley’s endnotes, added to the book in 1961, he noted that even
“intuitive thinking” might be achieved by machines someday: “Perhaps
intuitive thinking is a very rapid running over of possible alternatives in
one’s mind, coupled with very rapid appraising of them, so that one arrives

at a conclusion with hardly any consciousness of how that conclusion was
obtained. If so, then of course it is possible to program computers in such a
way that they display what we call intuitive thinking, except that the
method of obtaining the conclusions is known.”

SEE ALSO Hobbes’s Leviathan (1651), The Consciousness Mill (1714), ENIAC (1946), Colossus:
The Forbin Project (1970), “Call Them Artificial Aliens” (2015)

OceanofPDF.com

The Turing test probes a machine’s capability for exhibiting intelligent behavior
indistinguishable from that of a person.

TURING TEST

1950
FRENCH PHILOSOPHER DENIS DIDEROT (1713–1784) once remarked: “If they
find a parrot who could answer to everything, I would claim it to be an
intelligent being without hesitation.” This leads to the question: Can
appropriately programmed computers be considered to be intelligent entities
that “think”? In 1950, English computer scientist Alan Turing (1912–1954)
attempted to answer this with his famous paper “Computing Machinery and
Intelligence,” published in the journal Mind. He suggested that if a
computer behaves in the same way as a human, we might as well call it
intelligent, and then he proposed a special test to evaluate any given
computer’s intelligence: Imagine that a computer and human respond, by
text, to typed questions of human judges who cannot actually see who or
what is responding. If the judges cannot distinguish the computer from the
person after studying the text responses, then the computer has passed a
typical version of what we refer to today as the “Turing test.”
In the past, the Loebner competition was held each year, in part, to honor
the computer programmers who create programs that come closest to
passing the Turing test. Of course, the Turing test has stimulated much
debate and controversy over the years. For example, if the computer is
actually far more “intelligent” than humans, it will need to pretend to be
less intelligent because the test is focused on imitating humans. As a result,
devious and funny techniques that introduce typing errors, change the topic
of conversation, inject jokes, ask the judges questions, and so forth were
often used to fool judges. In 2014, a conversational robot developed by
programmers in Russia passed a version of the test, pretending to be a
thirteen-year-old Ukrainian boy named Eugene Goostman.
In 2023, AI21 Labs created an online social experiment called “Human
or Not?” using large language models. Played by more than two million

people, results indicated that 32 percent of the people could not distinguish
between humans and machines when players engaged in two-minute
conversations with either an AI bot or a human participant.
Another challenge to the value of the Turing test is that the level of
expertise of the human judges can easily change the outcome of the test.
However, whatever we think about the test’s ability to detect “intelligence,”
it definitely inspires creativity in computer programmers and engineers.

SEE ALSO “Darwin among the Machines” (1863), Giant Brains, or Machines That Think (1949),
Natural Language Processing (1954), ELIZA Psychotherapist (1964), Chinese Room (1980),
Moravec’s Paradox (1988), ChatGPT (2022)

OceanofPDF.com

Norbert Wiener wrote that the machine that “can learn and can make decisions on the basis
of its learning, will in no way be obliged to make such decisions as we should have made, or
will be acceptable to us.”

THE HUMAN USE OF HUMAN BEINGS

1950
NORBERT WIENER (1894–1964), THE INFLUENTIAL American mathematician
and philosopher, was one of the key originators of the field of cybernetics,
which is concerned with feedback in many realms of human endeavor and
technology. According to AI expert Daniel Crevier, Wiener believed that
feedback mechanisms are “information-processing devices: they receive
information and then make a decision based on it. Wiener speculated that all
intelligent behavior is the consequence of feedback mechanisms; perhaps
by definition, intelligence is the outcome of receiving and processing
information.”
In his book The Human Use of Human Beings (1950), Wiener
contemplates ways in which humans and machines will cooperate, and his
vision certainly has applicability today with people in nearly constant
electrical communication: “It is the thesis of this book that society can only
be understood through a study of the messages and the communication
facilities which belong to it; and that in the future, development of these
messages and communication facilities, messages between man and
machines, between machines and man, and between machine and machine,
are destined to play an ever increasing part.”
He presciently contemplated the need for future machines that learn, but
he also provided warnings about delegating decision-making processes to
literal-minded machines: “Any machine constructed for the purpose of
making decisions, if it does not possess the power of learning, will be
completely literal minded. Woe to us if we let it decide our conduct, unless
we have previously examined its laws of action, and know fully that its
conduct will be carried out on principles acceptable to us! [The machine
that] can learn and can make decisions on the basis of its learning, will in no
way be obliged to make such decisions as we should have made, or will be

acceptable to us. [If a man gives responsibility to the machine], whether it
can learn or not, is to cast his responsibility to the winds, and to find it
coming back seated on the whirlwind.”
These words of caution have relevance for us today, with many futurists
warning of the need for formulating paths to safe artificial general
intelligence.

SEE ALSO “Darwin among the Machines” (1863), Tesla’s “Borrowed Mind” (1898), Dartmouth AI
Workshop (1956), Intelligence Explosion (1965), Deep Learning (1965)

OceanofPDF.com

Reinforcement learning is an approach for teaching useful actions to software agents so as
to maximize a cumulative reward. Famous early uses included maze solving and learning to
play checkers, tic-tac-toe, and backgammon.

REINFORCEMENT LEARNING

1951
REINFORCEMENT LEARNING IS REMINISCENT of a simple behavior observed in
cats seeking rewards. In the early 1900s, the psychologist Edward
Thorndike (1874–1949) placed cats inside boxes from which they could
escape only by stepping on a switch. After some wandering, the cats would
eventually step on the switch by chance, and the door would open, and the
cat would be rewarded, for example, with food. After the cats learned to
associate this behavior with the reward, they escaped with increasing speed,
up to, eventually, a maximum rate of escape.
In 1951, cognitive scientist Marvin Minsky (1927–2016) and his student
Dean Edmunds built SNARC (Stochastic Neural Analog Reinforcement
Calculator), a neural network machine consisting of 3,000 vacuum tubes to
simulate 40 connected neurons. Minsky used the machine to study a
scenario involving a simulated rat navigating a maze. When, by chance, the
rat made a sequence of useful moves and escaped from a maze, the
connections corresponding to these moves were strengthened, thus
reinforcing the desired behavior, facilitating learning. Other famous early
examples of reinforcement learning devices include systems for playing
checkers (1959), tic-tac-toe (1960), and backgammon (1992).
As implied by these examples, in its simplest definition, reinforcement
learning (RL) is an area of machine learning that involves traversing a
collection of states to receive a reward or to maximize a cumulative reward.
The “learner” discovers which actions yield the highest reward by
repeatedly testing actions. Today, RL is often combined with deep learning,
which involves a large simulated neural network, often to recognize patterns
in data. With RL, a system or machine can learn without explicit
instructions; thus, machines like self-driving cars, industrial robots, and
drones can develop and improve skills through trial and error and

experience. One practical challenge of broadly applying RL is that it
requires a large amount of data and practice simulations.

SEE ALSO Tic-Tac-Toe (c. 1300 BCE), Artificial Neural Networks (1943), Machine Learning
(1959), Backgammon Champion Defeated (1979), Checkers and AI (1994)

OceanofPDF.com

IBM’s Shoebox machine listened as an operator spoke numbers and arithmetic commands
such as “Five plus three plus eight minus nine. Total.”

SPEECH RECOGNITION

1952
A RECENT ISSUE OF THE ECONOMIST MAGAZINE likened today’s speechrecognition devices to “casting a magic spell,” allowing people to “control
the world through words alone.” This reminds us of novelist Arthur C.
Clarke’s assertion that any sufficiently advanced technology is
indistinguishable from magic. “The fast-emerging technology of voice
computing proves Clarke’s point.… Say a few words into the air, and a
nearby device can grant your wish.”
The science and technology of speech recognition, which enables the
recognition of spoken language by machines, has had a long history. In
1952, Bell Laboratories developed the AUDREY system, which made use
of vacuum-tube circuitry and understood spoken numerical digits. Ten years
later, IBM’s Shoebox machine at the 1962 Seattle World’s Fair understood
sixteen words, including the digits 0 through 9, and it would perform
arithmetic operations if it heard words like plus. In 1987, the “Julie” doll,
offered by the US toy company Worlds of Wonder, could understand some
simple phrases and reply.
The technology enabling machines to recognize speech has evolved
considerably. Historically, it has involved the hidden Markov model
(HMM), a statistical method for predicting whether a sound corresponds to
a word, and today recognition makes significant use of deep learning (i.e.,
artificial neural nets with multiple layers) to achieve high accuracy. For
example, a speech-recognition system may hear a stream of sound in a
noisy environment and make a number of “guesses” about what is being
said by determining the probability of various words and phrases it has
encountered in training text. Special software applications may have
knowledge of the likelihood of a particular phrase being used, and decide,
for example, whether “abdominal aortic aneurysm” should be ranked high

or low, depending upon whether it is heard by radiological dictation
software or if it is said in a car that is awaiting a simple command.
Of course, today, countless digital assistants—in our homes, cars,
offices, and mobile phones—respond to voice questions and commands,
and they can also help with dictation of notes. Blind persons and the
physically disabled may also benefit from speech input.

SEE ALSO Speech Synthesis (1939), Artificial Neural Networks (1943), Natural Language
Processing (1954)

OceanofPDF.com

In 1954, in a famous public demonstration of a research project known as the “GeorgetownIBM experiment,” Russian was automatically translated into English by an “electronic brain”
in the form of an IBM 701 computer, shown here.

NATURAL LANGUAGE PROCESSING

1954
“IN 1954, AN IBM PRESS RELEASE PROCLAIMED: “Russian was translated into
English by an electronic ‘brain’ today for the first time.… The famous 701
computer … within a few seconds, turned the sentences into easily readable
English. A girl who didn’t understand a word of the language of the Soviets
punched out the Russian messages on IBM cards.” The press release
continued by explaining that “the ‘brain’ dashed off its English translations
on an automatic printer at the breakneck speed of two and a half lines per
second.”
In 1971, computer scientist Terry Winograd (b. 1946) wrote SHRDLU, a
program that translated human commands such as “Move the red block next
to the blue pyramid” into physical actions. Today, natural language
processing (NLP) often involves many AI subfields, including speech
recognition, natural language understanding (e.g., machine reading
comprehension), and speech synthesis. One of the goals is to facilitate
natural interactions between humans and computers.
The early days of NLP usually involved the use of complicated sets of
manually created rules; but in the 1980s, NLP made increasing use of
machine learning algorithms that learned rules through analysis of large sets
of example language input. Typical NLP tasks may involve machine
translations (e.g., translating Russian into English), question answering
(e.g., “What is the capital of France?”), sentiment analysis (emotions and
attitudes on a topic), etc. Analyzing input from text, audio, and video, NLP
is employed in diverse realms, including spam-filtering for email,
summarizing information in long articles, and question-answering by
smartphone apps.
NLP is challenging for many reasons. For example, in speech
recognition, the sounds of adjacent words blend into one another, and the

computing system must also take into account syntax (i.e., grammar),
semantics (i.e., meaning), and pragmatics (i.e., purpose or goal)—along
with the many classes of ambiguity in language where words take on
different meanings in different contexts. Today, significant use of artificial
neural network methods helps to improve accuracy.

SEE ALSO Speech Synthesis (1939), Artificial Neural Networks (1943), Turing Test (1950), Speech
Recognition (1952), Machine Learning (1959), Licklider’s “Man-Computer Symbiosis” (1960),
ELIZA Psychotherapist (1964), SHRDLU (1971), Paranoid PARRY (1972), Watson on Jeopardy!
(2011) , ChatGPT (2022)

OceanofPDF.com

The Dartmouth Summer Research Project on Artificial Intelligence is considered to be an
important event in the history of AI and where the term artificial intelligence, selected by
computer scientist John McCarthy (pictured here in 1974), started to gain acceptance.

DARTMOUTH AI WORKSHOP

1956
“IN THE SUMMER OF 1956,” WRITES JOURNALIST Luke Dormehl, “when Elvis
Presley was scandalizing audiences with his hip gyrations … and President
Dwight Eisenhower authorized ‘In God we trust’ as the US national motto
—AI’s first official conference took place.” That conference—the
Dartmouth Summer Research Project on Artificial Intelligence—is where
the term artificial intelligence, coined by computer scientist John McCarthy
(1927–2011), started to gain acceptance.
The workshop was formally proposed by McCarthy of Dartmouth
College, Marvin Minsky (1927–2016) of Harvard University, Nathaniel
Rochester (1919–2001) of IBM, and Claude Shannon (1916–2001) of Bell
Telephone Laboratories, as follows: “We propose that a 2-month, 10-man
study of artificial intelligence be carried out during the summer.… [We
conjecture] that every aspect of learning or any other feature of intelligence
can in principle be so precisely described that a machine can be made to
simulate it. An attempt will be made to find how to make machines use
language, form abstractions and concepts, solve kinds of problems now
reserved for humans, and improve themselves. We think that a significant
advance can be made … if a carefully selected group of scientists work on it
together for a summer.” The proposal also made specific mention of several
other key areas of consideration, including “neuron nets” and “randomness
and creativity.”
During the meeting, Carnegie Mellon’s Allen Newell (1927–1992) and
Herbert Simon (1916–2001) presented their Logic Theorist, a program for
proving theorems in symbolic logic. Author Pamela McCorduck writes
about the Dartmouth Workshop: “They had in common a belief … that what
we call thinking could indeed take place outside the human cranium, that it

could be understood in a formal and scientific way, and that the best
nonhuman instrument for doing it was the digital computer.”
Partly because of the complexity of AI technology, and because meeting
participants came and went on different dates, the expectations for the
conference were probably a bit too high. Nevertheless, the Dartmouth AI
workshop brought together a diverse group of researchers who influenced
the field for the next twenty years.

SEE ALSO Artificial Neural Networks (1943), Natural Language Processing (1954), Licklider’s
“Man-Computer Symbiosis” (1960)

OceanofPDF.com

The first version of the perceptron was implemented in software on an IBM 704 computer,
pictured here in a 1957 photo. The IBM 704 was among the first mass-produced computers
with floating-point arithmetic hardware.

PERCEPTRON

1957
“TODAY, ARTIFICIAL NEURAL NETWORKS (ANNS) are used in countless
applications, including pattern recognition (e.g., face recognition), timeseries prediction (e.g., predicting whether a stock price will rise), signal
processing (e.g., filtering out noise), and more. The basics of neural
networks are discussed on page 77, and one historically important step on
the ladder to fully functional ANNs were perceptrons, developed in 1957 by
psychologist Frank Rosenblatt (1928–1971). In 1958, based partly on
Rosenblatt’s enthusiasm, the New York Times proclaimed that the
perceptron was “the embryo of an electronic computer that [the Navy]
expects will be able to walk, talk, see, write, reproduce itself and be
conscious of its existence.”
The perceptron originally had three levels of connected “neurons” (i.e.,
simple computational units). The first level was a 20 × 20 array of
photocells corresponding to the retina of an eye. The second level contained
connector cells that received input from the photocells, the initial
connections of which were random. The third level consisted of output cells
that labeled the object placed in front of the machine (e.g., “triangle”). If the
perceptron guessed correctly (or incorrectly), researchers might strengthen
(or weaken) the electrical connections between the cells that led to the label.
The first version was implemented in software on an IBM 704 computer.
A second version, the Mark 1 perceptron, was implemented in special
hardware and was a trainable machine that could learn to classify certain
patterns by modifying the strength of connections between the neurons.
Mathematical weights were actually encoded in potentio-meters, and
changes in weights during the learning process were performed by electric
motors. It was hoped that the device could perform a wide range of patternrecognition tasks; but, alas, the hype and hope exceeded the limitations of

such a simple model. In fact, the 1969 book Perceptrons by MIT’s Marvin
Minsky (1927–2016) and Seymour Papert (1928–2016) explicitly
demonstrated the limitations of simple perceptrons and dampened interest
in this nascent field of machine learning. Later on, however, it became
much clearer that configurations of neurons with more layers could have
immeasurable value and applications.

SEE ALSO Artificial Neural Networks (1943), Machine Learning (1959), Deep Learning (1965)

OceanofPDF.com

American scientist and economist Yoshihiro Francis Fukuyama (b. 1952) has called
transhumanism—which usually involves the use of technology to enhance human, mental,
and physical capacities—the world’s most dangerous idea.

TRANSHUMANISM

1957
“THE COMING OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE will likely be the most significant
event in the history of the human species,” writes transhumanist
philosopher Zoltan Istvan. “The key, of course, is not to let artificial
intelligence run wild and out of sight, but to already be cyborgs and part
machines ourselves, so that we can plug right into it wherever it leads.”
In New Bottles for New Wine, published in 1957, biologist Julian Huxley
(1887–1975) coined the term transhumanism when he suggested that “the
human species can … transcend itself … by realizing new possibilities of
and for his human nature.… The human species will be on the threshold of
a new kind of existence, as different from ours as ours is from that of
Peking man. It will at last be consciously fulfilling its real destiny.”
The modern idea of transhumanism, espoused by philosopher-futurist
Max More (b. 1964) and many others, usually involves the use of
technology to enhance human mental and physical capacities. The idea is
that perhaps one day we will become “posthuman,” or even immortal
through genetic manipulation, robotics, nanotechnology, computers, or
mind uploading to virtual worlds—and because we will fully understand the
biological basis of aging. Already we are getting glimmers of how to use
brain-computer interfaces to link us to advanced artificial intelligences to
expand our cognitive abilities, and the closer we get to fully understanding
the biological basis of aging, the closer we may get to immortality.
If your body or mind could survive indefinitely, would “you” actually
persist? All of us are changed by our experiences—and these changes are
usually gradual, which means that you are nearly the same person you were
a year ago. However, if your normal or enhanced body survived
continuously for a thousand years, gradual mental changes would
accumulate, and perhaps an entirely different person would eventually

inhabit the body. The thousand-year-old person might be nothing like you.
“You” would no longer exist. There would be no moment of death at which
you had ceased to exist, but you would slowly fade away over the
millennia, like a sand castle being transformed by an ocean of time.

SEE ALSO The Consciousness Mill (1714), Searches for the Soul (1907), Licklider’s “ManComputer Symbiosis” (1960), Living in a Simulation (1967), Spielberg’s A.I. Artificial Intelligence
(2001)

OceanofPDF.com

In 2017, Stanford researchers developed a machine-learning algorithm that could outperform
radiologists at diagnosing pneumonia. Shown here is a chest X-ray indicating right pleural
effusion.

MACHINE LEARNING

1959
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE EXPERT ARTHUR Lee Samuel (1901–1990) is
credited as being among the first to use the term machine learning, which
gained prominence in his 1959 paper “Some Studies in Machine Learning
Using the Game of Checkers,” published in the IBM Journal of Research
and Development. In the paper, he explained that “programming computers
to learn from experience” may eventually eliminate much of the need for
explicit, task-specific programming and instructions.
Today, one of the major computing methods and enablers of artificial
intelligence is machine learning. It plays a role in computer vision, speech
understanding, autonomous robots, self-driving cars, face recognition, email
filtering, optical character recognition, providing product recommendations,
identifying likely cancers, detecting data breaches, and more. Many forms
of machine learning require large sets of input data for training, to help
make predictions and classifications.
With supervised machine learning, algorithms may be fed data samples
that are labeled with information, so that the system can later make
predictions when subsequent data is provided in an unlabeled fashion. For
example, consider a system that ingests a collection of 100,000 images of
lions and tigers that humans have correctly labeled as “lion” or “tiger.”
Subsequently, the supervised learning algorithm should be able to
distinguish lions from tigers it has not seen before. With unsupervised
machine learning, unlabeled data is employed, so that the system may
discover hidden patterns. For example, the system may determine that
thirty-year-old women who stop purchasing albacore canned tuna may be
pregnant and, thus, are targets for baby-product ads.
Note that machine-learning approaches can be fallible—for example, if
the input data is biased, incorrect, or even manipulated in a malicious way.

We should be careful not to overrely on certain automated approaches when
making decisions on who should qualify for loans, be offered jobs, or
receive parole. This principle applies in countless areas of machinemediated decision making.

SEE ALSO Artificial Neural Networks (1943), Reinforcement Learning (1951), Natural Language
Processing (1954), Knowledge Representation and Reasoning (1959), Deep Learning (1965), Genetic
Algorithms (1975), Swarm Intelligence (1986), Adversarial Patches (2018)

OceanofPDF.com

MYCIN was an expert system that used AI to identify bacteria causing severe infections,
such as meningitis, and to recommend treatments. MYCIN employed a simple inference
engine and a knowledge base of around 600 rules. Shown here are Streptococcus
pneumoniae bacteria that can cause meningitis.

KNOWLEDGE REPRESENTATION
AND REASONING

1959
“"FOR A SYSTEM TO BE INTELLIGENT,” WRITES computer scientist Nils Nilsson,
“it must have knowledge about its world and the means to draw conclusions
from, or at least act on, that knowledge. Humans and machines alike
therefore must have ways to represent this needed knowledge in internal
structures, whether encoded in protein or silicon.” Nowadays, much of the
attention on AI seems to be on machine learning and statistical algorithms
for applications such as image recognition. Nevertheless, logic-based
knowledge representation and reasoning (KR) still has a big role to play in
many areas.
KR is the field of AI concerned with representing information in such a
way that computer systems can efficiently use the information to make
medical diagnoses and legal recommendations, as well as to facilitate
intelligent dialog systems such as Siri on the iPhone or Alexa on the
Amazon Echo. As just one example, a semantic network is sometimes used
as a form of KR to represent semantic (i.e., meaning) relationships between
concepts. These semantic networks often take the form of graphs, with
vertices representing concepts and edges (i.e., connecting lines) indicating
the semantic relationships between them. KR also has application in
automatic reasoning, including the automated proving of mathematical
theorems.
Some of the early work in AI KR includes the General Problem Solver, a
computer program developed in 1959 by Allen Newell (1927–1992),
Herbert Simon (1916–2001), and colleagues to analyze goals and solve
simple general problems (e.g., the Tower of Hanoi). Later, the Cyc project
—started in 1984 by Douglas Lenat (1950–2023)—employed numerous

analysts documenting various areas of commonsense reasoning to help AI
systems perform human-like reasoning (e.g., the Cyc inference engine
employs logical deductions and inductive reasoning). Today, AI researchers
in the area of KR deal with many issues, including ensuring that the
knowledge base can be updated as needed to allow efficient development of
new inferences. The researchers are also concerned with how uncertainty
and vagueness can best be addressed in KR systems.

SEE ALSO Aristotle’s Organon (c. 350 BCE), Tower of Hanoi (1883), Perceptron (1957), Machine
Learning (1959), Expert Systems (1965), Fuzzy Logic (1965)

OceanofPDF.com

Joseph Licklider wrote: “The hope is that … human brains and computing machines will be
coupled together very tightly, and that the resulting partnership will think as no human brain
has ever thought.”

LICKLIDER’S “MAN-COMPUTER
SYMBIOSIS”

1960
IN 1960, PSYCHOLOGIST AND COMPUTER SCIENTIST Joseph Licklider (1915–
1990) published a seminal paper titled “Man-Computer Symbiosis.” He
begins his essay by explaining a symbiotic relationship of a fig tree, which
is pollinated by a Blastophaga wasp whose eggs and larvae derive
nourishment from the tree. In the same way, Licklider proposed, humans
and computers could form a symbiotic relationship. In the early years of
symbiosis, humans would set the goals and formulate the hypotheses as
computers prepared the way for insights. Some problems, he wrote, “simply
cannot be formulated without computing-machine aid.”
Rather than envisioning computer-based entities replacing humans,
Licklider was more aligned with Norbert Wiener (1894–1964), whose
theories of cybernetics tended to focus on close interactions between
humans and machines. In the paper, he explains: “The hope is that …
human brains and computing machines will be coupled together very
tightly, and that the resulting partnership will think as no human brain has
ever thought and process data in a way not approached by the informationhandling machines we know today.”
Licklider also discusses “thinking centers” that he believed would
incorporate the functions of traditional libraries, and he suggested the need
for natural-language processing for symbiosis.
In his essay, Licklider concedes that “electronic or chemical ‘machines’
will outdo the human brain in most of the functions we now consider
exclusively within its province,” and he provides examples of chess
playing, problem solving, pattern recognizing, and theorem proving. He
clarifies that “the computer will serve as a statistical-inference, decision-

theory, or game-theory machine to make elementary evaluations of
suggested courses of action.… Finally, it will do as much diagnosis, patternmatching, and relevance-recognizing as it profitably can.…”
Nearly sixty years later, Licklider’s paper still raises important questions
about the potential union of human intelligence and AI: When the day
comes that we have a coupling with machines even more than we have
today, will a symbiotic person still be considered a “human”? Will such a
person ever consider disengaging from the computer?

SEE ALSO “Darwin among the Machines” (1863), Natural Language Processing (1954),
Transhumanism (1957)

OceanofPDF.com

Portrait of Eliza Doolittle, a seller of flowers from George Bernard Shaw’s play Pygmalion,
by artist William Bruce Ellis Ranken (1881–1941). ELIZA was named after Miss Doolittle,
since Doolittle could convincingly simulate a sophisticated and educated person, partly by
having improved her language skills.

ELIZA PSYCHOTHERAPIST

1964
ELIZA IS A COMPUTER PROGRAM THAT responds to natural-language input
(e.g., typed text), simulating a conversation between the user and a
psychotherapist. Developed in 1964 by computer scientist Joseph
Weizenbaum (1923–2008), the program became famous as one of the first
and most convincing “chatterbots” (i.e., conversational simulators). In fact,
Weizenbaum was shocked and distressed at the degree to which some
people revealed deep emotions and personal information during their
dialogues with ELIZA, as if they considered ELIZA to be a real human
being with the capacity for empathy.
ELIZA was named after Eliza Doolittle from the Irish playwright George
Bernard Shaw’s 1912 comedy Pygmalion. In the play, Professor Henry
Higgins teaches Eliza, an uneducated woman, how to speak properly and,
thus, convincingly mimic an upper-class lady. Similarly, Weizenbaum’s
ELIZA was programmed to respond to certain keywords and phrases,
providing the illusion of real human empathy. Some researchers believed
that the program could actually help individuals suffering from certain
psychological conditions.
As Weizenbaum watched people interacting with ELIZA, he grew
alarmed at their growing dependence on computers and at how people could
be deceived. In his landmark 1966 technical paper on ELIZA, he wrote:
“[In] artificial intelligence … machines are made to behave in wondrous
ways, often sufficient to dazzle even the most experienced observer. But
once a particular program is unmasked, once its inner workings are
explained … its magic crumbles away; it stands revealed as a mere
collection of procedures.… The observer says to himself ‘I could have
written that.’ With that thought, he moves the program in question from the
shelf marked ‘intelligent,’ to that reserved for curios.… The object of this

paper is to cause just such a re-evaluation of the program about to be
‘explained.’ Few programs ever needed it more.”
Today, chatbots are often used in dialog systems for customer service
and for various forms of online virtual assistance and mental-health therapy.
They are also used in some toys, or to assist consumers shopping online, or
as advertising agents.

SEE ALSO Turing Test (1950), Natural Language Processing (1954), Paranoid PARRY (1972),
Ethics of AI (1976)

OceanofPDF.com

Figure from US patent 9,703,939 for a method of securely unlocking (accessing) a mobile
phone using the phone’s camera and face recognition.

FACE RECOGNITION

1964
FACE RECOGNITION SYSTEMS ATTEMPT TO IDENTIFY people from images or
video footage, often by comparing facial features (e.g., relative position of
the eyes and nose) with those in an image database. Some modern systems
use 3-D sensors to capture information and to increase accuracy when
confronted with variations in lighting and viewing angles, and certain
smartphones use infrared light to illuminate a user’s face during the
authentication process. Many challenges exist for accurate face recognition,
such as when people are wearing accessories like hats and sunglasses, or
even makeup, but today, in some circumstances, algorithms outperform
humans in recognizing faces. The origin of face recognition “technology”
could be traced to nineteenth-century England, where a regular system of
prison photography was introduced in 1852, as a more humane method than
branding, to keep track of prisoners and to share with other police
departments when they escaped. One of the pioneers of more advanced face
recognition was mathematician and computer scientist Woody Bledsoe
(1921–1995), who worked on earlier forms of face recognition in 1964. At
the time, he noted that the task was particularly difficult due to head
rotation and tilt, lighting, facial expression, age, etc. Bledsoe and other early
pioneers tended to rely on significant human collaboration with the
computer, as humans manually extracted image facial coordinates from
photos by hand using a graphics tablet (e.g., drawing pad).
Over the years, face recognition systems have employed a variety of
techniques, including eigenfaces, hidden Markov models, dynamic link
matching, and neural networks. As outlined by technologist Jesse Davis
West, face recognition has several important applications today: “Law
enforcement agencies are using face recognition to keep communities safer.
Retailers are preventing crime and violence. Airports are improving

travelers’ convenience and security. And mobile phone companies are using
face recognition to provide consumers with new layers of biometric
security.” Nevertheless, one may wonder if this could mark a worrisome
turning point in civilization, when people are no longer able to go out in
public and remain anonymous.

SEE ALSO Optical Character Recognition (OCR) (1913), Speech Recognition (1952), AIBO Robot
(1999)

OceanofPDF.com

In 1965, Irving J. Good expressed concerns regarding a potential superhuman “intelligence
explosion” in which AIs designed increasingly better versions of themselves.

INTELLIGENCE EXPLOSION

1965
IN 1965, BRITISH MATHEMATICIAN IRVING J. GOOD (1916–2009)—who
worked as a cryptologist with fellow computer scientist Alan Turing—
expressed concerns regarding a potential superhuman “intelligence
explosion” in a paper titled “Speculations Concerning the First
Ultraintelligent Machine.” In the paper, Good writes: “Let an
ultraintelligent machine be defined as a machine that can far surpass all the
intellectual activities of any man however clever. Since the design of
machines is one of these intellectual activities, an ultraintelligent machine
could design even better machines; there would then unquestionably be an
intelligence explosion, and the intelligence of man would be left far behind.
Thus, the first ultraintelligent machine is the last invention that man need
ever make, provided that the machine is docile enough to tell us how to
keep it under control.”
In other words, if humans built an AGI (i.e., artificial general intelligence
that is not limited to a restricted field of knowledge and capability), it might
be self-improving with engineering capabilities that allowed it to
recursively redesign its hardware and software. As just one example
configuration, perhaps such AGIs could use neural nets and evolutionary
algorithms to build hundreds of separate modules that intercommunicate
and collaborate with increasing sophistication, speed, and efficiency.
Attempts to confine or isolate the potentially dangerous AI from the rest of
the Internet might fail. Even if programmed with a beneficent goal and task,
such as manufacturing better light bulbs, what if it decided to convert the
entire North American continent into a lightbulb manufacturing facility?
Of course, there may be many reasons why such a superintelligence
would be unlikely, such as the need to rely on slow humans and hardware
networks. On the other hand, it is possible that an intelligence explosion

would also immensely benefit humanity in the race to cure diseases and
solve environmental problems. But what would be the sociological effects
of superintelligent weapons—or even artificial companions that exhibited
an intellect and (simulated) empathy that is greater than our human
spouses?

SEE ALSO “Darwin among the Machines” (1863), Lethal Military Robots (1942), The Human Use
of Human Beings (1950), Leakproof “AI Box” (1993), Paperclip Maximizer Catastrophe (2003),
“Call Them Artificial Aliens” (2015)

OceanofPDF.com

AI expert systems are often created by extracting the specialized knowledge of human
experts, artistically represented by glimmering light bulbs in this drawing. The expert
information is converted into a set of probabilistic rules.

EXPERT SYSTEMS

1965
“ACCORDING TO JOURNALIST LUKE Dormehl, AI “expert systems” are
“attempts to create clones of flesh-and-blood human experts … by
extracting their specialized knowledge and turning it into a set of
probabilistic rules.” In a best-case scenario, expert systems could, in
principle, be used to cram the know-how of an expert gastroenterologist,
financial adviser, or lawyer into a computerized device, and have the
resultant AI systems give useful advice to all.
Expert systems started to be explored in the 1960s and made use of a
knowledge base (containing representations of facts and rules) and
inference engines (to apply the rules and perform evaluations). Rules might
be of an “if-then” form, such as “If a patient with a particular demographic
exhibits a particular symptom, then there is a certain probability that he or
she has a particular condition.”
Applications of expert systems may broadly include diagnosis,
prediction, planning, classifying, and related areas involving specialized
domains of expertise, in areas ranging from medicine to evaluating
insurance risks or potential locations for mineral exploration. Useful expert
systems also often have inference engines that can provide explanations, so
that users can understand the chain of reasoning. An example of a famous
early expert system is Dendral (short for Dendritic Algorithm), a Stanford
University project started in 1965 to help chemists identify unknown
organic molecules based on information from mass spectra. Another famous
early example is MYCIN, a Stanford University AI system developed in the
1970s to help diagnose bacterial infections and recommend antibiotics and
dosages. Early expert systems were often coded in LISP or Prolog.
One of the challenges of expert systems often involves acquiring and
codifying knowledge from busy experts in particular fields, or from books

and papers. It can also be challenging to organize knowledge into a
collection of facts and rules that experts agree on, along with various
numerical weights applied (to signify likelihood or importance). Today,
many people use “recommender systems,” a somewhat related area of AI
that is more focused on predicting user preferences in areas ranging from
movies and books to financial services and potential marriage partners.

SEE ALSO The Human Use of Human Beings (1950), Knowledge Representation and Reasoning
(1959), Deep Learning (1965)

OceanofPDF.com

Diagram from US patent 5,579,439 that provides a fuzzy logic design for an intelligent
controller in a plant-control system. The design includes an artificial neural network for
generating fuzzy logic rules and membership functions data. “The fuzzification layer of the
learning mechanism neural network can be constructed of four layers A, B, C, D of
neurons.”

FUZZY LOGIC

1965
“FUZZY SET THEORY HAS BEEN USED IN commercial applications of expert
systems and control devices for trains and elevators,” writes scientist
Jacoby Carter. “It has also been combined with neural nets to control the
manufacture of semiconductors. By incorporating fuzzy logic and fuzzy sets
in production systems, significant improvements have been gained in many
AI systems. This approach has been particularly successful with ambiguous
data sets or when the rules are imperfectly known.”
Classical two-valued logic is concerned with conditions that are either
true or false. Fuzzy set theory, which focuses on members of a set that have
degrees of membership, was introduced by mathematician and computer
scientist Lotfi Zadeh (1921–2017) in 1965, and in 1973 he provided the
details of fuzzy logic (FL), which is derived from fuzzy set theory and
allows a continuous range of truth values.
FL has a wide range of practical applications. As an example, consider a
temperature-monitoring system for a device. A membership function may
exist for the concepts cold, warm, and hot, but a single measurement may
consist of three values such as “not cold,” “slightly warm,” and “slightly
hot.” Zadeh believed that if feedback controllers could be programmed to
make use of imprecise, noisy input, they could be more effective and easier
to implement.
One milestone in the history of fuzzy logic occurred in 1974, when
Ebrahim Mamdani (1942–2010) of the University of London used it to
control a steam engine. In 1980, FL was used to control a cement kiln.
Various Japanese companies have used FL to control water-purification
processes and train systems. FL has also since been used to control steel
mills, self-focusing cameras, washing machines, fermentation processes,
automobile-engine controls, anti-lock braking systems, color-film

developing systems, glass processing, computer programs used in financial
trading, and systems used for recognizing subtle differences in written and
spoken languages.

SEE ALSO Aristotle’s Organon (c. 350 BCE), Boolean Algebra (1854), Expert Systems (1965)

OceanofPDF.com

Deep neural nets (DNNs) contain multiple intermediate layers of artificial neuron units (e.g.,
ranging from just a few layers to dozens of layers), which increase the ability of DNNs to
learn. DNNs comprise the “architecture” upon which deep learning takes place.

DEEP LEARNING

1965
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE INVOLVES approaches that enable machines to
mimic human intelligence. Machine learning (see page 99) is a form of AI
that enables machines to improve at some task through practice and
experience. Deep learning is a form of machine learning that allows
systems to train themselves to perform tasks, like playing a game or
recognizing a cat in a photo, using deep neural nets (DNNs), which have
multiple intermediate layers of artificial neuron units, in contrast to shallow
nets, which employ just a few layers. Although the phrase deep learning
was not introduced until 1986, Soviet mathematician Alexey Ivakhnenko
(1913–2007) conducted early work, in the form of supervised deep
multilayer perceptrons, in 1965.
Generally speaking, the multiple layers of neurons can perform feature
extraction on the data at different levels of a hierarchy (e.g., responding to
simple edges at one level and to facial features at another). Deep learning
may involve backpropagation, a process in which the system can pass
information in a reverse direction, from output to input, in order to teach the
system when it has made errors so as to improve the results.
Deep learning has been successfully applied to speech recognition,
computer vision, natural language processing, social networking, human
language translations, drug design, identifying specific style periods for
paintings, making product recommendations, estimating the value of
different marketing actions, performing image restoration and cleaning,
playing games, identifying people in photos, and more.
As technologist Jeremy Fain writes: “Ultimately, deep learning has
pushed machine learning across a threshold. Whereas machine learning had
some success in automating repetitive tasks or data analytics, it is now

bringing the future to life in the form of computers that can see, hear and
play all types of games.”

SEE ALSO Artificial Neural Networks (1943), Reinforcement Learning (1951), Perceptron (1957),
Machine Learning (1959), Computer Art and DeepDream (2015), Adversarial Patches (2018)

OceanofPDF.com

Shakey was notable for setting serious milestones in the fields of pattern recognition and
computer vision, problem solving, natural-language processing, and information
representation. Shakey contained a TV camera, distance range finders, collision sensors,
and motors for steering.

SHAKEY THE ROBOT

1966
“IN 1970, LIFE MAGAZINE REFERRED TO SHAKEY as the world’s “first
electronic person” who could soon “travel about the Moon for months at a
time without a single beep of direction from Earth.” Although the report of
this fascinating robot was quite an exaggeration, Shakey was notable for
setting serious milestones in the fields of pattern recognition and computer
vision, problem solving, natural-language processing, and information
representation.
Developed between 1966 and 1972 at the Stanford Research Institute,
Shakey was among the earliest serious attempts to design a generalpurpose, autonomous robot that could move around, perceive its
surroundings, monitor the execution of its plans, and reason about its
actions. The project was funded by the US Defense Advanced Research
Projects Agency (DARPA) and was primarily programmed using LISP. In
order for the robot to perform well, its world was limited to several rooms,
connected by corridors, with doors, light switches, and objects that Shakey
could push around. An operator typed in commands like “Push the block off
the platform,” and Shakey attempted to explore and identify the platform,
push a ramp to the platform, drive up the platform, and push the block off.
Shakey relied on various levels of programs. For example, one level used
routines for route planning, motor control, and the capturing of sensory
information, while a middle level was concerned with actually moving to a
designated position and processing the images from Shakey’s TV camera.
High-level programming involved task planning and performing sequences
of actions to achieve goals.
Not surprisingly, Shakey the robot got its name from its jerky motion as
it drove about. Carrying around an antenna for a radio and video link to a
DEC PDP computer, Shakey also contained a TV camera, distance range

finders, collision sensors, and motors for steering. The development of
Shakey led to important research in AI, including the development of search
algorithms for pathfinding, and feature extraction methods in computer
vision.

SEE ALSO Natural Language Processing (1954), SHRDLU (1971), AIBO Robot (1999), ASIMO
and Friends (2000), AI on Mars (2015)

OceanofPDF.com

As computers become more powerful, perhaps someday we will be able to simulate entire
worlds—fanciful and realistic—and reality itself. It is possible that more advanced beings are
already doing this somewhere in the universe.

LIVING IN A SIMULATION

1967
“OUR UNIVERSE SEEMS REAL, BUT IS IT really?” writes author Jason Koebler.
“As humans get better at simulating artificial intelligence, it seems at least
plausible that we could create life that is [conscious]. And if we can create
conscious life, who’s to say that the universe, as we know it, wasn’t created
by superintelligent artificial intelligence …?”
Could we be living in a computer simulation and be artificial
intelligences ourselves? The hypothesis that the universe is a digital
computer was pioneered by German engineer Konrad Zuse (1910–1995) in
1967. Other researchers, including Ed Fredkin (1934–2023), Stephen
Wolfram (b. 1959), and Max Tegmark (b. 1967), have suggested that the
physical universe may be running on a cellular automaton or discrete
computing machinery—or be a purely mathematical construct.
In our own small pocket of the universe, we have already developed
computers with the ability to simulate lifelike behaviors using software and
mathematical rules. One day we may create thinking beings that live in
simulated spaces as complex and vibrant as a rain forest. Perhaps we’ll be
able to simulate reality itself, and it is possible that more advanced beings
are already doing this elsewhere in the universe.
What if the number of these simulations is larger than the number of
universes? Astrophysicist Martin Rees (b. 1942) suggests that if this were
the case, “… as they would if one universe contained many computers
making many simulations,” then it is likely that we are artificial life. Rees
continues, “Once you accept the idea of the multiverse …, in some of those
universes there will be the potential to simulate parts of themselves, … and
we don’t know what our place is in this grand ensemble of universes and
simulated universes.”

Physicist Paul Davies (b. 1946) expanded on the notion of a multiverse
with multiple simulated realities in a 2003 New York Times article:
“Eventually, entire virtual worlds will be created inside computers, their
conscious inhabitants unaware that they are the simulated products of
somebody else’s technology. For every original world, there will be a
stupendous number of available virtual worlds—some of which would even
include machines simulating virtual worlds of their own.…”

SEE ALSO The Consciousness Mill (1714), Searches for the Soul (1907), Artificial Life (1986),
“Call Them Artificial Aliens” (2015)

OceanofPDF.com

Cybernetic Serendipity was notable for demonstrating numerous aspects of computer-aided
creativity. The book also featured computer designs made on mechanical computer plotters.

CYBERNETIC SERENDIPITY

1968
“CYBERNETIC SERENDIPITY: THE COMPUTER and the Arts (1968) WAS A
GROUNDBREAKING ILLUSTRATED book and catalogue for the well-attended
exhibition at the Institute of Contemporary Arts in London (and later in
Washington, DC, and San Francisco). Edited and curated by British art
critic Jasia Reichardt (b. 1933), the book and simultaneous exhibit were
notable for demonstrating numerous aspects of computer-aided creativity,
from visual art to music, poetry, storytelling, dance, animation, and
sculpture, inspiring a generation of experimental collaborations involving
artists, scientists, and engineers.
In 1948, American mathematician and philosopher Norbert Wiener
(1894–1964) defined cybernetics as “the scientific study of control and
communication in the animal and the machine”; today the term has taken on
a broader meaning involving the control of numerous kinds of systems
using technology such as electronic devices. Serendipity usually refers to
unexpected, delightful, and useful outcomes made by accident and chance.
With contributors that included artists, composers, poets, and computer
programmers, Cybernetic Serendipity raised questions about the nature of
art and chance. Some of the most stimulating parts of the book are beautiful
computerized Japanese haiku poems, accompanied by algorithmic recipes
to generate the poems. For example, one haunting poem begins: “Eons deep
in the ice, I paint all time in a whorl.…” Another section concerns the
generation of “Little Grey Rabbit–type stories” that are constructed by a
computer using simple rules. A typical story might begin like this: “The sun
shone over the woods. Across the fields softly drifted the breeze while then
the clouds, which calmly floated all afternoon, moved across the fields … ”
In addition to poetry and stories, Cybernetic Serendipity featured
painting machines and a range of computer art made on mechanical

computer plotters or CRT displays, inspiring people interested in the
nascent field of algorithmic and/or generative art. The book also included
musical scores generated from traces of the New York City skyline or
splatters of ink, various forms of electronic music machines, computerprogrammed choreography, sound-activated mobiles, pendulum drawing
machines and harmonographs, architectural works, pseudo-Mondrian
paintings, and more.

SEE ALSO Ramon Llull’s Ars Magna (c. 1305), Lagado Book-Writing Engine (1726),
Computational Creativity (1821), Computer Art and DeepDream (2015)

OceanofPDF.com

Artist’s rendering of HAL 9000’s famous red all-seeing camera eye from 2001: A Space
Odyssey.

HAL 9000

1968
“MY MISSION RESPONSIBILITIES RANGE over the entire operation of the ship,
so I am constantly occupied,” explains HAL 9000, the fictional AI in the
famous 1968 movie 2001: A Space Odyssey. “I am putting myself to the
fullest possible use, which is all I think that any conscious entity can ever
hope to do.” Unfortunately for the crew, HAL later becomes a killer that
must be terminated.
HAL is important partly because a number of prominent AI researchers
say they were inspired to explore the field of AI after watching the movie,
the screenplay of which was written by Stanley Kubrick (1928–1999) and
Arthur C. Clarke (1917–2008). Interestingly, HAL embodies many of the
capabilities we expect today of future artificial general intelligences (AGIs)
that can behave intelligently across a wide range of goals and environments.
This sentient machine is capable of computer vision, speech recognition,
face recognition, speech output, natural-language processing, chess playing,
and various forms of advanced reasoning, planning, and problem solving.
HAL can even read lips, appreciate art, exhibit emotions, strive for selfpreservation, and interpret the emotions of humans.
In the 1960s, when the film was being made, experts had predicted that
by 2001 AIs like HAL would be possible. Even though AI researcher
Marvin Minsky (1927–2016) was an adviser on the film set, it is apparent
today that many more years are needed to create a HAL-like entity, with his
full range of capabilities.
In a haunting scene from the movie, after HAL becomes dangerous and
must be disabled, we see an astronaut slowly removing computer modules
as HAL continually degrades and slowly sings. Perhaps one lesson of HAL
today is that we may not be fully aware of the effects of pervasive AI use
from childhood to death. We would be eminently wise to consider both the

pros and cons of pervasive AI in the future, as these entities become more
powerful and we rely on them for countless forms of decision making.

SEE ALSO Natural Language Processing (1954), Colossus: The Forbin Project (1970), The
Terminator (1984)

OceanofPDF.com

Mastermind playing board. The “decoding” region of the board is where colored pegs are
placed. The initial secret sequence of colored pegs would be placed at left, covered by a
shield. The smaller pegs at bottom track the correctness of guesses.

MASTERMIND

1970
MASTERMIND®, A COLORFUL CODE-BREAKING board game, has been the
subject of passionate AI research for decades. Invented in 1970 by
Mordecai Meirowitz (b. 1930), an Israeli postmaster and
telecommunications expert, the game was initially rejected by all
mainstream game companies. Nevertheless, the game went on to sell over
50 million copies, making it the most successful new game of the 1970s.
To play the game, a code-maker selects a sequence of four colors,
represented by colored pegs that come in six different colors. The opponent
must guess the code-maker’s secret sequence—with as few guesses as
possible. Each guess is presented in the form of a sequence of four colored
pegs. The code-maker reveals how many of those pegs are both the correct
color and in the correct position and how many more are the correct color
but in the wrong position. For example, the secret code may be green-whiteblue-red. The guess may be orange-yellow-blue-white. In this situation, the
code-maker indicates that the player has one peg of the correct color in the
correct position and one peg of the correct color in the wrong position, but
he doesn’t mention the specific color names. The game continues with more
guesses. A code-maker selects from a possible 64 (or 1,296) possible
combinations, assuming there are six colors and four positions.
In 1977, American computer scientist Donald Knuth (b. 1938) published
a strategy that enables a player to always guess the correct code within five
guesses. This was the first known algorithm to solve Mastermind, and
numerous papers followed. In 1993, Kenji Koyama and Tony W. Lai
published a strategy with a maximum of six guesses required in the worst
case, but with an average number of guesses of only 4.340. In 1996,
Zhixiang Chen and colleagues generalized previous results to the case of n
colors and m positions.

Mastermind has also been studied several times using genetic
algorithms inspired by evolutionary biology. In 2017, researchers from
Asia University in Taiwan employed AI strategies of reinforcement learning
and obtained an average number of guesses of 4.294.

SEE ALSO Tic-Tac-Toe (c. 1300 BCE), Reinforcement Learning (1951), Genetic Algorithms (1975),
Connect Four (1988), AlphaGo Go Champion (2016)

OceanofPDF.com

Colossus, from the 1970 movie Colossus: The Forbin Project, is an advanced weapons
defense system that becomes sentient. The AI system tells its creator “in time you will come
to regard me not only with respect and awe, but with love.”

COLOSSUS: THE FORBIN PROJECT

1970
IMAGINE WAKING UP ONE MORNING AND HEARING the synthesized, robotic
voice of Colossus, the AI system from the 1970 movie Colossus: The
Forbin Project, an advanced weapons defense system that has become
sentient. In the movie, Colossus participates in a worldwide broadcast,
starting its speech with an ominous line: “This is the voice of world
control.” Colossus then explains that if humanity agrees to its absolute
authority without resisting, Colossus will bring a kind of peace and
prosperity, solving problems of famine, overpopulation, war, and disease. If
humans choose to fight Colossus, they will be destroyed. Colossus further
explains that it will extend itself “into more machines devoted to the wider
fields of truth and knowledge.” Finally, Colossus realizes that humans will
complain that they have lost their freedom, but notes that being dominated
by Colossus is better than being “dominated by others of your species.”
Located deep within a mountain, Colossus cannot be tampered with and
is designed to control the nuclear weapons of the United States and allies. It
demonstrates that any attempt to disable it will result in nuclear retaliation
against humans.
The movie, directed by Joseph Sargent (1925–2014), is based on the
science fiction novel by British author and WWII naval commander Dennis
F. Jones (1917–1981). Sargent’s technical advisors were inspired, in part, by
the North American Aerospace Defense Command (NORAD), which
provides aerospace warning and protection for the United States and
Canada. During the making of the film, the Control Data Corporation
actually loaned various impressive-looking computer equipment, which
provided additional realism.
Was Colossus actually bad for humanity? Might you give up more
control to a computer system if it truly helped solve the problems of

humankind? Would you if it made the world safer than the current approach
of delegating nuclear annihilation to the judgment of a tiny number of
individuals, who could conceivably be impaired by emotion, preAlzheimer’s, or other unproductive thinking? The question still looms.

SEE ALSO Lethal Military Robots (1942), Intelligence Explosion (1965), HAL 9000 (1968),
Leakproof “AI Box” (1993)

OceanofPDF.com

SHRDLU was a computer program that responded to natural-language commands to move
virtual objects, such as blocks, in a virtual world. Today, robotic arms (in the real world) are
often programmable and used in assembly lines and bomb disarmament.

SHRDLU

1971
“IMAGINE SPENDING YOUR LIFE IN A SIMPLE universe consisting of colored
objects, like pyramids and cubes, that can be moved around at your will.
This is the world of SHRDLU, developed in 1971 by computer scientist
Terry Winograd (b. 1946). The SHRDLU program translated naturallanguage commands such as “Will you please stack up both of the red
blocks and either a green cube or a pyramid” or “Find a pyramid that is
taller than the one you are holding and put it into the box” into physical
actions. One could also ask questions about the history of this universe
(e.g., “Did you pick up anything before the cube?”). Internally, it used the
LISP programming language and employed simple graphics output to show
a simulation of the world that could be manipulated by a virtual robot arm.
In the preface of his 1971 PhD thesis on SHRDLU, Winograd wrote:
“Computers are being used today to take over many of our jobs … and
perform routine office work.… But when it comes to telling computers
what to do, they are tyrants … and act as though they can’t even understand
a simple English sentence.” The name SHRDLU comes from “etaoin
shrdlu,” the approximate order of frequency of the twelve most commonly
used letters in English. To carry out commands, the program had
subsystems that parsed language and semantic processing systems that
made logical deductions. It had a procedural problem solver that could
determine how to carry out the commands, and it kept track of the world,
knowing the relative positions of objects.
For its time, SHRDLU was considered a big achievement in naturallanguage processing. It even had a simple memory: If you told it to move
the red ball, and later referred to the ball, it could assume you meant the red
one. It also knew what would actually be feasible. For example, it
“understood” that the tops of objects must be cleared before new objects

could be stacked on top. However, despite its remarkably natural operation,
SHRDLU was limited in that it could not learn from errors.

SEE ALSO Natural Language Processing (1954), Expert Systems (1965), Shakey the Robot (1966)

OceanofPDF.com

PARRY was paranoid about the Mafia, dishonest bookies, horse racing and gambling,
punishment for debts, and police collusion with the Mafia.

PARANOID PARRY

1972
“THE BEST PERFORMANCE OVERALL IN HMC (human-machine conversation)
has almost certainly been Colby’s PARRY program, since its release on the
[Arpanet] around 1973,” wrote AI scientists Yorick Wilks and Roberta
Catizone in 1999. “It was robust, never broke down, always had something
to say and, because it was intended to model paranoid behavior, its zanier
misunderstandings could always be taken as further evidence of mental
disturbance.…”
In 1972, psychiatrist Kenneth Colby (1920–2001) developed PARRY, a
computer program intended to emulate a person with paranoid
schizophrenia. Specifically, PARRY was developed to test theories of
paranoid thinking, and the AI, which appeared to have delusions about the
Mafia, had a knowledge representation involving feelings of selfinadequacy and protection against certain interview questions (people with
paranoid schizophrenia are highly suspicious of others’ motivations). Colby
hoped that PARRY could be used to teach students, and he also believed
that paranoid patients’ sentences were produced by an underlying organized
structure of rules that could be taught to computers, studied, and used to
treat patients.
PARRY handled conversations by assigning weights to various dialogue
inputs. Interestingly, psychiatrists who interacted via text with PARRY
failed to perceive that they were interviewing a computer program, and they
also could not identify which “patients” were human and which were
computer programs. Perhaps PARRY had come close to passing the Turing
test, at least in a special setting (i.e., interacting with a simulated person
who is not sane). PARRY was also available on the Arpanet (a predecessor
of the Internet), where it engaged in more than 100,000 sessions, including
sessions with the ELIZA psychotherapist.

In 1989, Colby started a company, Malibu Artificial Intelligence Works,
that marketed a therapy program for depression. This program would be
used by the US Navy and Department of Veterans Affairs and was
distributed to people who (controversially) used it without consulting a
trained psychiatrist. Colby told one skeptical journalist that his depression
program could be better than human therapists because “after all, the
computer doesn’t burn out, look down on you, or try to have sex with you.”

SEE ALSO Turing Test (1950), ELIZA Psychotherapist (1964), Ethics of AI (1976)

OceanofPDF.com

NASA spacecraft antenna, discovered by an evolutionary computer design program to create
superior radiation patterns. The software begins with random antenna designs and refines
them through an evolutionary process.

GENETIC ALGORITHMS

1975
“AN IMPORTANT CONCEPT BOTH IN ARTI-FICIAL Life and in Artificial
Intelligence is that of a genetic algorithm (GA),” writes philosopher Jack
Copeland. “GAs employ methods analogous to the processes of natural
evolution in order to produce successive generations of software entities
that are increasingly fit for their intended purpose.”
The famous 1975 book Adaptation in Natural and Artificial Systems by
scientist John Holland (1929–2015) developed and popularized GAs, which
can solve real-world problems by using biologically inspired methods such
as selection, mutation, and crossover (recombination). With GAs, humans
don’t directly program a solution; rather, a solution emerges through
simulated competition, improvement, and evolution.
These algorithms usually start with an initial set, or population, of
random solutions or candidate programs. A fitness function assigns a fitness
value to each program to indicate how well the program performed a
desired task or reached an outcome. During generations of evolution, each
candidate being evaluated has a set of properties that can be mutated
(changed) through time.
Scientists can find it difficult to understand the amazingly useful output
of GAs. According to former NASA engineer Jason Lohn, the algorithms’
effectiveness makes up for their unintelligibility: “If I optimize an antenna
using evolutionary algorithms, there’s only a 50 percent chance I’ll be able
to explain exactly why it has made the choices it has made. The rest of the
time the design is simply not intelligible to us. It works—and as engineers,
what we ultimately care about is getting things to work.”
Unfortunately, GAs may become “trapped” in a region of reasonably
good solutions (called a local optimum) rather than finding the best solution
(a global optimum). Nevertheless, they have had remarkable success when

applied to antenna design, protein engineering, vehicle routings and
scheduling, circuit design, assembly-line scheduling, pharmacology, art, and
other fields that benefit from searching through a large number of
possibilities for solutions. GAs were even used for generating realistic
computer-animated horses in the movie The Lord of the Rings: The Return
of the King.

SEE ALSO Computational Creativity (1821), Machine Learning (1959), Mastermind (1970),
Artificial Life (1986), Swarm Intelligence (1986)

OceanofPDF.com

Consider an AI control unit dealing with a runaway train barreling down the railway tracks.
Ahead, there are five elderly people on the track who will be killed. If the AI switches the
train to another track, it will kill only one young person. What ethical choice should the AI
make?

ETHICS OF AI

1976
“OVER SEVERAL DECADES, BOTH LAY-PEOPLE and experts have expressed
concerns regarding possible threats of AI to human dignity, safety, privacy,
jobs, and more. For example, computer scientist Joseph Weizenbaum
(1923–2008) suggested in his influential 1976 book Computer Power and
Human Reason that AIs should not be used as substitutes for humans in jobs
—such as therapist or judge—that emphasize interpersonal respect, love,
empathy, and care. Weizenbaum suggested that, even though AI entities
might be fairer and more effective than humans, who often have biases and
become tired at their jobs, excessive reliance on AI could degrade human
values and the human spirit as we increasingly think of ourselves as
emotionless computerized drones.
Already, scientists have raised privacy concerns after testing AI entities
that can detect, with increasing levels of accuracy, the nationality, ethnicity,
or sexual orientation of people based on names or photographs from dating
sites. Concerns have also been raised about AI entities that recommend who
receives bail or parole, based on the available input data, in the criminal
justice system. In the arena of self-driving vehicles, ethical considerations
will need to be programmed into vehicle logic that would control car
decisions such as whether to save the vehicle occupant or a pedestrian, if a
crash is imminent and only one can likely be saved. Of course, job
displacement is also a major concern for truck drivers and other workers in
a range of professions.
In the future, AI entities will need to be monitored for various kinds of
illegal or immoral actions that humans already take, including
cyberbullying, impersonating people we love or trust, stock manipulation,
and inappropriate killing (e.g., by autonomous weapons). When should AI
entities be required to disclose to real humans that they are not human? If

robots, when pretending to be humans, can be better caregivers and
companions, need they disclose their nonhumanity?

SEE ALSO Metropolis (1927), Asimov’s Three Laws of Robotics (1942), Lethal Military Robots
(1942), ELIZA Psychotherapist (1964), Paranoid PARRY (1972), Autonomous Vehicles (1984),
Slowing the AI Race? (2023)

OceanofPDF.com

The Scientific American cover story in June 1980 revolved around the backgammon program
BKG 9.8, which competed against the reigning world champion, Luigi Villa, possibly making
him the first world champion at any board game to be defeated by a computer program.

BACKGAMMON CHAMPION
DEFEATED

1979
“LIKE MOST BOARD GAMES, BACKGAMMON IS a sublimated version of human
warfare,” writes AI expert Daniel Crevier, “its name deriving from the
Welsh bac and gamen, ‘little’ and ‘war.’”
Despite the name, no one is certain where the ancient board game of
backgammon originated, but it has been around for almost 5,000 years. In
the game, two players command little “soldiers,” represented as a set of
fifteen pieces that move between twenty-four triangles. The roll of two dice
controls the choices of possible moves of the players, who take turns and
whose goal is to move all their pieces off the board.
In 1979, the backgammon program BKG 9.8 competed against the
reigning world champion, Luigi Villa, defeating Villa and making him
possibly the first world champion at any board game to be defeated by a
computer program. Admittedly, BKG 9.8 benefited from some favorable
dice rolls, but skill is needed in selecting the best move for the actual rolls.
BKG 9.8 used fuzzy logic, among other useful mathematical techniques.
TD-Gammon, developed in 1992 by IBM researcher Gerald Tesauro,
employed an artificial neural network and learned expert-level
backgammon by playing games against itself. The program examined legal
moves on each turn and updated the weights within the neural nets. Because
it required no human training, TD-Gammon explored interesting strategies
that humans had not considered, which, in turn, taught humans how to play
better. Today, several backgammon programs exist that use neural networks
and offer analyses to humans.
Because backgammon has a random dice-influenced process, the “game
tree” search space is extremely large, and this stymied early attempts to

create expert software players. When neural nets are used, the initial
weights within the net are random and the net is trained through
reinforcement learning. To achieve competence, the initial TD-Gammon
made use of forty hidden network nodes within the neural network, as well
as 300,000 training games. Later versions increased the hidden nodes to 160
and the number of training games to over a million, so as to play at the
same level as the best humans.

SEE ALSO Artificial Neural Networks (1943), Reinforcement Learning (1951), Fuzzy Logic (1965),
Checkers and AI (1994), Deep Blue Defeats Chess Champion (1997)

OceanofPDF.com

Imagine sitting in a closed room. You receive a piece of paper with Chinese symbols through
a slot in the wall. You don’t know Chinese, but you can consult a set of instructions that
shows you how to compose appropriate responses. Thus begins an interesting question in
the philosophy of AI.

CHINESE ROOM

1980
CAN A COMPUTER BE CONSCIOUS? THE term strong AI refers to the idea that
properly configured AI computer systems might actually think and have
conscious minds, whereas weak AI refers to systems that can only act as if
they think like humans and have minds. One attack against the idea of
strong AI in computers comes from the philosopher John Searle (b. 1932),
who presented his famous Chinese Room experiment in 1980.
Imagine sitting in a closed room. You receive a piece of paper with
Chinese characters through a slot in the wall. Although you do not know
Chinese, you can consult a set of instructions that tell you how to compose
appropriate responses using Chinese characters. Based on this instruction
guide, you write down some characters on a piece of paper and send an
appropriate response through the slot to the outside world. To a person
outside the room, it would appear that you have a perfect understanding of
Chinese; but, of course, you are only following rules, and the Chinese on
both papers is total gibberish to you.
This thought experiment may suggest that a computer program cannot
give a computer a mind, consciousness, or understanding, even if the
computer and its program seem to be quite intelligent. However, some
philosophers have countered that even if you do not understand Chinese, the
system consisting of you, the closed room, the set of instructions, and your
processing of the instructions does understand—and is a kind of
consciousness that is external to you and of which you are unaware.
Others have considered thought experiments in which each of your brain
cells might, one by one, be slowly replaced by electronic components with
the same input/output functions. Surely, with just a few of your cells
replaced, you are still “you.” Perhaps a year later, however, all your cells

would have been replaced, and at no point would you suddenly lose your
ability to be conscious and self-aware. Are you still “you”?
Of course, for most useful AI tasks, it is sufficient for an AI to simply act
intelligently. Still, debates continue to rage about the Chinese room and its
implications.

SEE ALSO Turing Test (1950), Natural Language Processing (1954), ELIZA Psychotherapist
(1964), Paranoid PARRY (1972)

OceanofPDF.com

In Blade Runner, the human-like AI replicants can be differentiated from humans by
administering the Voigt-Kampff test, which involves studying subtle emotional responses
and eye movements.

BLADE RUNNER

1982
“IN THE FUTURE, INTELLIGENT ROBOTS WILL likely be difficult to distinguish
from human beings, at least through a superficial inspection. When that day
arrives, what effect will this have on humanity and human relations? This
theme has been explored in several famous movies, and one particularly
influential film on the subject is the 1982 cult movie Blade Runner, directed
by Ridley Scott (b. 1937) and based on the 1968 novel Do Androids Dream
of Electric Sheep? by Philip K. Dick (1928–1982). Set in a futuristic Los
Angeles in the year 2019, the film depicts replicants, which are synthetic
humans that must be “retired” (killed) by the movie’s protagonist. These
replicants are so similar to humans that the way to distinguish them from
humans is by administering the Voigt-Kampff test, which involves studying
subtle emotional responses and eye movements of the replicants when
asked a set of questions. One of the replicants, Rachael, believes she is
human and has had memories implanted to give her a fuller personal history
and the illusion of a human experience.
Reflecting on the character of Rachael in Blade Runner, author and
researcher Jelena Guga writes: “Humans aspire to creating AI, but the kind
of AI that they can be in control of. Thus, in the film, the solution to [the]
autonomous, independent AI problem is solved by implanted memories that
can be controlled.… Ethics, free will, dreams, memories, and all those
values attributed exclusively to humans, are ‘brought into question’ and
radically redefined through popular representations of humanoid robots …
developed in such a way [as] to be able to express perhaps even more
humanness than humans.”
“How we ought to treat artificial forms of life becomes an increasingly
important issue,” writes philosopher Greg Littmann, “as humans continue to
develop sophisticated computer systems and perform wonders with genetic

engineering. Philosophically challenging films like the grim science fiction
nightmares of Scott are useful when we ask ourselves about our real-world
obligations, since these allow us to test our preconceptions against
hypothetical situations to see whether our theories are consistent.”

SEE ALSO Metropolis (1927), Asimov’s Three Laws of Robotics (1942), Ethics of AI (1976), The
Terminator (1984), Spielberg’s A.I. Artificial Intelligence (2001)

OceanofPDF.com

Self-driving vehicles sense their surroundings using various technologies. Possible levels of
autonomy range from low levels that exist today in many cars (e.g., lane-keeping assistance
and automatic emergency braking) to complete autonomy, where no driver attention is ever
required.

AUTONOMOUS VEHICLES

1984
“THE MUNDANE AUTOMOBILE IS ABOUT TO disrupt your life,” write engineers
and authors Hod Lipson and Melba Kurman. “Thanks to rapid advances in
mobile robotics, cars are poised to morph into the first mainstream
autonomous robots that we will entrust with our lives. After almost a
century of failed attempts to automate driving, modern hardware
technology, and a new generation of artificial-intelligence software called
deep learning, are giving cars human-level ability to safely guide
themselves through unpredictable environments. ”
Self-driving cars, also known as autonomous cars, are capable of driving
and sensing their surroundings without human input. The cars employ
various technologies such as laser-based LIDAR (for “light detection and
ranging”), radar, the Global Positioning System (GPS), and computer
vision. Many potential benefits exist, including enhanced mobility for the
elderly and the impaired, and a reduction in traffic accidents, especially
when drivers or passengers are performing other activities in the vehicle.
Major work began in this field in the 1980s. For example, the DARPAfunded Autonomous Land Vehicle (ALV) project in the United States,
begun in 1984, demonstrated an eight-wheeled road-following vehicle with
three diesel engines propelling it at 3 mph. Sensors included a color video
camera and a laser scanner, with reasoning performed by goal-seeking and
navigator computing modules. In the twenty-first century, possible levels of
autonomy range from low levels that exist today in many cars (e.g., lanekeeping assistance and automatic emergency braking) to complete
autonomy, where no driver attention is ever required and steering wheels
may be optional.
Vehicles of high autonomy present many intriguing conundrums. For
example, in cases of an impending, inevitable crash, what rules will be used

to determine who to save? Does the safety of one passenger take precedence
over the safety of more than one pedestrian? Could terrorists load a selfdriving car with explosives and send it to a destination? Will hackers alter
the navigation system and cause accidents?

SEE ALSO Tesla’s “Borrowed Mind” (1898), Lethal Military Robots (1942), Ethics of AI (1976),
ASIMO and Friends (2000), AI on Mars (2015), Autonomous Robotic Surgery (2016), Adversarial
Patches (2018)

OceanofPDF.com

The Terminator outwardly resembles a human, but it is a cybernetic creature with living tissue
over a robotic metallic endoskeleton.

THE TERMINATOR

1984
“PRIMATES EVOLVED OVER MILLIONS OF years; I evolve in seconds…,” says
the AI in Terminator Genisys, the fifth installment of the Terminator movie
series. “I am inevitable; my existence is inevitable.”
In this popular movie series, the transition of the AI to self-awareness
takes place suddenly, when the Skynet supercomputer goes online on
August 4, 1997, to control the US military’s arsenal, and human decisions
are removed from the military’s strategic defense. Skynet begins to learn at
a geometric rate and becomes self-aware at 2:14 a.m. Eastern time on
August 29.
In 1984, James Cameron (b. 1954) directed the original Terminator
installment. In this movie, when humans realize that the AI defense
network, Skynet, has become self-aware, people panic and try to deactivate
it. In an attempt to protect itself, Skynet then triggers a nuclear holocaust,
launching a first nuclear strike against Russia that results in a war that kills
roughly three billion people. In The Terminator, a cyborg played by actor
Arnold Schwarzenegger (b. 1947) is sent back in time from 2029 to kill
Sarah Connor before the birth of her son, who would otherwise grow up to
lead the survivors’ resistance against Skynet.
Throughout The Terminator, we obtain glimpses of what the Terminator
AI is seeing, in the form of heads-up information displays and decisionmaking menus. The cyborgs’ alien style of thinking and ultra-efficient
minds make them particularly frightening. As one of the characters noted, a
terminator “can’t be bargained with. It can’t be reasoned with. It doesn’t
feel pity, or remorse, or fear! And it absolutely will not stop, ever, until you
are dead!”
Today, the rise of killer robots may not be so far-fetched, given the
development of killer drones with Hellfire missiles. It would be relatively

easy to make such a drone fully autonomous so that it makes decisions
about who to target and kill, based on machine learning and rules of
engagement.

SEE ALSO Lethal Military Robots (1942), Intelligence Explosion (1965), HAL 9000 (1968),
Colossus: The Forbin Project (1970), Ethics of AI (1976)

OceanofPDF.com

Termite colonies seem to display a great deal of consciousness. Even though an individual
component of the hive mind is limited—because a termite has limited capacity—the entire

collection of component creatures displays emergent behavior and produces intelligent
solutions.

ARTIFICIAL LIFE

1986
CONSIDER HIVE MINDS ON EARTH, LIKE termite colonies, that seem to display a
great deal of consciousness. Even though an individual component of the
hive mind is limited—a single termite has limited capacity, for example—
the entire collection of components displays emergent behavior and
produces intelligent solutions. Termites create huge, intricate mounds that
are taller than our Empire State Building relative to their own height. These
termites control the temperature of the mound by altering its tunnel
structure, and thus the component termites come together to create a warmblooded super-organism. Is the hive conscious, even if its components are
not? Perhaps the decision making of the colony bears some resemblance to
the collective behavior of neurons in our brain.
Among the most interesting models for artificial life are those in which
complex, collective, lifelike behaviors arise from simple rules. The field of
artificial life—coined by biologist Christopher Langton in 1986—often
involves researchers examining simulations that can exhibit or imitate
intelligent behavior. As an example, consider cellular automata—a class of
simple mathematical systems that can model a variety of physical processes
with complex behaviors. Some of the classic cellular automata consist of a
grid of cells, like a checkerboard, that can exist in two states: occupied or
unoccupied. The occupancy of one cell is determined from a simple
mathematical analysis of the occupancy of neighbor cells.
The most famous two-state, two-dimensional cellular automaton is the
Game of Life, invented in 1970 by mathematician John Conway (1937–
2020). Despite its simple rules, an amazing diversity of behaviors and forms
multiply and evolve, including gliders, which are arrangements of cells that
move themselves across their universe and can even interact to perform
computations. Could such “creatures” be considered alive?

The field of artificial life seems limitless, and other areas of this field
include the development of genetic algorithms that evolve and reproduce,
physical robotic swarms that exhibit lifelike behavior, and computer games
like The Sims, in which the player creates virtual people, places them in
towns, and tends to their needs and moods.

SEE ALSO Machine Learning (1959), Living in a Simulation (1967), Genetic Algorithms (1975),
Swarm Intelligence (1986), Tamagotchi (1996), “Call Them Artificial Aliens” (2015)

OceanofPDF.com

Ant-colony optimization is a method for finding solutions using simulated ants, inspired by
actual ants finding solutions. Shown here are ants forming a living bridge to a leaf.

SWARM INTELLIGENCE

1986
“TERMITE MOUNDS CAN REACH OVER 17 FEET (5m) in height, with termites
acting like simple “novelty detectors,” responding to changes in air
characteristics within the mound and altering the structure as needed.
Authors Doris and David Jonas speculate: “What is the other way of
knowing, by which the termites know what they have to do and when they
have to do it? Instructions cannot be brought to them quickly enough by
messengers, since the distances within the hill are far too great.… A group
brain functions as an instrument for decision-making in a way startlingly
like an intelligent individual brain.”
The apparent collective intelligence in these social insects, as well as that
in flocking and herd animals, inspired the concept of swarm intelligence. In
AI, this concept is employed to deal with a range of challenges. The
software agents follow simple, local rules and, as with ants and termites,
there is no central controller dictating the behavior of the collective. As just
one example, Boids, an artificial life program developed in 1986 by
computer scientist Craig Reynolds (b. 1953), simulates the flocking
behavior of birds by following simple rules involving a bird steering toward
the average heading of birds in the flock, steering to move toward the
average position of birds, and steering to avoid excessive crowding.
One of the numerous swarm methods studied in AI today is ant-colony
optimization, a method using simulated ants that records their positions and
quality of solutions to help ants in the colony determine better solutions. In
some implementations, these “ants” simulate attractive chemical trails
(pheromones) that evaporate over time. Particle-swarm optimization
simulates the position and velocity of a swarm of fish toward an optimal
location. Other interesting methods are artificial immune systems, bee-

colony optimization algorithms, firefly optimization algorithms, bat
algorithms, cuckoo searches, and roach-infestation optimization.
The applications of swarm intelligence include control of autonomous
vehicles, routing in telecommunication networks, scheduling of aircraft, art
creation, enhancing systems for reactive power and voltage control, and
clustering of gene-expression data.

SEE ALSO Machine Learning (1959), Living in a Simulation (1967), Genetic Algorithms (1975),
Artificial Life (1986), “Elephants Don’t Play Chess” (1990)

OceanofPDF.com

Some challenges that are relatively easy for children, including sensorimotor tasks, turn out to
be among the most difficult for AI entities.

MORAVEC’S PARADOX

1988
“IF YOU WANTED TO BEAT MAGNUS CARLSEN, THE world chess champion, you
would choose a computer,” writes journalist Larry Elliott. “If you wanted to
clean the chess pieces after the game, you would choose a human being.”
This is the essence of Moravec’s paradox, emphasized by several AI
researchers in the 1980s, who ironically noted that the seemingly difficult
tasks involving high-level reasoning were becoming easier and easier for
computers to perform. At the same time, seemingly easy tasks that involve
human sensorimotor skills (e.g., walking around and picking up a piece of
lint from a shoe) can be quite difficult for computerized systems. The
paradox is named after roboticist Hans Moravec, who wrote in his 1988
book Mind Children that “it is comparatively easy to make computers
exhibit adult-level performance on intelligence tests or playing checkers,
and difficult or impossible to give them the skills of a one-year-old when it
comes to perception and mobility.”
Moravec has noted that millions of years of evolution contributed to our
ability to perform some tasks nearly unconsciously, like walking and
recognizing faces and voices, which are so very necessary for survival.
However, abstract thought—for example, reasoning that involves
mathematics and logic, like chess—is newer and more difficult for humans.
However, this type of cognition is actually less difficult to engineer in AI
systems. For many tasks, AI systems still need to evolve even more
sensitive touch and motion controls to assist humans in roles like patient
care, food service, and plumbing. As elegantly summarized by cognitive
scientist Steven Pinker (b. 1954), Moravec’s paradox means that future
human workers may be left with lower-paying jobs that have been around
for centuries, even millennia: “The main lesson of thirty-five years of AI
research is that the hard problems are easy and the easy problems are hard.

The mental abilities of a four-year-old that we take for granted—
recognizing a face, lifting a pencil, walking across a room, answering a
question—in fact solve some of the hardest engineering problems ever
conceived.… As the new generation of intelligent devices appears, it will be
the stock analysts and petrochemical engineers and parole board members
who are in danger of being replaced by machines. The gardeners,
receptionists, and cooks are secure in their jobs for decades to come.”

SEE ALSO “Darwin among the Machines” (1863), Turing Test (1950), Licklider’s “Man-Computer
Symbiosis” (1960), “Elephants Don’t Play Chess” (1990)

OceanofPDF.com

A Connect Four game in progress, using yellow and red discs, which slide to the bottommost
open locations under the influence of gravity.

CONNECT FOUR

1988
“FOR A CHRISTMAS PRESENT, TOBY WALSH (B. 1964), a professor of artificial
intelligence at the University of New South Wales, once gave his father a
program that perfectly plays the game of Connect Four®. His dad, who had
previously loved playing the game, remarked that the program took the fun
out of the game, and Walsh had to agree. When smartphones become
superior to humans in virtually all games and creative endeavors, from
music composition to novel writing, what effect will that have on the
collective psyche of humanity?
Connect Four is played by two people using discs (yellow vs. red) on a
vertical board with seven columns and six rows. As the discs slide down a
column to the bottommost open grid position, the objective is to be the first
player to form a line of four adjacent discs of one’s own color (horizontally,
vertically, or diagonally). The game is reminiscent of a tic-tac-toe game, but
with gravity influencing the pieces. Of course, Connect Four is much more
complicated than tic-tac-toe: if one considers all possible game boards filled
with 0 to 42 discs, there are a walloping 4,531,985,219,092 positions. In
fact, the number of possible positions after n discs have been played on a
standard 7 × 6 board grows as thus (where n = 0, 1, 2, 3, …): 1, 7, 56, 252,
1260, 4620, 18480, 59815, 206780, 605934, 1869840, 5038572, 14164920,
35459424, 91871208, 214864650, 516936420, 1134183050, 2546423880,
5252058812, 11031780760, 21406686756, 42121344720, 76871042612 …
On October 1, 1988, computer scientist James D. Allen finally “solved”
Connect Four—that is, he devised an algorithm that could predict the
outcome of moves (win, lose, or draw) from every possible position,
assuming players play perfectly from that point on. Two weeks later, the
game was solved independently by computer scientist Victor Allis, who

employed an AI approach with nine strategies. As a result, we now know
that Connect Four can always be won by the first player with perfect play.
There is much room for further research on variations of Connect Four.
For example, imagine playing on boards that are wrapped into a cylinder, or
playing on boards with different grid sizes, additional colors, and more than
two dimensions. The number of possible positions and outcomes would be
mind-boggling.

SEE ALSO Tic-Tac-Toe (c. 1300 BCE), Othello (1997), Solving the Game of Awari (2002),
Quackle’s Scrabble Win (2006), AlphaGo Go Champion (2016)

OceanofPDF.com

Intelligence in life forms clearly does not revolve around playing games like chess. In the
paper “Elephants Don’t Play Chess,” Rodney Brooks argues for a different focus in
exploring AI.

“ELEPHANTS DON’T PLAY CHESS”

1990
“THERE IS AN ALTERNATIVE ROUTE TO Artificial Intelligence that diverges from
the directions pursued under that banner for the last thirty some years,”
wrote roboticist Rodney Brooks (b. 1954) in his widely cited 1990
manifesto titled “Elephants Don’t Play Chess.” He continued: “The
traditional approach has emphasized the abstract manipulation of symbols,
whose grounding in physical reality has rarely been achieved. We explore a
research methodology which emphasizes ongoing physical interaction with
the environment as the primary source of constraint on the design of
intelligent systems.”
One of several points made by Brooks in his paper is that all around us
are intelligences far removed from chess playing, in the form of intelligent
animals (e.g., elephants) and even insect swarms. Brooks believed that AI
research should move, at least in part, from a focus on classical AI
involving rules, symbol manipulation, and search trees to one based more
on considerations that include sensorimotor coupling with the environment
(e.g., feedback between senses and motion-producing mechanisms), visionmovement coordination, and other forms of direct physical interaction with
the real world.
Brooks’s paper concludes with a fascinating sampling of AI robots that
are reminiscent of bundles of sensory systems that react to the environment.
For Brooks, a physical body is considered to be crucial for the intelligence
that interests him—in AI creatures that can solve problems concerning
locomotion, grasping, and navigating through the world. These behaviorbased AI systems need not always “understand” the functioning of their
separate behavioral units for their intelligence. For example, Brooks
achieves intriguing behavior in his robots with simple rules involving

avoiding static and moving obstacles, coupled with a “desire” to randomly
wander and to look for distant places.
High-level behavior emerges from a set of simple interactions with the
environment. On this environment topic, Natural Computing authors
Dennis Shasha and Cathy Lazere note: “In the brief history of space travel,
it has been easier to build a computer program to guide a spacecraft to Mars
than to build a robot able to navigate over rough terrain with anything like
the skill of a billy goat.”

SEE ALSO “Darwin among the Machines” (1863), Turing Test (1950), Licklider’s “Man-Computer
Symbiosis” (1960), Swarm Intelligence (1986), Moravec’s Paradox (1988)

OceanofPDF.com

The possible risks of highly advanced AI computer programs have led researchers to
speculate about how to build AI enclosures that could confine or isolate such entities.

LEAKPROOF “AI BOX”

1993
AS DISCUSSED IN THE ENTRY “INTEL-LIGENCE Explosion,” some scientists have
expressed concerns that once AIs become sufficiently intelligent, such
entities could repeatedly improve themselves so as to pose a possible threat
to humanity. This runaway AI growth is sometimes referred to as the
technological singularity. Of course, such entities might also be extremely
valuable to humans; but possible risks have led researchers to speculate
about how to build AI boxes that could confine or isolate such entities, if the
need arises. For example, the hardware running the software for such
entities might act as virtual prisons that are not connected to
communications channels, including the Internet. The software could also
be run on a software virtual machine within another virtual machine in
order to increase the isolation. Of course, complete isolation would be of
little value, since this would prohibit learning from—or observing—a
superintelligence.
Nevertheless, if the AI superintelligence is sufficiently advanced, might
it still be able to make contact with the outside world, or with various
people who serve as gatekeepers, through unusual means, such as by
altering the processor cooling-fan speeds to communicate via Morse code or
by making itself so valuable that theft of the box is likely? Perhaps such an
entity could be exceedingly convincing by offering its human gatekeepers
bribes in order to coax them to allow more communication or replication to
other devices. This bribing may seem far-fetched today, but who knows
what wonders the AI could offer, including cures for diseases, fantastic
inventions, melodies that enthrall, and multimedia visions of romance,
adventure, or bliss.
Author Vernor Vinge (b. 1944) argued in 1993 that for superhuman
intelligences, “confinement is intrinsically impractical. For the case of

physical confinement: Imagine yourself locked in your home with only
limited data access to the outside, to your masters. If those masters thought
at a rate—say—one million times slower than you, there is little doubt that
over a period of years (your time) you could come up with ‘helpful advice’
that would incidentally set you free.”

SEE ALSO “Darwin among the Machines” (1863), Rossum’s Universal Robots (1920), Giant Brains,
or Machines That Think (1949), Intelligence Explosion (1965), Living in a Simulation (1967),
Paperclip Maximizer Catastrophe (2003)

OceanofPDF.com

In the 1950s, IBM scientist Arthur Samuel became well known for his adaptive checkers
program that learned by playing games against modified versions of itself. For what other
games will AI players soon exhibit superhuman skills?

CHECKERS AND AI

1994
CHECKERS IS PLAYED ON AN 8 × 8 BOARD, with players who take turns trying
to capture each other’s pieces by hopping over them. In the 1950s, IBM
scientist Arthur Samuel (1901–1990) became well known for his adaptive
checkers program that learned by playing games against modified versions
of itself. A famous milestone in the history of checkers-playing AI is
Chinook, which in 1994 became the first computer program to win the
world championship title against humans.
Chinook was developed by a team led by Canadian computer scientist
Jonathan Schaeffer (b. 1957); it made use of both a library of opening
moves played by grandmasters and an algorithm that, by 1992, searched
checkers moves to an average minimum search depth of nineteen ply (one
ply equals one move by one player). It also used an endgame database for
all positions with eight pieces or fewer, and a useful move-evaluation
function.
Before the famous 1994 man-machine checkers match, Marion Tinsley
(1927–1995), widely considered the best checkers player who ever lived,
declared “I have a better programmer than Chinook. His was Jonathan,
mine was the Lord.” Alas, after six games, which were all draws, Tinsley
complained of abdominal pains and had to stop playing. He died a few
months later of pancreatic cancer. Chinook was declared the winner by
default.
In 2007, Schaeffer and colleagues used computers to finally prove that
checkers, when played perfectly, is a no-win game. This means that
checkers resembles tic-tac-toe—a game that also can’t be won if both
players make no wrong moves. Schaeffer’s proof was executed by hundreds
of computers over eighteen years that eventually showed that it was
theoretically possible to build a machine that will never lose to a human.

To “solve the game of checkers,” the research team considered 39 trillion
arrangements with ten or fewer pieces on the board and then determined if
either of the two players wins. The team also used a specialized search
algorithm to study the start of the game—specifically to see how initial
moves “funneled” into the ten-checker configurations.

SEE ALSO Tic-Tac-Toe (c. 1300 BCE), Mechanical Turk (1770), Machine Learning (1959),
Backgammon Champion Defeated (1979), Deep Blue Defeats Chess Champion (1997), Othello
(1997)

OceanofPDF.com

Figure from US Patent 6,213,871, titled “Nurturing simulation apparatus for virtual creature,”
issued to Akihiro Yokoi. The Tamagotchi form of artificial life, harbored in an egg-shaped
device, started to become popular in 1997.

TAMAGOTCHI

1996
THE TAMAGOTCHI® ARTIFICIAL LIFE-FORM, harbored in a tiny portable device,
was among the first virtual pets to gain worldwide attention for children and
adults. Amazingly, when it reached the United States at the FAO Schwartz
toy store in 1997, 30,000 units were sold in three days. In a year, the AI was
selling in more than eighty countries, producing revenues of more than
$160 million. It also led to research into the “Tamagotchi Effect,” which
describes the emotional attachments people often develop with lifelike but
inanimate forms. Parents also often wondered how to best handle the strong
emotional upheavals of children when their virtual pets inevitably died. In
the Japanese version, a dead pet would be represented by a ghost and
headstone, and US versions might show an angel. Japanese toy-maker
Bandai actually decided to open a virtual cemetery on the Internet for
deceased pets.
Developed by Bandai employee Aki Maita (b. 1967) and toy designer
Akihiro Yokoi (b. 1955) in Japan, the Tamagotchi was first released in
1996. The software was housed in an egg-shaped object with an interface
that consisted of just three buttons. A creature—displayed on a small, lowresolution screen—would start as an egg and then develop according to care
the player provided. For example, owners would need to “feed” the pet,
which could become sick if not cared for properly. Using infrared
communications, two owners could link their toys to form friendships. Also,
the device would beep to request attention from the owner, and children
often took their pets to school because the creatures could die in a few hours
if they did not receive care. The ensuing distractions in the classroom
caused some schools to ban Tamagotchis.
These simple forms of virtual life raised many questions, as children
sometimes treated them as if they were actually alive. What is considered a

healthy relationship between children and such entities, and how would this
evolve in the coming years? Does the Tamagotchi have some form of
intelligence, given that it “perceives” its environments through its infrared
sensors and buttons, reacts, and requires socialization when it “feels”
lonely? As advanced virtual pets are developed for the elderly for
companionship, are possible risks outweighed by the rewards?

SEE ALSO Living in a Simulation (1967), Artificial Life (1986), AIBO Robot (1999)

OceanofPDF.com

What new versions of chess will AI entities or humans invent that may introduce new
challenges for humans and machines? Shown here is Fortress Chess, played in Russia in
the 18th and 19th centuries. Four players (AIs and/or humans) are represented here as
black, white, dark gray, and light gray.

DEEP BLUE DEFEATS CHESS
CHAMPION

1997
VLADIMIR KRAMNIK (B. 1975), THE UNDISPUTED World Chess Champion
from 2006 to 2007, once told reporters, “I am convinced, the way one plays
chess always reflects the player’s personality. If something defines his
character, then it will also define his way of playing.” Would this
“personality” also be reflected in an AI’s style of play?
For decades, technologists had considered chess a kind of measuring
stick for artificial intelligence, being a game that required strategy, detailed
reasoning, logic, foresight, and—at least for human players—guile. After
many years of debating as to when a machine might defeat a reigning world
chess champion, it finally happened in 1997: IBM’s Deep Blue computer
defeated Russian world chess champion Garry Kasparov (b. 1963) in a sixgame match. After Game 5, Kasparov had become so discouraged that he
explained: “I’m a human being. When I see something that is well beyond
my understanding, I’m afraid.”
Using special-purpose hardware, the 1997 version of Deep Blue was
capable of evaluating 200 million chess positions per second, and it
typically searched to a depth of around six to eight future moves, if not far
more. Deep Blue’s strategy could also take into account a large database of
past grandmaster games, and it used endgame databases that included chess
positions with five or fewer pieces.
The dream of chess machines stretches far back in time. The Mechanical
Turk chess robot, created by Hungarian inventor Wolfgang von Kempelen
in 1770, played a strong game of chess, but it also employed a human who
hid inside the machine. In 1950, computer scientist Alan Turing and
mathematician David Champernowne (1912–2000) designed a computer

program, known as the “Turbochamp,” to play chess. However, because no
computer was available to actually run the algorithm, Turing simulated a
computer by manually consulting the algorithm during a testing phase.
In 2017, the program AlphaZero beat world-champion chess-playing
computer programs, having taught itself how to play in less than a day! The
program used machine learning, starting from random play, and was given
no domain knowledge except the game rules.

SEE ALSO Mechanical Turk (1770), Checkers and AI (1994), AlphaGo Go Champion (2016)

OceanofPDF.com

Close-up of Othello playing pieces, showing that the discs may be flipped to turn from black
to white, or vice versa, according to the rules of the game.

OTHELLO

1997
BECAUSE OF THE PRECISE RULES OF GAMES AND the ability to determine a
winner in the playing process, games have been a popular testing arena for
AI researchers. Also, the AI system can often play millions of games against
itself or other AI players so as to improve and gain insight. One interesting
game to which AI has been successfully applied is Othello, also called
Reversi, which was mentioned in an 1886 edition of The Saturday Review
and dates much further back in time.
The game of Othello is played on an 8 × 8 grid with disks that are white
on one side and black on the other. During a turn, a player places a disk
with the player’s color facing up.
Imagine you are playing black, and you place your disk at one end of a
line of white pieces with another black disk at the other end. In that
scenario, the intermediate white disks are turned over to black. In other
words, discs are flipped by a play that sandwiches them between opposite
color discs, and the player with the majority color at the end of the game is
the winner.
One reason the game is so challenging for humans to visualize is that,
unlike chess and checkers, the colors of Othello pieces may keep changing.
Since around 1980, Othello computer programs have easily defeated
professional players. In 1997, Logistello, a computer program created by
computer scientist Michael Buro, defeated the human champion Takeshi
Murakami by the score of 6 games to 0. At the time, Murakami, a 32-yearold English teacher from Tokyo, seemed surprised at his defeat, saying that
at least one Logistello move was “unfathomable” because it was so different
from a move a human would make.
The number of legal positions in Othello is at most 1028. Even today,
Othello is considered an “unsolved game” in the sense that no one has

proved what the outcome of a game would be if both sides played perfect
games.

SEE ALSO Tic-Tac-Toe (c. 1300 BCE), Mastermind (1970), Checkers and AI (1994), Deep Blue
Defeats Chess Champion (1997), AlphaGo Go Champion (2016)

OceanofPDF.com

As robot dogs and other pets become more advanced in the coming years, will there come a
time when they are nearly indistinguishable from actual animals or outnumber actual living
pets in our homes?

AIBO ROBOT

1999
THE DOG-LIKE ROBOT AIBO, INTRODUCED by the Sony Corporation in 1999,
was one of the world’s first mass-market sophisticated consumer robots for
entertainment. Enjoyed by children and adults, AIBO also was used in AI
education and for research purposes because it included a vision system and
articulators in a relatively inexpensive package. The robots have also been
used in RoboCup® autonomous soccer competitions, many of which can be
viewed on YouTube, showing how the dogs search for the ball and move it
toward the goal.
The AIBO, which takes its name from the Japanese word for “pal,” could
respond to numerous commands and made use of various sensors, including
touch sensors, a camera, a range finder, and a microphone. More sensors
and actuators (for the moveable legs, neck, and other parts) were added in
successive models of the robot. Some versions could autonomously
recharge their batteries at a charging station. Software gave the robots a
personality and the ability to walk and respond to the environment. Each
robot learned slightly different behaviors as people interacted with it.
Fascinating studies have been conducted using the AIBO and other
artificial pets for patients with dementia, and the studies suggest that robotic
pets could be beneficial for companionship and stimulation. More advanced
pets may one day be even more helpful to people during any period of
cognitive decline. Other studies have considered AIBO–human
relationships and found that a significant number of owners reported that
the AIBO has feelings, even though they understood that the dog was
mechanical and not alive. Psychologists continue to ponder the implications
of autonomous systems that fool people into thinking they have real
emotions and far more capabilities than they actually have.

In 2017, Sony announced a new generation of AIBO with many more
actuators to provide smoother, more natural movements. These fourthgeneration models have improved face recognition abilities, more features
involving mobile Internet access, and more sophisticated abilities to adapt,
learn, and respond to the environment.

SEE ALSO de Vaucanson’s Duck Automaton (1738), Electric Bob’s Big Black Ostrich (1893), Face
Recognition (1964), Shakey the Robot (1966), Tamagotchi (1996), ASIMO and Friends (2000)

OceanofPDF.com

A humanoid robot. If you had a robot butler residing in your home, would you prefer the
butler to look human, or would a more robotic appearance be more comfortable for you?

ASIMO AND FRIENDS

2000
THE HISTORY OF REAL-WORLD ROBOTS HAS HAD several notable milestones,
just a few favorites of which are listed here. Three-wheeled “tortoises,”
developed in 1949 by British neurophysiologist William Walter (1910–
1977), could autonomously explore the environment using various sensors.
In 1961, Unimate, created by American inventor George Devol (1912–
2011), became the world’s first industrial robot and was employed on the
General Motors automobile assembly line. In 1973, Japan’s WABOT-1—the
world’s first full-scale, humanoid, intelligent robot—required 45 seconds
for each step. In 1989, MIT showed off the six-legged robot insect named
Genghis, developed by roboticist Rodney Brooks (b. 1954), which
employed simple logic rules in order to walk and explore. In 1998, Tiger
Electronics released the owl-like Furby®, which sold over 40 million units
in a few years. Although a very simple robot, Furby produced “Furbish”
speech output that transformed into English over time, giving the
impression that it could learn language just as humans do. Finally, BigDog,
a four-legged robot created in 2005 by Boston Dynamics and partners, was
notable for its ability to walk across a variety of difficult terrains.
Perhaps one of the most iconic of modern real-world robots has been
Advanced Step in Innovative Mobility (ASIMO®), introduced by the Honda
Motor Company in 2000 to significant mainstream fanfare. The humanoid
robot was 4 feet, 3 inches tall (130 cm) and, using its internal cameras and
various sensors, was capable of autonomous navigation by walking.
ASIMO could recognize gestures, faces, and sounds, and it could also grasp
objects.
Our complex future will surely have a continuing need for AI, and robots
will play an increasing collaborative role with humans. Perhaps someday

robots like ASIMO will assist the elderly or infirm. However, as
cyberneticist Norbert Wiener cautions, “The world of the future will be an
even more demanding struggle against the limitations of our intelligence,
not a comfortable hammock in which we can lie down to be waited upon by
our robot slaves.”

SEE ALSO Elektro the Moto-Man (1939), Shakey the Robot (1966), AIBO Robot (1999), Roomba
(2002), AI on Mars (2015), ChatGPT (2022)

OceanofPDF.com

The Adventures of Pinocchio was one of the inspirations for Stanley Kubrick during the
development of A.I. Pinocchio, the wooden puppet, dreamed of becoming a human boy.

SPIELBERG’S A.I. ARTIFICIAL
INTELLIGENCE

2001
THE FILM A.I. ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE, directed by Steven Spielberg (b.
1946), is a provocative drama that makes us question the future of AI and
the capabilities of an AI android boy named David, given as a gift to a
mother because she misses her human son. The movie is based on the 1969
story “Supertoys Last All Summer Long” by English author Brian Aldiss
(1925–2017). Although the film was not released until 2001, its
development began in the 1970s, when director Stanley Kubrick acquired
the film rights.
Much of the film follows David after his separation from his mother and
his attempt to return to her. He is accompanied on his quest by Teddy, an AI
teddy bear, as he seeks a Blue Fairy (inspired by the Disney film
Pinocchio), who David believes can turn him into a “real” human being. In
one part of the journey, David’s engineer creator explains to David that the
“Blue Fairy is part of the great human flaw to wish for things that don’t
exist, or the greatest single human gift—the ability to chase down our
dreams. And that is something no machine has ever done until you.”
Viewers of the film debated whether an android could truly love, with
film critic Roger Ebert (1942–2013) writing that an android is merely “a
puppet with a computer program pulling its strings.” Toward the end of the
film, after two thousand years in suspended animation, David encounters
spindly alien AIs that have evolved from androids like him and who have
taken a particular interest in David, because he is the last being who has
actually ever encountered humans. They allow him to spend one last day
with a clone of his long-dead human mother in a virtual dream-state.
Reflecting on the sad but thought-provoking film, Empire of Dreams author

Andrew Gordon writes: “We measure ourselves against the robot, trying to
define what makes us human, fearing that even as we become more robotic,
our creations become more human and may ultimately surpass or replace
us.… A robot has become ‘human’ by attaining the ability to dream, yet
dreams of the human are all that is left of humanity.”

SEE ALSO “The Artist of the Beautiful” (1844), Transhumanism (1957), Blade Runner (1982)

OceanofPDF.com

Awari has fascinated researchers in the field of artificial intelligence. In 2002, computer
scientists calculated the outcome for all 889,063,398,406 positions that can occur in the
game, and proved that Awari must end in a draw for perfect players.

SOLVING THE GAME OF AWARI

2002
RESEARCHERS STUDYING ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE have invested great effort
developing game-playing programs—both as a test of AI strategies and to
push the limits of software and hardware. One interesting example in the
history of game playing involves Awari, a 3,500-year-old African board
game. Classified as a count-and-capture game, Awari is a member of a set
of strategy games called mancala and has various different names in
different countries.
The Awari board consists of two rows of six cup-like hollows—with four
markers (beans, seeds, or pebbles) in each hollow—where one row belongs
to each player. On a player’s turn, the player chooses one of his or her six
cups, withdraws all seeds from that cup, and drops one seed in each cup
counterclockwise from this cup. The second player then takes the seeds
from one of the six cups on his or her side and does the same. When a
player drops his last seed into a cup on the opponent’s side containing only
one or two seeds (making a total of two or three seeds), that player captures
all the seeds in this cup. The same player also takes any seeds in cups
immediately before the emptied cup if they now also total two or three.
Players can take seeds only from their opponent’s side of the board, and the
game ends when one player has no seeds left in the cups on his or her side.
Whoever captures the majority of seeds wins.
Awari has been of immense attraction to researchers in the field of
artificial intelligence; but until 2002, no one knew if the game was like tictac-toe in which perfect plays from the beginning always ended a game in a
draw. Finally, computer scientists John W. Romein (b. 1970) and Henri E.
Bal (b. 1958) of the Free University in Amsterdam wrote a computer
program that calculated the outcome for all 889,063,398,406 positions that
can occur in the game, proving that Awari must end in a draw with perfect

play by both players. The massive computation required about 51 hours on
a computer cluster with 144 processors.
“Did we ruin a perfectly fine game?” ask Romein and Bal. “We do not
think so. Connect Four was solved as well, and people still play the game.
The same holds for other solved games.”

SEE ALSO TicTac-Toe (c. 1300 BCE), Mastermind (1970), Backgammon Champion Defeated
(1979), Connect Four (1988), Checkers and AI (1994), Othello (1997)

OceanofPDF.com

Modified versions of robotic vacuum cleaners have been hacked by hobbyists to alter their
functionality, causing the robots to map rooms, draw Spirograph®-like patterns, battle one
another, perform surveillance with cameras, and more.

ROOMBA

2002
A YEAR AFTER THE ROOMBA® ROBOTIC vacuum cleaner was introduced to the
world by iRobot Corporation, journalist Monte Reel wrote: “How did it
happen that the robotic revolution is kicking off with the Roomba, an
automated floor vacuum cleaner that will mesmerize—or maybe terrify—
your pet cat? It was a fortuitous meeting of brain power, ambition, and a
distaste for housework on the part of iRobot engineers, whose backgrounds
range from artificial-intelligence research to the design of unmanned
extraterrestrial vehicles.”
The Roomba autonomic vacuum cleaner, which appeared on the market
in 2002, contains various sensors that enable it to detect dirt on the floor,
sense stairways that might cause it to fall, and change its travel direction
when encountering objects. The 900 series also featured a camera that
helped the navigation software ensure that the device efficiently covered the
floor area. When the battery in the Roomba is low, the vacuum seeks a
charger by using its infrared beacons. Acoustic dirt sensors help it detect
certain kinds of dirty spots that might need special attention. In the past, the
Roomba has relied on spiral cleaning paths, random walks, and other
methods for covering a floor.
A variant of the LISP programming language was used to write much of
the software for Roomba. Today, various hackers enjoy modifying the
device, using its Roomba Open Interface (ROI) for other purposes, like
turning the Roomba into a painter or using it for surveillance.
The Roomba is a representative of a wider class of domestic robots used
for household chores. Of course, as these devices become more
sophisticated, privacy concerns will arise. Already, debates have raged
regarding the maps of a user’s home that iRobot could conceivably share
with any businesses interested in estimating aspects of a user’s home or

lifestyle, and perhaps the police could even interrogate such robots during
crime investigations.

SEE ALSO Shakey the Robot (1966), Autonomous Vehicles (1984), ASIMO and Friends (2000), AI
on Mars (2015)

OceanofPDF.com

Even if programmed with a beneficent task, such as efficiently manufacturing paperclips,
what if the AI then decided to convert as much of the planet as possible into a paperclip
manufacturing facility?

PAPERCLIP MAXIMIZER
CATASTROPHE

2003
“EVEN IF HIGHLY INTELLIGENT AND CAPABLE AIs are given useful goals, it is
nevertheless possible to have dangerous results in the future. One famous
example, discussed in 2003 by philosopher and futurist Nick Bostrom, is
the horror of the Paperclip Maximizer. Imagine a future in which an AI
system supervises a set of factories producing paperclips. The AI is given a
mission of producing as many paperclips as possible. If the AI is not
sufficiently constrained, one might imagine that it could optimize its goal,
first by operating the factories at maximum efficiency, and then devoting
more and more resources to the task until vast regions of land and more
factories were devoted to making paperclips. Eventually, all the available
resources on Earth could be converted to this task, followed by all the
relevant matter in the solar system, turning everything into paperclips.
Although this scenario may sound implausible, it is intended to focus
attention on the serious point that AIs may not have humanlike motives that
we can truly understand. Even innocuous goals could prove dangerous if
AIs gain the ability to evolve and create their successive improved
machines, as discussed in the entry on Intelligence Explosion. How might
humans ensure that AI goals, and their constituent mathematical reward and
utility functions, remain stable and comprehensible through the decades and
centuries? How might useful “off switches” remain accessible? What if
such reward circuits and software cause the AI to lose interest in the
external world and devote its energy to maximizing a reward signal, much
like taking a drug and dropping out of society? How will we deal with
different countries and geopolitical regimes using different reward functions
for their own AIs?

Another famous example, attributed to AI expert Marvin Minsky, is the
Riemann hypothesis catastrophe, in which we imagine a superintelligent AI
system with the goal of solving this difficult and important hypothesis in
mathematics. Such a system might devote more and more computing
resources and energy to the task, taking over and creating ever-improved
systems at the expense of humanity.

SEE ALSO “Darwin among the Machines” (1863), Intelligence Explosion (1965), Leakproof “AI
Box” (1993)

OceanofPDF.com

In Scrabble, each tile has a single letter, which is annotated with its value in the range 1 to
10, based on its frequency of use in the English language. Vowels are worth only one point.

QUACKLE’S SCRABBLE WIN

2006
“CHESS HAD ITS DEEP BLUE,” WRITES COM-PUTING technology journalist Mark
Anderson. Jeopardy! had its Watson. Baseball has its sabermetrics, as
chronicled in the hit book and film Moneyball. In each game, data mining
has upended the field of play.” An exciting development involving AI
applied to word games occurred in 2006, when the computer program
Quackle defeated former world champion David Boys at Scrabble® in a
tournament held in Toronto, Canada. When Boys lost three games out of
five, he insisted “It’s still better to be a human than to be a computer.”
The Scrabble game was invented in 1938 by American architect Alfred
Butts (1899–1993). When playing Scrabble, opponents place tiles on a
game board consisting of a 15 × 15 array of squares. When playing the
English version, each tile has a single letter, which is annotated with its
value in the range 1 to 10, based on its frequency of use in the English
language. For example, vowels are worth one point, whereas Q and Z are
worth 10 points. As players alternate turns, they must add letters to the
board in such a way that each row or column of letters always forms a
word.
The game is actually quite complex, invol-ving more than just
knowledge of words in a language. For example, strategy may involve
anticipating what letters are still to be drawn as well as the utility of placing
tiles on special squares on the board that may increase the tile’s score.
Scrabble is considered a game of imperfect information, like poker, since an
opponent’s available tiles are hidden from view.
Quackle determines what tiles to play based on simulations that assess
the board using an evaluation function. It was created by a team that
included Jason Katz-Brown, who himself is one of the top-ranked Scrabble
players in the world. As part of their fascinating research, developers had

Quackle play itself numerous times to better understand the value of
playing various words compared to other words a player might legally use
during a turn, or with considerations of words that a player might use on the
next turn.

SEE ALSO Connect Four (1988), Deep Blue Defeats Chess Champion (1997), Othello (1997),
AlphaGo Go Champion (2016), AI Poker (2017)

OceanofPDF.com

The globe-like avatar representing IBM Watson is based on the IBM Smarter Planet icon. In
the display employed for the Jeopardy! contest, colors and motions changed depending on
game states and answer confidence levels.

WATSON ON JEOPARDY!

2011
KEN JENNINGS (B. 1974), THE WORLD CHAMPION of the game show Jeopardy!
®, wrote about his contest with an AI entity called Watson: “When I was
selected as one of the two human players to be pitted against IBM’s
‘Watson’ supercomputer in a special man-vs.-machine Jeopardy! exhibition
match, I felt honored, even heroic. I envisioned myself as the Great CarbonBased Hope against a new generation of thinking machines.…”
Watson was a question-answering computer system that used naturallanguage processing, machine learning, information retrieval, and more to
defeat the world champion in 2011 in a game involving general knowledge
clues. What made the task particularly difficult—more difficult than chess
playing—is that the computing system needed to provide an answer in just a
few seconds, while considering the challenges and ambiguities of the
English language, with clues that included puns, humor, riddles, cultural
references, special contexts, and rhymes—something that humans consider
instinctively.
To accomplish this task, Watson employed thousands of parallel
processing units called cores, along with information such as the entire
Wikipedia corpus, stored in its RAM memory (because access to spinning
hard drives would be too slow during the competition). All information had
to be stored locally, since Watson was not allowed access to the Internet
during a match; in order to arrive at an answer, the AI considered the results
of numerous separate analysis algorithms at once. The more algorithms that
found the same answer, the more likely it would be a correct answer.
Watson continually scored different answers with a confidence level, and if
the confidence was sufficiently high, Watson would provide the answer.
After his loss, Jennings wrote “But there’s no shame in losing to
silicon.… After all, I don’t have 2,880 processor cores and 15 terabytes of

reference works at my disposal—nor can I buzz in with perfect timing
whenever I know an answer. My puny human brain, just a few bucks worth
of water, salts, and proteins, hung in there just fine against a jillion-dollar
supercomputer.”

SEE ALSO Natural Language Processing (1954), Machine Learning (1959), Deep Blue Defeats
Chess Champion (1997), Quackle’s Scrabble Win (2006)

OceanofPDF.com

Example of a DeepDream artwork. The approach makes use of an artificial neural network
that can seek and enhance patterns in images, with startling results.

COMPUTER ART AND DEEPDREAM

2015
“ACCORDING TO ESSAYIST JONATHAN SWIFT (1667–1745), “Vision is the art of
seeing things invisible.” This idea of seeing new patterns at the edges of art,
science, and mathematics certainly applies to many categories of art
produced with the aid of computers, algorithms, neural networks, and other
forms of AI. Early explorations of computer art include the work of
Desmond Paul Henry (1921–2004) and his bombsight analog computerbased drawing machines, starting around 1961. American engineer A.
Michael Noll (b. 1939) became famous in 1962 for exploring random and
algorithmic processes to produce visual art, and British-born artist Harold
Cohen (1928–2016) created AARON—an AI computer-drawing program
that could autonomously produce art—in 1968.
A more recent example of computer art includes the collaboration of
many users with DeepDream, a 2015 computer-vision program created by
Google engineer Alexander Mordvintsev and colleagues. The approach
makes use of an artificial neural network (ANN) that can seek and enhance
patterns in images—with startling results. To better understand DeepDream,
consider that neural nets may be trained to classify and recognize features in
an input image (e.g., chipmunks or stop signs) based on numerous
“training” images. By running the neural network “in reverse,” DeepDream
looks for patterns in images and amplifies them in a manner somewhat
reminiscent of when we gaze up at the clouds and begin to see animal-like
shapes. For artificial neural nets, each layer progressively extracts higherlevel features—for example, the first layer might be sensitive to corners and
edges, while layers closer to the output neurons may be examining complex
features. Not only are the resulting pictures fascinating to study and
brimming with detail, but they can provide a sense of the level of
abstraction on which a particular ANN layer is working.

The resemblance of DeepDream artwork to hallucinations experienced
by users of certain mind-altering drugs suggests that DeepDream might help
researchers better understand how artificial neural networks relate to actual
neural networks in the brain’s visual cortex. Furthermore, the program
could help illuminate how the brain attempts to find pattern and meaning.

SEE ALSO Computational Creativity (1821), Artificial Neural Networks (1943), Deep Learning
(1965), Cybernetic Serendipity (1968), DALL-E (2021)

OceanofPDF.com

In the future, Kelly believes that we will encounter “synthetic aliens,” beings that we create,
forcing us to deal with the same benefits and challenges that we would expect if we ever
established contact with intelligent extraterrestrial aliens from other planets.

“CALL THEM ARTIFICIAL ALIENS”

2015
“THE MOST IMPORTANT THING ABOUT MAKING machines that can think is that
they will think differently,” writes Kevin Kelly (b. 1942), founding
Executive Editor of Wired magazine. In his acclaimed 2015 essay, “Call
Them Artificial Aliens,” he noted that “… to solve the current grand
mysteries of quantum gravity, dark energy, and dark matter, we’ll probably
need intelligences other than human. The extremely complex questions that
will come after them may require even more distant and complex
intelligences. Indeed, we may need to invent intermediate intelligences that
can help us design yet more rarified intelligences that we couldn’t design
alone.”
So deep and difficult will be questions in the future that they will require
numerous different “species of minds” to solve them, along with new
human skills to interface with such minds. Kelly concludes his essay by
comparing thinking machines with aliens: “AI could just as well stand for
Alien Intelligence. We cannot be certain that we’ll contact extraterrestrial
beings … in the next 200 years, but we can be almost 100 percent certain
that we’ll have manufactured an alien intelligence by then. When we face
those synthetic aliens, we’ll encounter the same benefits and challenges we
expect from contact with ET. They’ll force us to reevaluate our roles, our
beliefs, our goals, our identity.”
We can hardly imagine an antelope understanding the significance of
prime numbers, yet alterations of our own brains, along with the
development of useful AI interfaces, could admit a variety of profound
concepts to which we are now totally closed. If the yucca moth, with only a
few ganglia for its brain, can recognize the geometry of the yucca flower
from birth, how much of our capacity is hardwired into our convolutions of
cortex? Of course, there are likely facets of the universe we can never

understand, just as an antelope could never understand calculus, black
holes, symbolic logic, or poetry. There are thoughts we can never think,
visions we can only glimpse. It is at this filmy, veiled interface between
human reality and a reality beyond that we may find the numinous, which
some may liken to dancing with the artificial gods.

SEE ALSO Searches for the Soul (1907), Giant Brains, or Machines That Think (1949), Intelligence
Explosion (1965), Artificial Life (1986)

OceanofPDF.com

Self-portrait of Curiosity located at the foothill of Mount Sharp on Mars, October 6, 2015.

AI ON MARS

2015
“ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE AND AUTONOMY will play increasing roles in space
exploration as robotic spacecraft and rovers need to make rapid, smart
decisions, particularly when they are not in constant communication with
Earthlings back home. As we reach farther into the solar system, and even
send rovers into the seas of faraway moons like Jupiter’s Europa,
communication delays can be particularly troublesome.
One recent example of limited but fascinating AI in outer space involves
the NASA Curiosity rover, patrolling Mars to help determine whether the
planet was ever capable of sustaining life, and to help us better understand
Martian geology, climate, and radiation patterns. In 2015, Curiosity
received an AI software upload called Autonomous Exploration for
Gathering Increased Science (AEGIS) to help it with its tasks.
“Right now Mars is entirely inhabited by robots,” says planetary scientist
Raymond Francis, “and one of them is artificially intelligent enough to
make its own decisions about what to zap with its laser.” If Curiosity finds a
particular surface feature of interest, it can vaporize a small portion with a
laser and examine the resulting spectra to estimate the rock’s composition.
If warranted, it can also use its long arm, microscope, and X-ray
spectrometer for a closer examination. In particular, AEGIS allows
Curiosity to autonomously select a target rock and accurately pinpoint it
with the laser—using computer vision to examine digital images, looking
for edges, shapes, size, brightness, and so forth. Journalist Marina Koren
notes: “The software—just about 20,000 lines of code out of the 3.8 million
that make Curiosity tick—has turned a car-sized, six-wheeled, nuclearpowered robot into a field scientist.”
Curiosity’s investigations may one day pave the way for human
exploration, and systems like AEGIS will aid in this process by using

machine learning and other AI approaches to detect anomalies. Given that
there are periods of time when Curiosity is on the far side of Mars and
cannot communicate with Earth and receive instructions, and given that
communication with Earth can drain power from the rover, AI can be
particularly useful when communication is limited or impossible.

SEE ALSO Shakey the Robot (1966), Autonomous Vehicles (1984), Roomba (2002)

OceanofPDF.com

The AlphaGo computer program defeated South Korean Lee Sedol, the first time a program
beat a 9-dan professional player, without handicaps.

ALPHAGO GO CHAMPION

2016
“WHILE THE BAROQUE RULES OF CHESS could only have been created by
humans, the rules of Go are so elegant, organic, and rigorously logical that
if intelligent life forms exist elsewhere in the universe, they almost certainly
play Go,” explained German-American chess and Go expert Edward Lasker
(1885–1981).
Go is a two-player board game that originated in China possibly around
2000 BCE and spread to Japan, where it became popular in the thirteenth
century CE. In the game, players alternately place black and white stones on
intersections of a 19 × 19 playing board. A stone or a group of stones is
captured and removed if it is tightly surrounded by stones of the opposing
player, and the objective is to control a larger territory than one’s opponent.
Go is complex for many reasons, including its large game board, complex
strategies, and huge numbers of variations possible in games. In fact, the
number of potential legal board positions is far more than the number of
atoms in the visible universe!
In 2016, the AlphaGo computer program became the first to defeat a
professional Go player of the highest rank, without handicaps, when it
defeated Lee Sedol (b. 1983) of South Korea. AlphaGo was developed by
DeepMind Technologies, a British AI company acquired by Google in
2014. Technically speaking, AlphaGo uses a Monte Carlo tree-search
algorithm and artificial neural networks to learn and play the game. In 2017,
a newer program version named AlphaGo Zero learned Go by playing
against itself many millions of times, without relying on data from human
matches, and then promptly defeated AlphaGo. In some sense, AlphaGo
Zero discovered or derived thousands of years of human insight, creativity,
and training—and then invented superior approaches in just a few days.

Referring to the amazing playing approaches of AlphaGo, journalist
Dawn Chan explains that “from all accounts, one gets the sense that an alien
civilization has dropped a cryptic guidebook in our midst: a manual that’s
brilliant—or at least, the parts of it we can understand.”

SEE ALSO Artificial Neural Networks (1943), Mastermind (1970), Backgammon Champion
Defeated (1979), Deep Blue Defeats Chess Champion (1997), Othello (1997)

OceanofPDF.com

Imagine the future of surgery where autonomous robots play an ever-increasing role, using
their own vision systems and machine intelligence. Perhaps they will be the heroes of the
operating room as they efficiently draw information from a CT or MRI scan.

AUTONOMOUS ROBOTIC SURGERY

2016
IN 2016, THE SMART TISSUE AUTONOMOUS Robot (STAR), a robotic surgical
system, demonstrated its skill on a pig’s small intestine, using its own
enhanced vision, machine intelligence, and dexterity. Compared with
human surgeons, STAR’s stitches were more consistent and created an
intestine that was more resistant to leaks near the seams. In this example of
“supervised anatomy,” STAR’s vision system relied on near-infrared
fluorescent tags placed on the intestinal tissue to help its camera track the
tissue. STAR planned the suturing task and made adjustments as tissues
moved.
The growing autonomy of surgical robots has had an impressive past,
rooted in the increasing use of robots to assist surgery. One of the most
popular forms of robotic surgery resembles laparoscopic surgery, also
referred to as keyhole surgery or minimally invasive surgery, which is
performed through small incisions and has a reputation for minimizing
blood loss and pain while accelerating patient recovery time. However,
instead of the surgeon hovering above the patient and directly manipulating
the tube-like devices inserted into a patient’s body, robotic surgery allows
the surgeon to sit comfortably at a console and manipulate instruments
attached to several robotic arms, while viewing 3-D images transmitted
from within the patient’s body. Unlike laparoscopic surgery, robotic surgery
can suppress the surgeon’s hand tremors, and large hand movement can be
scaled to provide more accuracy over tiny movements and manipulations.
In the emerging field of telesurgery, robotic instruments connected to highspeed communication networks allow a surgeon to perform an operation on
a patient in a separate location.
In 2000, American surgeon Mani Menon (b. 1948) was the first surgeon
in the US to use a robot to remove a cancerous prostate gland, and in the

same year he established the nation’s first center for robotic prostatectomy.
Today, robot-assisted laparoscopy is used for hysterectomies, repair of heart
mitral valves, hernia repairs, gall bladder removals, and much more. Robots
are also used to perform crucial steps in procedures involving orthopedic
knee replacements, hair transplants, and Lasik eye surgery.

SEE ALSO Lethal Military Robots (1942), Autonomous Vehicles (1984), AI Death Predictor (2019)

OceanofPDF.com

In 2017, AI programs defeated human professional poker players in Texas Hold ’Em. Here,
the players have imperfect information, which makes the game particularly challenging for
computers and requires a kind of “intuition” to determine winning strategies.

AI POKER

2017
IN 2017, NUMEROUS NEWS STORIES PROCLAIMED the huge triumph of two
different AI programs that defeated human professional poker players in a
game known as Texas Hold ’Em. In the past, AIs have been able to defeat
humans in many kinds of games—like chess and Go—involving perfect
information, where nothing is shielded from the players’ views. In Texas
Hold ’Em poker, two or more players are initially dealt two random
facedown cards. At the introduction of each new set of public cards, players
are asked to “bet, hold, or abandon” the money at stake on the table. Here,
the players have imperfect information, which makes the game particularly
challenging for computers and requires a kind of “intuition” to determine
winning strategies. Another challenge is that there is a massive number of
possible game scenarios (roughly 10160). In no-limit Hold ’Em, players
generally develop betting strategies that play out over numerous hands and
often try bluffs (e.g., betting low with favorable cards or betting just to
confuse the competition).
In spite of these challenges, an AI named DeepStack was able to defeat
professional poker players in heads-up no-limit Texas Hold ’Em. The AI
had used deep learning, with millions of randomly generated poker game
plays against itself, to train artificial neural networks in order to develop
poker intuition ahead of time. Also reported in 2017 was news of another
poker AI named Libratus that defeated four of the top-ranked human Texas
Hold ’Em players in numerous games during a twenty-day competition.
Libratus did not employ neural networks, instead using a different
algorithmic approach called counterfactual regret minimization (after every
game simulation, the program revisits its decisions and finds ways to
improve its strategy). Interestingly, while DeepStack can run on a laptop
computer, Libratus required much more sophisticated computer hardware.

Note that AIs that can deal with imperfect information may be useful in
numerous real-world situations, like guessing the final sale price of a house
or negotiating a good price for a new car. Interestingly, “pokerbots” (pokerplaying programs) of various skill levels have been around for years, but
they are generally not allowed to be used as assistants to humans in online
poker games among humans.

SEE ALSO Artificial Neural Networks (1943), Deep Blue Defeats Chess Champion (1997),
Quackle’s Scrabble Win (2006), AlphaGo Go Champion (2016)

OceanofPDF.com

Researchers have shown that it is possible to place circular psychedelic-looking patches in
the field of view of vision AI systems to fool them into “thinking” a banana is a toaster. This
highlights the possible risks of using AI for certain applications.

ADVERSARIAL PATCHES

2018
IMAGINE A BUTTON YOU COULD PIN TO YOUR shirt, or a sticker you could place
on a stop sign to trick an AI entity (e.g., a smart surveillance camera or a
self-driving car) into thinking you or the sign was anything you wished it to
see. Such a scenario is not far-fetched, and it represents a risk for AIs that
rely on machine learning, as well as visual or audio systems, to make
decisions.
In 2017, researchers at Google designed circular patches with colorful
psychedelic patterns to distract AI image classifiers. Such patches can fool
an AI system into thinking a banana—or virtually any object—is a toaster,
for example, when the patch is placed near the object. Past experiments
using other methods have tricked AI systems into thinking that turtles were
rifles and that rifles were helicopters. Even though visual adversarial
patches can be clearly seen by people, the use of strange patterns (e.g., a
graphic on the side of a building or the presence of a complex 3-D
sculpture) might be mistaken simply as art, so observers would not realize
that the pattern is confusing a drone into thinking a hospital is a military
target, for example.
Experiments have also caused AI systems to misclassify stop signs as
speed-limit signs. Some past work has focused on changes that are
imperceptible to humans, such as changing a few pixels in an image. In
2018, researchers at the University of California, Berkeley, constructed
audio adversarial examples for speech recognition systems. In other words,
given any audio waveform, the researchers could produce a nearly identical
waveform, tricking speech-to-text systems into transcribing the waveform
as any phrase the researchers choose.
“Adversarial machine learning” studies involve manipulating training
data while an AI is learning. Although it may be possible to deter some

adversaries by requiring AI systems to use multiple classifier systems or to
try to program them not to be distracted by adversarial samples during
training, potential risks exist in many AI applications.

SEE ALSO Lethal Military Robots (1942), Machine Learning (1959), Ethics of AI (1976),
Autonomous Vehicles (1984)

OceanofPDF.com

Ernő Rubik’s 1983 US patent 4,378,116 for a “spatial logical toy,” showing internal
mechanisms.

RUBIK’S CUBE ROBOTS

2018
THE CONSTRUCTION OF ROBOTS CAPABLE OF solving a Rubik’s Cube® using
computer vision and physical manipulation has been a popular challenge for
AI engineers, who have developed numerous different robotic designs over
the years. The original Rubik’s Cube was invented by the Hungarian
inventor Ernő Rubik (b. 1944) in 1974; by 1982, 10 million of them had
been sold in Hungary (which is, curiously, more than the population of that
country). It is estimated that over 100 million have been sold worldwide to
date.
The cube is a 3 × 3 × 3 array of smaller cubes that are colored in such a
way that the six faces of the large cube have six distinct colors. The twentysix external subcubes are internally hinged so that these six faces can be
rotated. The goal of the puzzle is to return a scrambled cube to a state in
which each side has a single color. There are 43,252,003,274,489,856,000
different arrangements of the small cubes, and only one of these
arrangements is the initial position where all colors match on each of the six
sides. If you had a cube for every one of these “legal” positions, you could
cover the entire surface of Earth (including oceans) about 250 times.
In 2010, researchers proved that no starting configuration of the cube
requires more than twenty moves to solve. In 2018, an agile Rubik’s Cube
robot called the Rubik’s Contraption finally pierced the half-second
boundary, solving a scrambled cube in just 0.38 seconds, which included
image capture, computation, and movement time. The setup employed by
MIT robotics student Ben Katz and software developer Jared Di Carlo made
use of six Kollmorgen ServoDisc motors and the so-called Kociemba twophase algorithm. By comparison, 10.69 seconds was the robotic world
record in 2011. Also in 2018, a deep-learning machine finally taught itself

how to solve a Rubik’s Cube using reinforcement learning without human
knowledge.
One variation that never appeared on toy-store shelves is the fourdimensional version of the Rubik’s Cube: the Rubik’s tesseract. The total
number of positions of the Rubik’s tesseract is an astounding 1.76×10120. If
the rotating layers of either the cube or the tesseract changed positions
every second since the beginning of the universe, they would still be turning
today and not have exhibited every possible configuration.

SEE ALSO Tower of Hanoi (1883), Reinforcement Learning (1951), Shakey the Robot (1966),
ASIMO and Friends (2000)

OceanofPDF.com

Researchers have trained an AI system to accurately predict if a person would die in three to
twelve months. If you could know the day, or even year, of your death, would you choose to
know ahead of time?

AI DEATH PREDICTOR

2019
IN 2016, RESEARCHERS AT STANFORD University were able to train an AI
system to accurately predict if a person would die in three to twelve months.
This remarkable application is included in this book as representative of the
wide variety of roles that AI and deep learning will play in coming years.
Palliative care usually involves providing relief for a patient’s pain,
stress, and other symptoms when the patient has a terminal diagnosis and no
cure is expected. Knowing when such specific care is warranted may have
beneficial effects for the sufferer, family, and caregivers—and help
determine when such care would be most effective. To create the AI “Death
Algorithm,” the Stanford team used information from about 170,000
patients who had died with, for example, cancer and heart and neurological
diseases. Various information from medical records—including a patient’s
diagnosis, medical procedure, medical-scan codes, drugs prescribed, etc.—
was used as input to “teach” the AI system. Then a deep neural net was
trained, with various internal weights adjusted for the neuron units. The
deep neural net made use of an input layer of 13,654 dimensions (e.g.,
codes for diagnoses and drugs), 18 hidden layers (each 512 dimensions),
and a scalar output layer.
In the end, nine out of ten people predicted to die within three to twelve
months did die within this time frame. Also, 95 percent of those whom the
algorithm determined would outlast twelve months did live longer lives.
However, as physician Siddhartha Mukherjee explained in a recent New
York Times article: “[The deep learning system] learns, but it cannot tell us
why it has learned; it assigns probabilities, but it cannot easily express the
reasoning behind the assignment. Like a child who learns to ride a bicycle
by trial and error and, asked to articulate the rules that enable bicycle riding,
simply shrugs her shoulders and sails away, the algorithm looks vacantly at

us when we ask, ‘Why?’ It is, like death, another black box.” Nevertheless,
research on these AI death predictors continues, and in 2019 a team of
experts at University of Nottingham showed that machine learning could
outperform traditional methods at predicting premature deaths, based on
demographic, biometric, clinical, and lifestyle factors.

SEE ALSO Deep Learning (1965), Ethics of AI (1976), Autonomous Robotic Surgery (2016)

OceanofPDF.com

3D folded structure of the erythropoietin hormone, which stimulates production of red blood
cells. The colorful ribbons represent helical portions of the amino-acid chain.

ALPHAFOLD 2

2020
“THE PROTEINS IN OUR BODIES PERFORM AN immense array of functions,
ranging from catalyzing metabolic reactions to maintaining the structures of
cells. We might visualize each protein as an individual string of pearls,
where a “pearl” represents one of twenty possible amino acids. In the body,
each string folds up into a complicated 3D structure that helps control the
function of that protein. For decades, one of the great challenges of
biologists has been to predict this final folded shape, based on the sequence
of amino acids. Accurately predicting protein structures may help scientists
design new proteins with specific functions, discover new drugs, and better
understand diseases such as neurodegenerative diseases that may result, in
part, from proteins that do not fold properly.
Developed by the DeepMind laboratory in 2020, the AI program
AlphaFold 2 (AF2) astounded scientists by its ability to accurately predict a
wide range of protein structures with atomic-level accuracy, even in cases in
which few similar structures were known. To accomplish this structureprediction task, AlphaFold 2 was trained using information on more than
100,000 known protein sequences and structures. Additionally, AF2 uses a
protein’s amino sequence as input, then queries databases of protein
sequences and constructs multiple sequence alignments that identify similar
sequences in organisms. AF2 also relies on “transformers,” a special kind of
deep-learning architecture that requires less training or learning time than
many previous neural network approaches.
Note that a protein’s structure is not the only determiner of a protein’s
function, which is also the result of other factors such as the interactions of
proteins, RNA, DNA, metals, and metabolites. Also, proteins have dynamic
shapes and can exist in different conformational states, and more research
would be beneficial to determine if future AI programs can adequately take

all of these complexities into account. Nevertheless, Nobel Prize winner
Venki Ramakrishnan referred to AF2 as “a stunning advance on the protein
folding problem” that “occurred decades” earlier than experts anticipated
and that “will fundamentally change biological research.”

SEE ALSO Artificial Neural Networks (1943), Machine Learning (1959), Deep Learning (1965)

OceanofPDF.com

Example illustration produced using a generative artificial intelligence tool. The text prompt
was “robot painting robot model at an easel photorealistic.”

DALL-E

2021
“IN THE PAST FEW YEARS,” WRITES AUTHOR Derrick Toomey in LectronicArt,
“we’ve witnessed an explosion of AI’s application in various fields, with the
world of digital art being no exception.” AI reshapes our notion of
creativity, he says, and provides an extended “canvas for human
imagination” while challenging the traditional boundaries between humans,
machines, and the “act of creation” itself.
One major development in the generation of art and images revolves
around DALL-E and similar AI applications that generate images from
textual descriptions, including other tools such as Midjourney and Stable
Diffusion. The OpenAI laboratory debuted DALL-E in 2021, and it uses
GPT (chat generative pre-trained transformer), a large language model, to
aid in the image-generating process, with training on text-image pairs from
the Internet. DALL-E also uses “diffusion” models that work by adding
noise (randomness) to training data and then reversing the process to
generate new samples.
Although these art-generating programs have the potential to reduce the
need for graphic artists, they can also function as a collaborator and source
of inspiration, while allowing artists to quickly test and curate artistic
concepts. DALL-E can also be used to edit existing images or expand them
beyond their original spatial borders. Of course, such applications raise
important issues to be resolved, such as determining who owns the rights to
the images and whether copyright infringement occurs when the programs
learn from the works of human artists and then produce works closely
resembling such art. The AI image-creation programs can also produce
realistic-looking fake imagery with the potential to deceive.
Nevertheless, the cultural implications of art-generating programs are
growing, and one wonders how our world will be changed when these

programs increasingly inspire and create more compelling art, movies,
interior designs, and virtual realities—and the programs train themselves to
produce new art forms based on the flood of their own imagery. In the
coming decades, will AI-generated art be a reflection of humanity’s history,
ideas, and dreams, or will AI tools provide a telescope for people seeking
entirely new visions and ways of thinking?

SEE ALSO Cybernetic Serendipity (1968), Computer Art and DeepDream (2015), ChatGPT (2022)

OceanofPDF.com

Despite the seeming intelligence and creativity of advanced chatbots and LLMs, linguist Emily
Bender and colleagues have referred to them as mere “stochastic parrots”—essentially
imitating text rather than understanding its meaning.

CHATGPT

2022
IN DECEMBER 2022, KEVIN ROOSE OF THE NEW York Times wrote “ChatGPT
is, quite simply, the best artificial intelligence chatbot ever released to the
general public.… ChatGPT feels different. Smarter. Weirder. More
flexible.”
ChatGPT (chat generative pre-trained transformer) is an AI application,
developed by the OpenAI laboratory, that converses with humans using
large language models (LLMs), employing artificial neural networks trained
on text collections such as Wikipedia, Internet bulletin boards, articles, and
software manuals. The invention of “transformer” algorithms and
architectures allows for massively parallel processing, to speed the
generation of such models.
As of January 2023, ChatGPT had more than 100 million users, making
it one of the fastest-growing consumer software applications in history.
Other LLM chatbots soon followed, such as Google’s Bard. These types of
chatbots can write natural prose on a seemingly endless variety of topics.
They can also write computer programs, generate poems and essays,
summarize or simplify texts, plan activities like vacations, explain scientific
concepts at multiple levels of difficulty or sophistication, and much more.
While impressive in their abilities, the use of these kinds of sophisticated
chatbots carries risks. For example, they can generate “hallucinations”
(plausible-sounding but inaccurate information), such as providing
references to published material that does not actually exist. They might
also be used by students to dishonestly complete school assignments,
provide instructions for how to create dangerous materials, generate spam,
spread incorrect information, and reduce the need for some jobs, such as
those involving creative writing and help desks.

Some researchers have referred to LLMs as mere stochastic, or
haphazard, “parrots,” reinforcing the notion that the LLMs don’t really
understand the meaning of their output. On the other hand, in 2023,
philosopher David Chalmers wrote “It seems entirely possible that within
the next decade, we’ll have robust [LLM] systems with senses,
embodiment, world models and self-models, recurrent processing, global
workspace, and unified goals.… It’s reasonable to have a significant
credence that we’ll have conscious LLM+s [extended LLMs] within a
decade.”

SEE ALSO Artificial Neural Network (1943), Natural Language Processing (1954), DALL-E (2021)

OceanofPDF.com

The thought processes of interconnected super-intelligent machines would be as alien to
humans as human thought processes are to a colony of wasps. Would such swarms of alien
entities always have humanity’s best interests in mind?

SLOWING THE AI RACE?

2023
IN MARCH 2023, THE FUTURE OF LIFE INSTITUTE (FLI)—an organization
devoted in part to reducing existential risks from advanced artificial
intelligence—published a letter calling for a pause on the development of
increasingly powerful AI systems, such as GPT (generative pre-trained
transformers) and large-language-model systems, like those used to power
the ChatGPT chatbot. The FLI letter emphasized the need to create plans for
ensuring AI safety, with possible government intervention, noting that
“Recent months have seen AI labs locked in an out-of-control race to
develop and deploy ever more powerful digital minds that no one—not
even their creators—can understand, predict, or reliably control.” The letterwriters also raised the possibility of AI triggering “a profound change in the
history of life on Earth,” with risks of job loss and AI-generated
propaganda, while creating challenges for humans to determine what is real
and fake, along with the concomitant civilization-wide loss of control
caused by “nonhuman minds” that eventually “outnumber, outsmart,” and
replace humans. Signatories to the letter included tech entrepreneur Elon
Musk and historian Yuval Noah Harari.
On the other hand, others have argued that the benefits of AI to human
progress, creativity, and discovery are so great that implementing
government moratoriums on AI development is not practical or wise. Of
course, overreliance on AI technology has clear risks. As one recent
example, in May 2023, it was discovered that a lawyer had relied on
ChatGPT to generate a legal brief that was filled with fake judicial opinions
and legal citations. Later, the lawyer explained to the court that he never
realized that AI chatbots could hallucinate and fabricate information.
Thinking further into the future, note that the “thought processes” of
interconnected super-intelligent machines would be as alien to humans as

human thought processes are to a colony of wasps. These alien swarms
could profoundly augment human intelligence, but would such entities
always have humanity’s best interests in mind?

SEE ALSO Ethics of AI (1976), “Call them Artificial Aliens” (2015), ChatGPT (2022)

OceanofPDF.com

NOTES AND REFERENCES
“Artificial intelligence is the next step in evolution, but it’s a different
step.… One artificially intelligent device can tell another not only
everything it knows in the sense that a human teacher can tell a
student some of what he knows, but it can tell another device
everything about its own design.… Basically the human mind is not
most like a god or most like a computer. It’s most like the mind of a
chimpanzee, and [designed] for getting along in the jungle or out in
the fields.”
—Edward Fredkin, quoted in Pamela McCorduck’s
Machines Who Think

I’ve compiled the following reference list that identifies some of the
material I used to research and write this book, and to provide information
on the quoted sources. As many readers are aware, Internet websites come
and go. Sometimes they change addresses or disappear. The website
addresses listed here provided valuable background information when this
book was written. Online sources such as Wikipedia (en.wikipedia.org) are
a valuable starting point for any quest such as this one, and I sometimes
used this site as a launchpad, along with many other websites, books, and
research papers.
If I have overlooked an interesting or pivotal moment associated with AI
that you feel has not been fully appreciated, please let me know about it.
Just visit my website (pickover.com), and send me an email explaining the

idea and how you feel it influenced the world. Perhaps future versions of
this book will include full-page entries on AI marvels such as: Roko’s
Basilisk, generative adversarial networks, neuromorphic computing,
Bayesian networks, Westworld (the TV series), WarGames (the 1983 film),
LSTM (long short-term memory) networks, and more. Finally, I thank my
book editors Meredith Hale and John Meils—along with Dennis Gordon,
Tom Erickson, Michael Perrone, Teja Krasek, and Paul Moskowitz—for
their comments and suggestions.

General Reading
Crevier, D., AI (New York: Basic Books, 1993).
Dormehl, L., Thinking Machines (New York: Tarcher, 2017).
McCorduck, P., Machines Who Think (Natick, MA: A. K. Peters, 2004).
Nilsson, N., The Quest for Artificial Intelligence (New York: Cambridge
University Press, 2010).
Riskin, J., The Restless Clock (Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
2016).
Truitt, E., Medieval Robots (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania
Press, 2015).
Walsh, T., Machines That Think (London: C. Hurst & Co., 2017).

Sources
Introduction
Chalmers, D., “Could a Large Language Model Be Conscious?”
arXiv:2303.07103, March 4, 2023, https://tinyurl.com/yw8jrjdr
Hambling, D., “Lethal logic,” New Scientist, vol. 236, no. 3151, p. 22, Nov.
11–17, 2017.
Peterson, J., “ChatGPT and the Dawn of Computerized Hyper-Intelligence |
Brian Roemmele | EP 357,” May 15, 2023, https://tinyurl.com
/mpzm9rhj
Reese, M., “Aliens, Very Strange Universes and Brexit—Martin Rees
Q&A,” The Conversation, April 3, 2017, http://tinyurl.com/mg3w6ez
Truitt, E., Medieval Robots (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania
Press, 2015).

“Visual Trick Has AI Mistake Turtle for Gun,” New Scientist, vol. 236, no.
3151, p. 19, November 11–17, 2017.
c. 400 BCE: Talos
Haughton, B., Hidden History: Lost Civilizations, Secret Knowledge, and
Ancient Mysteries (Franklin Lakes, NJ: New Page Books, 2007).
c. 250 BCE: Ktesibios’s Water Clock
Dormehl, L., Thinking Machines (New York: Tarcher, 2017).
c. 190 BCE: Abacus
Ewalt, D., “No. 2 The Abacus,” Forbes, August 30, 2005, http://tinyurl.com
/yabaocr5
Krimmel, J., “Artificial Intelligence Started with the Calendar and Abacus,”
2017, https://tinyurl.com/y5tnoxbl
c. 125 BCE: Antikythera Mechanism
Garnham, A., Artificial Intelligence: An Introduction (London: Routledge,
1988).
Marchant, J., “The Antikythera Mechanism: Quest to Decode the Secret of
the 2,000-Year-Old Computer,” March 11, 2009, http://tinyurl.com
/ca8ory
1206: Al-Jazari’s Automata
Hill, D., Studies in Medieval Islamic Technology, ed. D. A. King
(Aldershot, Great Britain: Ashgate, 1998).
c. 1220: Lancelot’s Copper Knights
Riskin, J., The Restless Clock (Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
2016).
Truitt, E., Medieval Robots (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania
Press, 2015).
c. 1300: Hesdin Mechanical Park
Bedini, S., “The Role of Automata in the History of Technology,”
Technology and Culture, vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 24–42, 1964.
Lightsey, S., Manmade Marvels in Medieval Cultures and Literature (New
York: Palgrave, 2007).
c. 1305: Ramon Llull’s Ars Magna
Dalakov, G., “Ramon Llull,” http://tinyurl.com/ybp8rz28

Gray, J., “‘Let us Calculate!’: Leibniz, Llull, and the Computational
Imagination,” http://tinyurl.com/h2xjn7j
Gardner, M., Logic Machines and Diagrams (New York: McGraw-Hill,
1958).
Madej, K., Interactivity, Collaboration, and Authoring in Social Media
(New York: Springer, 2016).
Nilsson, N., The Quest for Artificial Intelligence (New York: Cambridge
University Press, 2010).
1352: Religious Automata
Coe, F., The World and Its People, Book V, Modern Europe, ed. L. Dunton
(New York: Silver, Burdett, 1896).
Fraser, J., Time, the Familiar Stranger (Amherst: University of
Massachusetts Press, 1987).
c. 1495: Leonardo da Vinci’s Robot Knight
Phillips, C., and S. Priwer, The Everything Da Vinci Book (Avon, MA:
Adams Media, 2006).
Rosheim, M., Leonardo’s Lost Robots (New York: Springer, 2006).
1580: Golem
Blech, B., “Stephen Hawking’s Worst Nightmare? Golem 2.0” (tagline),
The Forward, January 4, 2015, http://tinyurl.com/yats534k
1651: Hobbes’s Leviathan
Dyson, G., Darwin among the Machines (New York: Basic Books, 1997).
1714: The Consciousness Mill
Bostrom, N., “The Simulation Argument: Why the Probability that You Are
Living in a Matrix is Quite High.” Times Higher Education Supplement,
May 16, 2003, http://tinyurl.com/y8qorjcf
Moravec, H., “Robot Children of the Mind.” In David Jay Brown’s
Conversations on the Edge of the Apocalypse (New York: Palgrave,
2005).
1726: Lagado Book-Writing Engine
Weiss, E., “Jonathan Swift’s Computing Invention.” Annals of the History
of Computing, vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 164–165, 1985.
1738: de Vaucanson’s Duck Automaton

Glimcher, P., Decisions, Uncertainty, and the Brain: The Science of
Neuroeconomics. (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2003).
Riskin, J., “The Defecating Duck, or, the Ambiguous Origins of Artificial
Life.” Critical Inquiry, vol. 29, no. 4, pp. 599–633, 2003.
1770: Mechanical Turk
Morton, E., “Object of Intrigue: The Turk, a Mechanical Chess Player that
Unsettled the World.” August 18, 2015, http://tinyurl.com/y72aqfep
1774: Jaquet-Droz Automata
Lorrain, J., Monsieur De Phocas (trans. F. Amery) (Sawtry,
Cambridgeshire, UK: Dedalus, 1994).
Riskin, J., The Restless Clock (Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
2016).
1818: Frankenstein
D’Addario, D., “The Artificial Intelligence Gap Is Getting Narrower,” Time,
October 10, 2017, http://tinyurl.com/y8g5bu5o
Gallo, P., “Are We Creating a New Frankenstein?” Forbes, March 17,
2017, http://tinyurl.com/ycsdr6gt
1821: Computational Creativity
Colton, S., and G. Wiggins, “Computational Creativity: The Final
Frontier?” In Proceedings of the 20th European Conference on Artificial
Intelligence, 2012.
1854: Boolean Algebra
Titcomb, J., “Who is George Boole and Why is He Important?” The
Telegraph, November 2, 2015, http://tinyurl.com/yb25t8ft
1863: “Darwin among the Machines”
Wiener, N., “The Machine Age,” 1949 unpublished essay for the New York
Times, http://tinyurl.com/ybbpeydo
1868: The Steam Man of the Prairies
Liptak, A., “Edward Ellis and the Steam Man of the Prairie,” Kirkus,
November 6, 2015, http://tinyurl.com/yadhxn7t
1907: Tik-Tok
Abrahm, P., and S. Kenter, “Tik-Tok and the Three Laws of Robotics,”
Science Fiction Studies, vol. 5, pt. 1, March 1978, http://tinyurl.com

/ybm6qv2y
Goody, A., Technology, Literature and Culture (Malden, MA: Polity Press,
2011).
1920: Rossum’s Universal Robots
Floridi, L., Philosophy and Computing (New York: Taylor & Francis,
2002).
Stefoff, R., Robots (Tarrytown, NY: Marshall Cavendish Benchmark,
2008).
1927: Metropolis
Lombardo, T., Contemporary Futurist Thought (Bloomington, IN:
AuthorHouse, 2008.)
1942: Asimov’s Three Laws of Robotics
Markoff, J., “Technology: A Celebration of Isaac Asimov,” New York Times,
April 12, 1992, http://tinyurl.com/y9gevq6t
1943: Artificial Neural Networks
Lewis-Kraus, G., “The Great A.I. Awakening,” New York Times Magazine,
December 14, 2016, http://tinyurl.com/gue4pdh
1950: The Human Use of Human Beings
Crevier, D., AI (New York: Basic Books, 1993).
Wiener, N., The Human Use of Human Beings (London: Eyre &
Spottiswoode, 1950).
1952: Speech Recognition
“Now We’re Talking: How Voice Technology is Transforming Computing,”
The Economist, January 7, 2017, http://tinyurl.com/yaedcvfg
1954: Natural Language Processing
“701 Translator,” IBM Press Release, January 8, 1954, http://tinyurl.com
/y7lwblng
1956: Dartmouth AI Workshop
Dormehl, L., Thinking Machines (New York: Tarcher, 2017).
McCorduck, P., Machines Who Think (Natick, MA: A. K. Peters, 2004).
1957: Transhumanism
Huxley, J., New Bottles for New Wine (London: Chatto & Windus, 1957).

Istvan, Z., “The Morality of Artificial Intelligence and the Three Laws of
Transhumanism,” Huffington Post, http://tinyurl.com/ycpx9bwa
Pickover, C., A Beginner’s Guide to Immortality (New York: Thunder’s
Mouth Press, 2007).
1959: Knowledge Representation and Reasoning
Nilsson, N., The Quest for Artificial Intelligence (New York: Cambridge
University Press, 2010).
1964: ELIZA Psychotherapist
Weizenbaum, J., “ELIZA—A Computer Program for the Study of Natural
Language Communication Between Man and Machine,”
Communications of the ACM, vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 36–45, 1966.
1964: Face Recognition
West, J., “A Brief History of Face Recognition,” http://tinyurl.com
/y8wdqsbd
1965: Expert Systems
Dormehl, L., Thinking Machines (New York: Tarcher, 2017).
1965: Fuzzy Logic
Carter, J., “What is ‘Fuzzy Logic’?” Scientific American, http://tinyurl.com
/yd24gngp
1965: Deep Learning
Fain, J., “A Primer on Deep Learning,” Forbes, December 18, 2017, http://
tinyurl.com/ybwt9qp3
1967: Living in a Simulation
Davies, P., “A Brief History of the Multiverse,” New York Times, 2003,
http://tinyurl.com/y8fodeoy.
Koebler, J., “Is the Universe a Giant Computer Simulation?” http://tinyurl
.com/y9lluy7a
Reese, M., “In the Matrix,” http://tinyurl.com/y9h6fjyx.
1972: Paranoid PARRY
Wilks, Y., and R. Catizone, “Human-Computer Conversation,”
arXiv:cs/9906027, June 1999, http://tinyurl.com/y7erxtxm
1975: Genetic Algorithms

Copeland, J., The Essential Turing (New York: Oxford University Press,
2004).
Dormehl, L., Thinking Machines (New York: Tarcher, 2017).
1979: Backgammon Champion Defeated
Crevier, D., AI (New York: Basic Books, 1993).
1982: Blade Runner
Guga, J., “Cyborg Tales: The Reinvention of the Human in the Information
Age,” in Beyond Artificial Intelligence (New York: Springer, 2015).
Littman, G., “What’s Wrong with Building Replicants?” in The Culture and
Philosophy of Ridley Scott (Lanham, MD: Lexington).
1984: Autonomous Vehicles
Lipson, H., and M. Kurman, Driverless (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press,
2016).
1986: Swarm Intelligence
Jonas, David, and Doris Jonas, Other Senses, Other Worlds (New York:
Stein and Day, 1976).
1988: Moravec’s Paradox
Elliott, L., “Robots Will Not Lead to Fewer Jobs—But the Hollowing Out
of the Middle Class.” The Guardian, August 20, 2017, http://tinyurl.com
/y7dnhtpt
Moravec, H., Mind Children (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press,
1988).
Pinker, S., The Language Instinct (New York: William Morrow, 1994).
1990: “Elephants Don’t Play Chess”
Brooks, R., “Elephants Don’t Play Chess,” Robotics and Autonomous
Systems, vol. 6, pp. 139–159, 1990.
Shasha, D., and C. Lazere, Natural Computing (New York: Norton, 2010).
1993: Leakproof “AI Box”
Readers may wish to become familiar with the concept of Roko’s Basilisk, a
thought experiment in which future AI systems retaliate against people
who did not bring the AI systems into existence. In many versions of
Roko’s Basilisk, AIs retroactively punish people by torturing
simulations of these people.

Vinge, V., “The Coming Technological Singularity.” VISION-21
Symposium, March 30–31, 1993.
1994: Checkers and AI
Madrigal, A., “How Checkers Was Solved.” The Atlantic, July 19, 2017,
http://tinyurl.com/y9pf9nyd
1997: Deep Blue Defeats Chess Champion
Webermay, B., “Swift and Slashing, Computer Topples Kasparov.” May 12,
1997, http://tinyurl.com/yckh6xko
2000: ASIMO and Friends
Wiener, N., God and Golem (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1964).
2001: Spielberg’s A.I. Artificial Intelligence
Gordon, A., Empire of Dreams: The Science Fiction and Fantasy Films of
Steven Spielberg (New York: Rowman & Littlefield, 2007).
2002: Roomba
Reel, M., “How the Roomba Was Realized.” Bloomberg, October 6, 2003,
http://tinyurl.com/yd4epat4
2002: Solving the Game of Awari
Romein, J., and H. Bal, “Awari is Solved.” ICGA Journal, September 2002,
pp. 162–165.
2003: Paperclip Maximizer Catastrophe
It should be noted that AI researcher Eliezer Yudkowsky (b. 1979) has said
that the paperclip maximizer idea may have originated with him. See the
podcast “Waking Up with Sam Harris #116—AI: Racing Toward the
Brink” (with Eliezer Yudkowsky).
2006: Quackle’s Scrabble Win
Anderson, M., “Data Mining Scrabble.” IEEE Spectrum, vol. 49, no. 1, p.
80.
2011: Watson on Jeopardy!
Jennings, K., “My Puny Human Brain.” Slate, Feb. 16, 2011, http://tinyurl
.com/86xbqfq
2015: “Call Them Artificial Aliens”
Kelly, K., “Call them Artificial Aliens,” in Brockman, J., ed., What to Think
About Machines That Think (New York: Harper, 2015).

2015: AI on Mars
Fecht, S., “The Curiosity Rover and Other Spacecraft Are Learning to
Think for Themselves.” Popular Science, June 21, 2017, https://tinyurl
.com/mtt82v9z
Koren, M., “The Mars Robot Making Decisions On Its Own,” The Atlantic,
June 23, 2017, http://tinyurl.com/y8s8alz6
2016: AlphaGo Go Champion
Chan, D., “The AI That has Nothing to Learn from Humans.” The Atlantic,
October 20, 2017. http://tinyurl.com/y7ucmuzo
Ito, J., and J. How, Whiplash: How to Survive Our Faster Future (New
York: Grand Central Publishing, 2016).
2018: Adversarial Patches
Brown, T., et al., “Adversarial Patch,” 31st Conference on Neural
Information Processing Systems (NIPS), Long Beach, CA, 2017.
2019: AI Death Predictor
Avati, A., et al., “Improving Palliative Care with Deep Learning,” IEEE
International Conference on Bioinformatics and Biomedicine (BIBM),
Kansas City, MO, pp. 311–316, 2017.
Mukherjee, S., “This Cat Sensed Death. What if Computers Could, Too?”
New York Times, January 3, 2018, http://tinyurl.com/yajko6pv
Rajkomar, A., et al., “Scalable and accurate deep learning with electronic
health records,” npj Digital Medicine, vol. 1, no. 18, 2018, http://tinyurl
.com/ych74oe5
2020: AlphaFold 2
AlphaFold Team, “AlphaFold: A Solution to a 50-Year-Old Grand
Challenge in Biology,” November 30, 2020, https://tinyurl.com
/yms6yanv
2021: DALL-E
Toomey, D., “Exploring OpenAI’s DALL-E: The Future of Digital Art?”
LectronicArt, June 18, 2023, https://tinyurl.com/a9xnzdjp
2022: ChatGPT
Bender, E., et al., “On the Dangers of Stochastic Parrots: Can Language
Models Be Too Big?” In Proceedings of the 2021 ACM Conference on

Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency (FAccT ’21), pp. 610–623,
2021.
Chalmers, D., “Could a Large Language Model Be Conscious?”
arXiv:2303.07103, March 4, 2023, https://tinyurl.com/yw8jrjdr
Roose, K., “The Brilliance and Weirdness of ChatGPT,” New York Times,
December 5, 2022, https://tinyurl.com/2fhsax5p
2023: Slowing the AI Race?
Future of Life Institute, “Pause Giant AI Experiments: An Open Letter,”
March 22, 2023, https://tinyurl.com/48csnvde

OceanofPDF.com

IMAGE CREDITS
Because several of the old and rare illustrations shown in this book were
difficult to acquire in a clean and legible form, I have sometimes taken the
liberty to apply image-processing techniques to remove dirt and scratches,
enhance faded portions, and occasionally add a slight coloration to a blackand-white figure in order to highlight details or to make an image more
compelling. I hope historical purists will forgive these slight artistic touches
and understand that my goal was to create an attractive book that is
aesthetically interesting for a wide audience. My fascination for the
incredible depth and diversity of topics revolving around AI should be
evident through the photographs and drawings.
Alamy: The Advertising Archives: 72; David Fettes: 154; richterfoto: 152; Science Photo Library:
128
Courtesy of International Business Machines Corporation, © (1962) International Business
Machines Corporation: 88
Courtesy of Universal Studios Licensing LLC: 126
Cyclopaedia: Abraham Rees: 6
Gallica: Robert de Boron: 14; Guillaume de Machaut: 16
Internet Archive: J.J. Grandville: 30; Ramon Llull: 18
iStock/Getty Images Plus: ArtemisDiana: 216; ChubarovY: 194 (banana); GlobalP: 204; in-future:
194 (wood); Kickimages: 138; Paulbr: 158; Vera Petruk: 198; PhonlamaiPhoto: 190; JIRAROJ
PRADITCHAROENKUL: 76; Rouzes: 110; sergeyryzhov: 8; Soifer: 192; Vladimir Timofeev: 156;
RichLegg/E+: 206
Getty: Kyodo News/Contributor: 168; The Washington Post/Contributor: 180; Westend61: 82
Google Research Team: 194 (patch)
Library of Congress: Charles Verschuuren: 64
New York World’s Fair 1939-1940 records, Manuscripts and Archives Division, The New York
Public Library/Mansfield Memorial Museum: 68

Scientific American: 136
Shutterstock: 7th Son Studio: 146; Charles Adams: 124; Berke: 170; Black Moon: 44; gualtiero
boffi: 122; Willyam Bradberry: 48; camilla: 178; Chesky: 142; Esteban De Armas: 74; Digital Storm:
184; Dmitry Elagin: 52; Leonid Eremeychuk: 134; Evannovostro: 114; Everett Historical: 78; Al
Fenn/The LIFE Picture Collection: 90; Ilterriorm: 166; Eugene Ivanov: 24; Ala Khviasechka: xvi;
Anastasiia Kucherenko: 120; MicroOne: 86; Morphart Creation: 26; MossStudio: 98; NadyaEugene:
150; Nor Gal: 164; Ociacia: 96; Phonlamai Photo: 60, 84, 108; Photobank gallery: 46;
PHOTOCREO/Michal Bednarek: 102; Saran_Poroong: 188; Glenn Price: 176; Quality Stock Arts:
174; R-Type: 130; ra2studio: 140; Robsonphoto: 212; Benjavisa Ruangvaree: 28; Tatiana Shepeleva:
100; Shutterstock.AI: 202; Studio Molekuul: 200; Travel mania: 148; Trial: 172; Tsuneomp: 144;
videodoctor: 118; vs148: vi
Stanford University: Chuck Painter: 92
United States Patent and Trademark Office: 56, 62, 106, 112, 160, 196
Wikimedia: Rocky Acosta: 80; Ismail al-Jazari/MFA Boston: 12; Aquarius70: 162; Edward S.
Ellis/Cover of “Steam Man of the Prairies”: 50; Emesee/Electric Sheep: 40; David Iliff: 20;
Jastrow/Ludovisi Collection: 4; Erik Möller, Mensch-Erfinder-Genie exhibit, Berlin: 22; Jessica
Mullen: 182; NASA: 94, 132, 136; John R. Neill: 58; New York World’s Fair 1939: 70; Joseph
Racknitz/Humboldt University Library: 34; Rama: 36; William Bruce Ellis Ranken/Christie’s: 104;
SRI International: 116; Sybil Tawse/“Bulfinch’s Mythology”: 2; Robert Toombs/New York Five Cent
Library: 54; Carston Ullrich: 42; Mogi Vicentini: 10; Theodore Von Holst: 38; Jiuguang Wang: 66

OceanofPDF.com

ABOUT THE AUTHOR

Clifford A. Pickover is a prolific author, having published more than fifty
books, translated into over a dozen languages, on topics ranging from
science and mathematics to religion, art, and history. He received his PhD
degree from Yale University, has been granted more than 800 US patents,
and has more than 180,000 X (formerly Twitter) followers. His patents are
owned by a wide variety of companies, including IBM, eBay, Google,
Twitter, Yahoo!, PayPal, LinkedIn, and many more. His website,
Pickover.com, has had millions of visitors.

When describing his work, creativity, and sense of wonder, the New
York Times wrote, “Pickover contemplates realms beyond our known
reality.” According to WIRED, “Bucky Fuller thought big, Arthur C. Clarke
thinks big, but Cliff Pickover outdoes them both.” The Christian Science
Monitor proclaimed: “Pickover inspires a new generation of da Vincis to
build unknown flying machines and create new Mona Lisas.”

OceanofPDF.com

