Profitable
Forex Trading
Using High & Low Risk
Strategies
Jim Brown
Copyright © 2024 JAGfx.com
All rights reserved.

DISCLAIMER
This book is designed to provide information that the author believes to be accurate on the
subject matter it covers, but it is sold with the understanding that neither the author nor the
publisher is offering individualised advice tailored to any specific portfolio or to any individual’s
particular needs or rendering investment advice or other professional services such as legal
accounting advice. Professional services should be sought if one needs expert assistance in
areas that include investment, legal, and accounting advice. There is a substantial risk of loss
associated with trading these markets. Losses can and will occur. No system or methodology
has ever been developed that can guarantee profits or ensure freedom from losses. No
representation or implication is being made that using this information will generate profits or
ensure freedom from losses. The trade examples provided were hypothetical only and were
prepared with the benefit of hindsight. No hypothetical trading record can completely account
for the impact of financial risk in actual live trading. Additionally, this book is not intended to
serve as the basis for any financial decisions, as a recommendation of a specific trading
system. Your personal financial circumstances must be considered carefully before investing or
spending money. No warranty is made with respect to the accuracy or completeness of the
information contained herein, and both the author and the publisher specifically disclaim any
responsibility for any liability, loss or risk, personal or otherwise, which is incurred as a
consequence, directly or indirectly, of the use and application of any of the contents of this
book.

JIM’S BOOKS
Are available on: Amazon, iBooks, Barnes & Noble, Kobo, Baker &
Taylor, Inktera, Playster, Scribd, Tolino, 24Symbols, Overdrive

CONNECT WITH THE AUTHOR
Over 20k followers across a variety of platforms including, but not
limited to:
JAGFX CLOSED FACEBOOK GROUP
http://bit.ly/jagfx-facebook
(No joining fees or spamming – just good ol’ Forex
discussions)
TELEGRAM
Channel
http://bit.ly/jagfx-telegram-channel
Discussion Group
http://bit.ly/jagfx-discussion-group
YOUTUBE (SINCE 2009)
http://bit.ly/youtube-jagfx
TWITTER
http://bit.ly/jagfx-twitter
JAGfx RECOMMENDED RESOURCES
Brokers | Expert Advisors (EAs/Trading Robots | Prop Firms | Trading
Simulator | TradingView | Trading Mindset
https://jagfx.com/resources
JAGfx RECOMMENDED PODCASTS & FACEBOOK GROUPS
https://www.jagfx.com/general-1-1
E admin@jagfx.com
W https://jagfx.com/

CONTENTS
PREFACE
INTRODUCTION
FOREX TRADING BASICS
FOREX TRADING TRUTHS
LEVERAGE EXPLAINED
CORRELATION
FURTHER OBSERVATIONS
FURTHER THOUGHTS
REALISTIC RETURNS
TRADING OTHER PEOPLE’S MONEY
CONTINUING WITH MY THOUGHTS
BROKERS
TECHNICAL INDICATORS
12.1 Moving Averages (MAs)
12.2 Bollinger Bands
12.3 QMP Filter
12.4 MACD Platinum
TRADING THOUGHTS
TRADING IDEAS
STOP LOSSES
ACTUAL TRADING IDEAS
SUPPORT AND RESISTANCE
ROUND NUMBERS
EXTREME LEVELS
DIVERGENCE
TRENDLINE BREAKS
FURTHER TRADING IDEAS
TRADE MANAGEMENT IDEAS
SUMMARY OF TRADE ENTRIES
SUMMARY OF TRADE MANAGEMENT TOOLS
TRADE ENTRY CONSIDERATIONS
26.1 Traditional
26.2 Loss Recovery

26.3 Hedging
26.4 Dollar Cost Averaging (DCA)
BONUS TRADING SYSTEM
A CHART SETUP I USE
CONCLUSION
DOWNLOADABLE PACKAGE TO ACCOMPANY PROFITABLE FOREX TRADING USING
HIGH & LOW RISK STRATEGIES

In this book, I've used a lighter background for the
occasional chart instead of my usual dark one. While I
generally prefer a dark background for analysis, this has
been done for image clarity
All images are also available in a .pdf in the download
package.

PREFACE
For those who can’t wait or don’t have the patience, there will be
information at the end of the book providing a link to subscribe and
access to the download package which will include the custom
indicators, templates, scripts and instructions - all that is required for
MT4, MT5 and TradingView. I mention this now because in my
previous books, I received many emails from readers asking me how
they could get access to the indicators before finishing the book,
despite the download link being listed in the book’s Table of Contents.
Some people are too impatient, or keen to get started. Take your time
folks, slow down and smell the roses as the markets aren’t going
anywhere.
You will also find a document in the download called ‘Read This First.’
There is a reason it has that title. Even if you are an experienced trader,
I would suggest that you also read this document. You would be
surprised at the number of questions I receive from readers with the
answer they are looking for in that document I have learned from some
mistakes I made in my previous books where I assumed certain things
from my readers. Hopefully, this book will go into a little more detail and
explain things better.
I am also assuming that the reader has some basic knowledge of Forex
trading. This was mentioned in the description of the book prior to
purchase, to ensure that potential buyers are aware of this requirement.
If not, then I suggest you do some research or, you can always read my
first book, Forex Trading: The Basics Explained in Simple Terms.
This book was written in 2016 and other than some statistics, the
information is still very relevant to this date. Not much changes in this
industry, and this particular book is exactly like the title suggests, Forex
trading explained in very simple terms. Some readers have suggested

it is too basic and that the information can be sourced for free over the
internet, and I get that.
However the point was to collate all the information in one place and
really break it down for the complete beginner. The book has received
some great reviews, so there must be some decent content in it. By
reading it as a beginner, you would certainly have enough knowledge
and confidence to start your own Forex trading journey. So, I won’t be
going into the basics in this book; and everything will be explained in
fairly clear and simple terms.
While I appreciate thoughtful questions, I encourage you to explore
basic research before asking. If a question is easily answered through
a simple internet search, my response is likely to include humour and
sarcasm. If you are still having issues after this, then I am here to help,
via email or any of the JAGfx social media platforms.
Throughout this book, I may repeat myself at times. Generally, there is
a reason I do this as it normally refers to something I consider important
or relevant enough that repeating it helps get the message across. I
also appreciate that English may not be the first language of some
readers. By making the same point in slightly different variations, it may
assist with the understanding.

INTRODUCTION
My name is Jim Brown and I am a full time foreign exchange trader,
commonly known as a Forex or FX trader. I am Australian but I am
currently living in various countries across South East Asia and I have
also written three other books on Forex Trading:
1. Forex Trading, The Basics Explained in Simple Terms
2. MT4/MT5 and TradingView High Probability Forex Trading Method
3. Trading Forex with Divergence on MT4/MT5 and TradingView
These books have generally been well received by traders who have
read them, ranging from beginners to more experienced traders. There
is no fluff in these books, and everything is laid out nice and clear for
the reader. This book will be no different.
I began looking at trading the Forex markets in early 2002, which was
considered the early days for online retail traders. Banks, institutions
and very wealthy individuals had been trading the currency markets for
a few years before this. Modern Forex trading began in the early 1970s
when the US allowed the United States dollar to float freely in the Forex
market. However, Forex trading has been around since the existence of
the first coins coming into circulation, in some form or another.
In this book, other than me going on a rant every now and then, I will
share my thoughts on the current situation of trading the Forex market. I
will also provide you with different trading ideas. Similar to my previous
books, I am only providing a framework, or a few trading ideas,
encouraging the reader to take these ideas and make them their own.
Experienced traders understand there are thousands of ways to trade
the markets. The trick is to find something that works for you and that
you are comfortable with. Once you are at the stage where you are
consistently overall profitable, and with drawdown under control, then
it’s simply a matter of scaling up to your desired level.

Ideally you want trading your system to become routine and have the
confidence to trade your system without hesitation or doubt. It can be
very rewarding if you get this right, but it does require work on your
part. Even though it can look easy at times, there will be times where
you will be pulling your hair out and wondering what went wrong as the
mind games set in. Trust me on this.
I am going to cover some of the basics first and clarify a few things.
Even though I did state that this book was aimed at intermediate and
higher level Forex traders, I know some beginner Forex traders will
read this, which will lead to questions I often receive, so I’ll try to cover
these questions before they are asked.
One thing I should clarify is that there is no central or physical exchange
for the Forex market. For example, if you were trading XYZ stock on the
New York Stock Exchange (NYSE), then no matter which broker you
were using to trade the XYZ stock, the prices would be exactly the
same across all brokers as controlled by the NYSE. This is not
necessarily the case with the Forex markets, as there can be slight
variations to price on the same pair across different brokers. To keep it
simple, brokers obtain their liquidity (funds to trade) from various
sources. Since there is no central exchange controlling prices, these
prices can vary slightly at times. Having said that, there shouldn’t be a
huge difference in pricing across reputable brokers, perhaps a pip or
two at most.
This brings me to my next point. The vast majority of technical
indicators used on charts use a mathematical formula based on
historical data (pricing), and as pricing can vary at times, this affects
the maths formula of the indicators. So what John may have on his
charts may vary slightly to Mary’s charts, even if both are looking at the
same pair on the same time frame using the same indicators, and this
could even be the case if they are both using the same broker. I’m
frequently asked questions like ‘my charts don’t look the same as
yours’ or ‘I didn’t get the same buy/sell signal as you’, and this
explains the reasons why.
Another thing I should mention about Forex brokers is that some use a
different start/end time for their trading. The majority of Forex brokers
these days use 5pm EST (New York) as their daily close time. This

would give you 5 candlesticks for the week, and others use midnight
GMT as their close time resulting in 6 candlesticks for the week, which
again would affect the look of some indicators; this is without
mentioning daylight saving adjustments twice a year for most brokers.
Ideally, if possible, choose a broker that bases its start/close time on
the NY EST to make things easier.
This may sound a little overwhelming and confusing, but the easiest
way around this is to use the same platform for all your analysis and not
worry about what other traders are seeing or doing. Pick one and stick
with it to be consistent over the long term. It doesn’t matter if you do
your analysis on one platform and trade from another platform, as long
as you use the same one for all of your analysis. Sometimes you will get
a worse trade fill than me or another trader, but other times you will get
a better trade fill than me or another trader. It tends to work out
reasonably even over the long term. Trade what you see and not what
others are seeing.
And some background information; it is believed the first generation of
Forex online trading platforms appeared sometime in 1996. I started
my journey a few years later and around the same time Metaquotes
came on the scene. This company is responsible for the development
of the very popular Metatrader platforms, MT4 and MT5. I can recall
trading off their very clunky MT3 platform before MT4 was released in
2005, with MT5 being released in 2010. In these early days, a good
spread on pairs like the EUR/USD and USD/JPY was around 3 pips,
with spreads on the GBP/USD and AUD/USD being anywhere from 5
to 6 pips. Things have certainly changed.
I am by no means claiming to be an expert in this field, but I do have a
lot of experience and have seen many different types of markets and all
the fads/marketing hype/scams etc., that seem to be fairly
commonplace in most trading communities. I do believe I can offer you,
the reader, some knowledge by sharing my experiences in this field,
which will hopefully give you a better understanding of things and also
get you thinking a little differently to other traders out there. More on this
will be discussed later in the book.
Throughout this book, you will find links to various websites and articles
that will relate to something that I have briefly touched on. You can go

to these websites if you would like to gain further knowledge on
something that may be of interest to you. My knowledge on some
subjects mentioned is limited so here I rely on, what I believe, smarter
people than me explaining the subject in a more in depth and technical
way. From my experience of interacting with my previous readers and
running a fairly large online support group, I understand that some
people want to know what’s ‘under the hood’, and love to get deep and
dirty. Hopefully these links will scratch that itch.

1
FOREX TRADING BASICS
First up, for those not quite familiar with Forex trading, I will give you a
very brief rundown of what it is and how it works. However, most of this
information is freely available on the internet. There is an abundance of
information out there on this subject, which can be a little overwhelming
for those of you new to this industry. As previously mentioned, you can
always check out my first book, ‘Forex Trading: The Basics
Explained in Simple Terms’.
(https://www.amazon.com/dp/1535198567/)
Forex, what does that mean? It simply means Foreign Exchange. You
may also hear it called the Currency market, the FX market, the Spot
FX market etc., generally they are all the same. It is the buying and
selling of currencies from various countries across the entire world.
Forex trading is a little different to Stock trading. If you were trading
Stocks, you are only trading an individual instrument, e.g. Amazon
(AMZN). Forex trading is traded in what they call ‘pairs’. This means a
Forex instrument is made up of two currencies. Examples of this would
be the EUR/USD, which involves the Euro and the United States Dollar,
or the GBP/JPY, which involves the Great British Pound and the
Japanese Yen.
There are eight major currencies:
1. ​USD (United States Dollar)
2. ​EUR (Euro)
3. ​JPY (Japanese Yen)

4. ​GBP (Great British Pound)
5. ​CHF (Swiss Franc)
6. ​CAD (Canadian Dollar)
7. ​AUD (Australian Dollar)
8. ​NZD (New Zealand Dollar)
When trading Stocks, there is always the chance that an individual
company can go broke, or their Stock price falls heavily and possibly to
zero. This doesn’t happen often, but it has happened. Think of wellknown companies like MF Global, Radio Shack, Kodak, Texaco,
Chrysler, Enron, Toys R” Us and Blockbuster.
Whereas if you trade any of these eight currencies, there is very little
chance of any of them going bust or to zero. Their central banks or
governments wouldn’t allow it, and if they did, then those countries
would be in serious financial trouble. There are conspiracy theorists
that may have a different opinion, but I’ll let that slide for now as I am
being a realist here and going with what is commonly accepted today in
the current financial world.
There are other currencies like the Mexican Peso, the Singapore Dollar,
the Turkish Lira, the South African Rand, and many more. I won’t cover
them all as different brokers offer different pairs to trade. These can be
a little more volatile at times due to government instability and other
various issues, so you have to be a little more careful when trading
these currencies.
These days, you can also include hybrid pairs like XAU/USD, which is
Gold and the US Dollar, or something like BTC/USD, which represents
Bitcoin and the US Dollar. There are plenty of instruments to trade on
most Forex platforms, so you won’t be lacking for choices. This
especially the case if you are trading on MT5 or TradingView.
Now I will go into some statistics regarding the popularity of both
individual currencies and currency pairs to give you an idea on what the
majority of traders are actually trading. Trading the EUR/USD accounts
for about 28% of the total market, which makes sense, as the United
States and Europe are two of the largest economies on the planet.

This is followed by USD/JPY with about 13% of the market share, then
the GBP/USD at about 11%. The list goes on with the AUD/USD at
6%, the USD/CAD at 5%, the USD/CHF at 5% and the NZD/USD at
4%. You will notice that all of these pairs involve the USD, which means
that it is the most heavily traded individual currency by far.
It is not until we look at the next pair on the list, which is the EUR/JPY
which accounts for about 4% of the market share that we move away
from the USD.

Figure 1 - Visualisation of these numbers.

If you look at individual currencies, you will see that the USD is involved
in over 72% of all transactions, with the Euro close to 40% and the
Japanese Yen at around 25% of all transactions.
How big is the Forex market? Absolutely huge! Many times larger than
all the other financial markets combined. There are some quoted
figures stating the Forex market trades several trillion dollars a day,
which is probably not that far off the mark. It is also a 24/5 market,
which means it opens early Monday morning in New Zealand and then
closes late on a Friday afternoon in New York, therefore it is a 24hr

market for about 5.5 days of the week, closing for the weekend only.
As mentioned, it is important to understand that there is no Central
Exchange that controls Forex pricing. Depending on what liquidity
provider your broker uses, there may be a slight difference between
your quoted price for the EUR/USD compared to my quoted price for
the EUR/USD. Generally, these should be fairly close most of the time
when legitimate brokers are concerned, but it is something to be aware
of.
The majority of Forex trading is conducted by the Interbank Market,
which is basically the ‘big boys and girls’ of the financial world. I won’t
go into too much detail here. To give you an idea of who the major
players are, they include the likes of Citicorp, JP Morgan Chase,
Deutsche Bank and HSBC. There are also many other banks and
Hedge Funds involved, and further information can be found on
Investopedia (https://bit.ly/42jysKI).
A big part of what affects the different currencies is inflation and the
Central Bank interest rates for the different countries. Understanding
the fundamentals behind the Forex market is not my strong point, so
later in the book I will link various articles that offer a better explanation.
It is not really necessary to deep dive into this, but having a basic
understanding will certainly help your trading so you are not caught with
your ‘pants down’ when there is an interest rate change that affects the
Forex pair/s you are trading.

2
FOREX TRADING TRUTHS
Here’s a few more statistics around the Forex trading world. Most of
these are common knowledge amongst traders, and even though the
numbers themselves may not be exact, they are close enough to give
you an idea of where most traders are at.
The big number thrown around is that 90% to 95% of traders fail. But
according to statistics from brokers, about 75% of traders are overall
losers, and about 25% are overall break even or small winners, with a
tiny percentage being overall consistently profitable. So, I guess the 90
to 95% figure is not too far off the mark. Another interesting statistic
from brokers is that 65% of traders actually choose the correct trade
direction when they enter a trade. So that tells me that even though the
majority of traders get trade direction right, they still somehow tend to
mess up their trade management. Which is not surprising, as I’ve
always been of the opinion that it’s not the trade entry that is so
important or the hard part, but more how you manage the trade once
you are in it I’ll plant a seed here - If 90-95% of traders fail, then why
would you do the same as those traders?
I suggest you avoid comparing yourself to other traders. When you are
new to the trading world, you will no doubt see and hear about many
success stories, with all the flash cars, super models, mansions and the
like. Most of this is marketing hype or outright lying. Don’t be fooled by
the hype and the excitement. Be your own boss and ignore the outside
noise.
There are traders who also seek confirmation of their own trade setups,
where you will come across comments in groups, forums and channels
like ‘I’m thinking about going long on the EUR/USD 4hr chart. What do

you all think?’ I don’t find this helpful as I have the impression that the
trader is unsure of themself and looking for help and support from
others. You will also see traders ask questions like ‘Where do you think
the GBP is heading?’ which is normally accompanied by a chart
showing potential moves on that pair, covering all scenarios.
To me, they are over analysing, and ideally they should be looking at
what’s actually happening with the chart at the time, and then follow
their own trading rules. I appreciate that it can be difficult at times, but it
is better to trade what you see and not what you think and try to ignore
any strong bias you may have. That may sound a little contradictory,
but what I am referring to here is if you have a strong bias about market
direction, and your trading system is giving you an opposite bias where
you ignore those setups. For example, the USD/JPY may be in a big up
trend that has gone on for a long time and is now approaching a big
number (potential resistance level) and your trading system is giving
you a strong buy signal. In your mind you are thinking the USD/JPY
should go down (bias), but in fact you should be following your system
and taking the strong buy trade setup. Like I said, it is tough to follow
through on this at times.
Now the main reason people get into trading is for the money. There is
no other reason. Some may say it’s for the lifestyle, or to help their kids
out, or to donate to charities, which are all valid reasons, but to do any
of that, you need to make money – it’s as simple as that. You certainly
don’t have the intention of getting into trading to lose money, even
though most will at some point.
A big issue with people new to trading is that they think it is easy. Look,
it can be but there is a learning curve, and for some it will be a lifelong
journey. Some will succeed, but many won’t. You have to do the work
to succeed. There is no way of avoiding this. You will get what you put
into it, and the better option is to treat it like a business and not as a
hobby.
There are many reasons why traders fail or give up on Forex trading, or
any trading for that matter, and I will list a few here. Firstly,
unreasonable expectations. New traders think it will be easy and they
will double their account balance in a day, a week or a month. Or they
believe they can earn 5% a day, or some other pie-in-the-sky figure.

These are not realistic numbers, and even though they may be
achievable at times by a skilled trader, it may not be sustainable. A
good Forex trader would be happy with 4 to 6% return a month. Many
new traders are not, which doesn’t make any sense to me.
With the popularity of the internet, including the highly popular
Instagram social media site, there appears to be thousands of hugely
successful young traders flaunting their wealth and their trading
courses. I’m not picking on the young folk here, as they are probably
more inclined to use a few more social media sites than us slightly older
folk. Some are probably genuine, but my thoughts are that most aren’t.
If you see a screenshot of a Lamborghini, mansion, super model or a
trader with a laptop in a hammock under a palm tree, it is probably best
to avoid them. These aren’t limited to Instagram by any means, as the
sharks can be found just about anywhere. It used to be prevalent in
trading forums and a few specialised chat rooms in my early days, but
the internet has come a long way since then, and some of the scams
are very sophisticated, with the ‘dream’ generally being the big selling
point. Be careful when checking any of these out, do your due diligence
first before committing any money to them, as you would with any major
purchase or investment in life.
New traders often seek the perfect trading system, or the Holy Grail,
believing they will have very few losing trades. Again, it’s an unrealistic
expectation. A skilled trader can make a healthy profit from a trading
method that has a win rate ranging from 30% to 70%, which means
they could also be losing trades 30% to 70% of the time. This will be
difficult mentally, but if you have a proven system that has a history of
long-term profitability, then you should be able to navigate these losses
(drawdowns) and follow your system, confident that it will eventually get
you back into the winner’s circle.
Risk, or position sizing, is also a concern. In markets like Forex some
brokers will offer their clients extremely high leverage. In the early days,
this was commonplace, but most countries or regions have tightened
regulations around Forex and some other types of trading. In major
jurisdictions like the US, Canada, the UK, Europe, Australia etc.,
regulated brokers are limited to offering leverage ranging from 20:1 to
around 50:1, which is still reasonable. However, brokers outside of
these jurisdictions may offer leverage ranging from 100:1 up to possibly

1000:1.
The issue with some of these brokers is that if something does go
wrong, clients may not be as well protected as they would in the betterknown jurisdictions. So, you could lose your money and you may have
little recourse. This is one of the risks of choosing a broker based in a
jurisdiction that may not be adequately regulated by the relevant
financial government bodies in that country.

3
LEVERAGE EXPLAINED
If you are a little confused on what leverage is and how it affects your
trading, here’s a quick example: If your account balance was $1,000
and your risk was 2% on a trade and your broker offered leverage of
50:1, you would only lose a maximum of $20 on that trade. That is
assuming nothing unexpected like slippage occurs. If you had the same
$1,000 account and the same 2% risk on a trade, but this time your
account leverage was 500:1, the maximum potential loss on that trade
is still $20. Leverage has no bearing on your overall risk if you follow
your money management rules.
Why are there different leverage values, and what do they actually
do? They limit the size of the position you can enter. So, the lower the
leverage, like the 20:1, means something like with $1 you can control
(buy or sell) $20, whereas a leverage of 400:1, means that with $1 you
can control (buy or sell) $400. That is very simplistic but should give
you an idea of the general concept. When you take a position in the
Forex market, your broker will require a deposit from you. This is similar
to a safety deposit, like when you rent a car. This deposit is referred to
as the margin, or a margin requirement. The lower the leverage, the
higher the margin requirement will be.
Here is a basic example of this using the same account size, the same
Forex pair, the same trade setup and same trade size, but different
leverage requirements:
20:1 - the broker would require a margin (deposit) payment of $100
from the trader
200:1 - the broker would require a margin (deposit) payment of $10
from the trader

Once again, these are simplistic numbers to show the basic maths
behind it, as these numbers would vary from broker to broker.
However, you should be able to see by now, that the higher the
leverage the broker offers you, the less margin (deposit) required. This
means you can either open larger position sizes or you can open more
position sizes, and therefore possibly break any money management
(risk strategy) rules you have in place. As mentioned earlier, a skilled
trader with strict money management rules in place wouldn’t be
affected by the different leverage options available, other than possibly
being restricted on the number of trades they could take at any one
time.

4
CORRELATION
Correlation is also a risk factor to consider. With the United States
dollar (USD) having a significant role in the Forex market, when it has a
substantial move in either direction, the market as a whole tends to
move in sync with it. Another example may be that you are in multiple
trades involving the Great Britain pound (GBP), and big news comes
out of the UK about this currency, then all your GBP trades may be
affected. So, there is risk to consider on individual currency pairs and
also overall risk on the basket of pairs you are trading. If you would like
some further information on correlation between all the Forex pairs,
Mataf’s website (https://bit.ly/3HGqpyk) offers a good overview.
If you were looking to reduce your overall correlation, there are a few
options. You could trade all available pairs, but only trade the better
setups if there were multiple trade setups involving the same currency.
Or, you could trade all the setups, but reduce your risk percentage on
each trade, maintaining control over your overall risk percentage
Another option involves trading different pairs on different time frames,
diversifying the overall risk.
Then you could always look at reducing the number of pairs you trade. I
have already mentioned the eight main currencies, where you could
make up a watchlist of pairs that only use each currency once, twice or
three times. If you were to trade all pairs involving the eight currencies,
the total number of pairs would be twenty-eight.
Here is an example of a basket using each currency once:
1. ​EUR/USD
2. ​GBP/JPY
3. ​AUD/CHF

4. ​NZD/CAD
And here is a second example, where you could combine both to give
you a watchlist with eight pairs to trade:
1. ​EUR/GBP
2. ​USD/JPY
3. ​AUD/NZD
4. ​CAD/CHF

6

FURTHER OBSERVATIONS
As mentioned earlier, you as the trader, have to find a trading approach
that you are comfortable with. You need a trading system (or method)
with a set of specific rules that you would follow to execute and manage
your trades. Some traders may even have multiple trading systems,
each with its own set of rules. With countless ways to trade, reading
one of the well-known Market Wizards books demonstrates that top
traders interviewed all used different trading systems. What works for
one trader, may not necessarily work for another trader. The individual
trader must find something they are comfortable with and become good
at it. You can always ramp up as you either gain more confidence or
your account balance increases. It is common for new traders to
bounce from one system to another looking for that ‘perfect’ system that
doesn’t actually exist. This is often referred to as the shiny new object
syndrome, or a search for the Holy Grail.
I will discuss a few different trading systems in this book, but there are
plenty available, from the very basic free ones to the complicated and
highly priced options. Trading systems can be found across the
internet, but please be cautious of the scammers targeting new traders.
Just because someone is charging $3,000 for a course, it doesn’t
necessarily mean it is going to be a good course. Do your due
diligence, and feel free to reach out to me as I may be able to give you
my thoughts on your possible impending purchase. I may even save
you a few bucks!
There is a lot of marketing hype out there, especially in the last few
years where there appears to have been a shift away from the more
traditional retail way of trading, which was either technical analysis or
fundamental analysis. Technical analysis is the trading decisions based

on the charts and the use of various technical indicators like RSI,
Moving Averages, MACD etc. Whereas fundamental analysis is where
a trader bases their trading decisions on major news events like
interest rate news, employment numbers, CPI figures etc., or some
traders may use a combination of both.
Popular these days are Price Action (PA) trading, also known as
trading off the ‘naked charts’. This still uses charts to make trading
decisions, but generally there are very few, if any, technical indicators
attached to them, so the trader is looking at market structure. Many of
these traders believe they are trading like the big institutions or the
banks do, but I’m not so sure about that. But if it works for them, then
by all means continue to trade like this. You may hear this type of
trading referred to as SMC (smart money concepts), bank (or
institutional) trading or ICT (Inner Circle Trading), and you will hear
terms like order blocks, order flow, liquidity, imbalance,
support/resistance zones, major levels, big numbers etc., being
bantered around. Having said that, actual chart patterns, market
structure, candlestick trading etc., have been around for a long time.
However they now give them fancy names either to impress or for
marketing/hype purposes.
I use Technical Analysis for the majority of my trading. I am a chartist. I
have the sort of personality that likes clear and specific rules, so I know
exactly where to get into a trade and then how to manage that trade.
While some discretion is involved when I am trading manually, after so
many years of looking at charts I’ve developed an intuition for how the
markets move, often referred to a gut-feeling. I appreciate that the
fundamentals are important, but my understanding in that area is
limited, so it doesn’t influence my trading decision.
Though, I am very aware of any major news releases that may affect
my trading and will take them into consideration where I deem
necessary. Personally, I use the free Economic Calendar on the Forex
Factory website as it can be customised by filters to display the news
events and currencies that I believe are important to me. It also
displays events in my local time, which simplifies my trading routine.
You can use any news site you are comfortable with, but it is important
to be aware of the news, especially if you are trading on the lower time
frames.

There can be a real ‘Us versus Them’ mentality when it comes to
traders who use technical indicators and traders who don’t. Some
traders are adamant that all indicators are lagging and only show the
signal after price has already moved, and therefore are late in getting
into a trade, believing that indicators are useless and are a waste of
time. There is probably some truth to that statement, but there are
some good indicators out there, and they can be used in conjunction
with each other, which may in turn make them more efficient than if they
were used as a standalone indicator. Most indicators are based on a
mathematical formula with figures taken from previous price action, so
they give the impression of predicting future moves in price, especially
when looking at historical charts.
Forex prices can move in any direction and at any given time. What
causes the markets to move is still buyers versus sellers. If there are
more buyers than sellers, then the market should go up, and if there are
more sellers than buyers, the market should go down. Now what
causes traders to buy or sell could be based on a multitude of reasons,
whether that is from the big institutions down to the smallest retail
trader, and everything in between.
I’ll use the EUR/USD as an example, as the most popular Forex pair
traded. At any given time, an institutional trader may place a substantial
order to buy this pair based on their anticipation of the US Federal
Reserve’s actions regarding interest rates in the US over the coming
months. However some traders, including me, might decide to sell this
pair based on a technical setup observed on the Daily chart.
Then, there may be day traders or scalpers, or even high frequency
automated traders that are both buying and selling this pair throughout
the trading day. Everyone has their reasons for entering a trade and not
one trader is right or wrong until proven otherwise by the trade result. It
is not unusual for me to be in both a buy trade and a sell trade on the
same pair at the same time based on different time frames I am looking
at. It could end up that both are winners, both are losers, or one winner
and one loser. Who cares what the result is, so long as you are
following your trading system’s rules and ignoring the outside noise.
There is a constant back-and-forth as price gets pulled in one direction
and then the other, based on who is entering/exiting the market, when

they are entering/exiting the market and how big their position size is
when they enter/exit the market. With so many participants, high trading
volumes and a 24/5.5 market, it makes for a very liquid and dynamic
market at times. With such huge liquidity, it is very easy for a trader to
get the trade fills they desire with minimal slippage or re-quotes, if any,
unless there is some market extreme that has caught the market off
guard.
This can happen at times, with the most recent famous market move
involving the Swiss Franc in January 2015. If you were trading then,
you would know all about this, but for those that weren’t, it was when
the Swiss National Bank suddenly decided to de-peg their currency
from the Euro. No one saw this coming, and the Swiss franc (CHF) shot
up in value by about 30% in minutes which created havoc around the
world for many traders, brokers and investors. It actually brought some
brokers down, including one of mine at the time, and also had some
traders owing their brokers money after their trading accounts went into
a negative balance.
If you are curious about this move, then bring up a Daily chart of the
EUR/CHF, or the USD/CHF, around mid-January 2015. It’s not hard to
miss. The market moved so fast that stop loss orders were blown
through as there was no support at all for the other side of the market. If
you were in a sell trade, then life would have been great, but if you were
in a buy trade, you would have been blown out of the water with the
majority of brokers. This is one of the reasons that reduced leverage
was introduced across Europe, as was the new rule that brokers have
to offer clients negative balance protection, so the most a trader can
lose is their actual account balance and nothing more.
More information on the Swiss franc move can be found on
Investopedia (https://bit.ly/4bf5NL1).
This was an extreme move and probably the toughest to deal with in
recent history, and something like this does not happen often. Having
said that, there have been many other volatile moves throughout the
years in the Forex markets, with one of the most recent being the initial
Covid outbreak in early 2020. The GBP pairs were affected by an
unexpected result with the Brexit referendum in June 2016, coupled
with the subsequent UK decisions in the following years as they

messed about with it. Instances like ‘fat-finger’ error trades, which
result from human errors in placing large volume institutional trades.
For more information and examples of this you can refer to Wikipedia
(https://bit.ly/3HBurrE).
Another popular term these days is the ‘flash crash,’ which is normally
attributed to algorithmic or high frequency trading, where the markets
crash very quickly followed by a rebound just as fast. An explanation
and some examples can also be found on Wikipedia
(https://bit.ly/3HCNwd5).
Just as there are many different ways to trade, there are also many
different time frames to consider. Personally, I like to prioritise my
lifestyle, so I tend to stick to trading the higher time frames, which is
normally trading off the Daily charts. This means I analyse the charts
once a day and base all my trading decisions on that for the next 24hrs,
and I’m done for the day. This can be like watching paint dry for those
who require more action or the adrenaline rush from trading. This can
especially be the case if you are only trading a small account balance,
and want to build it quickly and not be restricted by your big stops and
small position sizes based on your money management rules (risk). I
understand this.
The challenge is that it is a lot harder to trade on the lower time frames
than the higher ones, as the decision process is much quicker and you
are more at the mercy of news events among other factors. Keep in
mind also, that the Forex market can move very quickly, this includes in
one direction followed by an immediate reversal in the opposite
direction. If you can’t trade successfully on the higher time frames, then
you will struggle to be a successful trader on the lower time frames.
That’s the way it is for us mere mortals. I also understand that new
traders love the idea of being a day trader, sitting in front of the
computer and taking several trades every day. They like the rush and
being able to brag to their friends, and it can even feel like a normal 9 to
5 job, but with the potential to make plenty more money. However this
type of trading is mentally draining and very hard work. It is certainly
achievable - I do know a few successful day traders. They are generally
very good traders, very disciplined and treat it very business- like. It is
not a hobby for them as they are very professional and a lot of hard
work has brought them to this position. It didn’t happen overnight or by

doing a two week course - they have done the hard yards.
A lot of traders try to pick the exact tops or bottoms of markets, looking
for the turning point. This seems to be the way we are wired. We
certainly like to be right, and let everyone know when we are. The
closer a trader gets to this turning point, the better a trader they think
they are. Traders also seem to be drawn to trading against the trend,
rather than with it. You would think it would be the opposite, as when a
trend is already in play, it is simply a matter of joining the path of least
resistance and riding the wave, whereas looking for turning points is
more challenging. Exact highs and lows (turning points) are easy
enough to identify on historical charts, but when looking at the extreme
right edge of a live chart, then that is a whole new challenge.
Keep in mind that this is also used as a marketing tool by some trading
course sellers, where they identify exact highs and lows on historical
charts, claiming that their trading system got them into the trades at
those precise points. This can be a little deceitful and is something to
be aware of. Personally, I have an issue with traders who post trade
setups after the fact showing where they entered and exited, especially
when they always appear to be profitable trades. If you are going to
impress me, show me your trade setup at the time of entry with no data
to the right of it. I don’t really care if it is a loser or not, as I want to see
the analysis and the thinking behind it, and it shows me that you are
both transparent and willing to put your reputation on the line. Don’t get
me wrong, as historical charts have a place in trading and are
especially useful for backtesting trading strategies. I use them all the
time.
One criticism I sometimes receive about my trading system is that I
enter trades late, meaning I miss the high/low turning points. However I
disagree with this assessment. I wait for the trade signal to be
confirmed, and I'm not too concerned if I only profit from part of the
move. For instance, if a move from high to low was 200 pips and I only
managed to profit 140 pips, I have no problem with that result at all.
Volatility
Since about 2019, the Forex market has suffered a fairly significant
reduction in market volatility. What exactly is market volatility? It is
basically how much the market moves over a certain period of time. For

example, a Forex pair may have moved an average of about 250 pips
per day at one stage, but now, that same pair only moves an average
150 pips per day.
Here we are considering the high and low levels of that Forex pair for
the day, rather than focusing on where it opens and closes for the day,
as that could be at the same price level. For example, in the case of
the mentioned 250 pip per day, the pair may have risen by 200 pips
from the candle’s opening price, and then down 50 pips below the
candle’s opening price, before retracing to close at the same price it
originally opened. The range is still 250 pips from the high to the low.
Whereas a 150 pip range might have moved straight up or down 150
pips from the candle’s opening price. Therefore, it is more to do with
how much it moves in a certain period of time, rather than how far it
moves from its opening and closing prices.
It can be a bit confusing and a little difficult to quantify. So to help you
understand, I uploaded the ATR indicator with a setting of 10 on
various Daily charts and had a look back in time to see how the
numbers present. The ATR, which stands for Average True Range,
and is a default indicator on most trading platforms, with the number 10
representing how many days over which the average is calculated. I
used the setting of 10 as there are five trading days in a week, so this
gives me 2x weeks of trading.
The ATR is a widely used indicator among traders, serving various
purposes such as a stop loss positioning tool, defining profit target
levels and also a trailing stop tool. For example, when using it to assist
with stop loss placement, if a currency pair has a current ATR reading
of 80 pips and the trader intends to buy, they may consider a stop loss
of 1.5x ATR. This provides a reasonable buffer without being too close
to the entry price. In this case an ATR of 80 x 1.5 would give a stop loss
of 120 pips below the entry price. The trader may set a target of 2x
ATR, so the price would have to move up 160 pips for that trade to
achieve that target. This is one example of using the ATR as a trading
tool.
This indicator prints a single meandering line below the price chart that
shows the actual Average True Range (ATR) for the preceding 10x
days in pips. As I write this book in late 2023/early 2024, I have drawn

a horizontal line at that most recent level and retraced the historical
data back to the early 2000s when I first started trading Forex. Here I
could see the different ATR levels over time, and it is quite obvious that
in the last few years back to 2019, this level has been very low, and is
not too far off the early 2000 levels, depending on which Forex pair you
are looking at.
Having said that, there are periods in time when volatility is high
resulting in higher ATR readings, that may last for months or even a
couple of years.
To give you an example of this, I will once again use the popular
EUR/USD pair and provide you with a rough idea of its timeline with
regards to the ATR 10 from 2004 until late 2023:
During 2004 the ATR was somewhere between 80 - 180
pips.
Then during 2006/2007, it dropped down between 50 - 100
pips. As the GFC (Global Financial Crisis) approached, the
market became way more volatile with the ATR hitting 300+
levels a few times.
As we came out of the GFC in mid-2009, the ATR levels
began to drop off again.
Then during 2010/2011, it slowly increased in value again
averaging around 150 pips with the occasional spikes over
200 pips.
The market then dropped off in 2012/2013 and early 2014,
where the ATR was around the 100 pip level.
Again it became a little more volatile throughout 2015 with
the ATR hovering around the 150 pip level.
That didn’t last that long though, as again the levels began
to fall, dropping down to the 80 - 120 pip range right
through until mid-2018.
After that period, the ATR levels dropped further, whereas
up until early 2020, the ATR range was only in the 40 - 70
pip range, which is very low for this pair.
Then, we experienced the initial Covid outbreak in early
2020, where market volatility increased dramatically. It
started in early March when the ATR was around 50 pips,

before settling back to similar levels in mid-April. However,
it had shot up to the 210 pip level during this period.
The market was then stuck in the fairly low ATR range of
60 - 100 pips from the Covid outbreak until about March
2022. It then fluctuated in the range of 75 - 125 pips for a
few months. In late 2022, there were a couple of spikes up
to the 150 -160 pip range.
These higher spikes didn’t last long though, as the market
slowly wound back down to the 75 - 100 pip range for a few
months. Since about April 2023, it has been sitting pretty
consistently around the 75 pip level up until the present
(December 2023).

Figure 2 The EUR/USD Daily chart from early 2014 through to early January 2024, with
the ATR of 10 below the actual price chart. The 50, 100 & 150 pip levels are marked
up, so you can see the volatility in the last 10 years.

There appears to be a similar pattern across the board with most Forex
pairs. There are times when some pairs will be out of sync with the
general market due to factors specific to one particular currency. A
good example of this is the GBP pairs during the Brexit vote in June
2016, where the GBP pairs made some significant moves based on an
unexpected vote result. Even though a few other pairs saw increased
ATR levels, they were nothing like the increases on the GBP pairs.

Volatility is the result of inflation levels, interest rates, monetary policy
and a host of other factors. The accepted reason for low volatility these
days is due to the fact that most countries have very low inflation levels
and also very low interest rates. A combination of these two factors
tend to reduce the exchanging of currencies between countries, which
in turn means less trading volume and therefore smaller moves in the
market.
This article from Nasdaq.com (https://bit.ly/3ugHHio) written in late
2019, remains very relevant in today’s Forex market, as not much has
changed since then regarding volatility. It goes deeper into the topic
that I briefly touched and is worth a read if this is a subject that interests
you.
Inflation is normally based on the CPI (Consumer Price Index) figures.
This Investopedia article (https://bit.ly/3Un6T1k) will provide more
information on this subject.
If you would like more detailed information on how interest rates affect
the Forex market, Investopedia (https://bit.ly/47W2mpy), has some
good information.
If you are interested in learning more about interest rates in a slightly
simpler way, CashbackForex (https://bit.ly/3UgDeXu) provides a good
read.

7
FURTHER THOUGHTS
So after reading all of this, you can probably see my point that not only
is trading a fairly difficult task to begin with, but as markets change over
the years, it may actually become more difficult to trade successfully, as
what may have worked in 2012 may not work in 2024.
If you continue to do what everyone else is doing, then there is a very
good chance that you will end up the same as everyone else, or about
90% of them anyway, and that is, failing to become a successful trader.
Therefore, I am suggesting that you think a little differently when it
comes to trading. I’m not talking about going completely off the
reservation here, rather about doing things a little different from the
masses - something a little out of the box or from left field. Be creative,
unique, and innovative, or, at least be an independent thinker. Don’t
follow the herd.
The traditional way of trading involves a trader identifying a trade setup
based on the rules they are using. Then the trader takes that trade,
which includes having a stop loss and a take profit in place, generally
with a positive risk/reward ratio. While this is a simplistic overview,
there can be subtle variations to that scenario, but it should give you an
idea of what I am talking about.
So, a trader will identify an entry point, and then work out their position
size based on their risk parameters, which will be based on their stop
loss level. Then they establish a profit target, generally aiming for a
minimum of 1:1 risk/reward or higher. If they believe that price can’t
reach that profit target based on their analysis, they may opt not to take
that trade. For those trades they decide to take, many traders allow the
trade to play out, where price will eventually either hit the stop loss price

for a loss or the profit target price for a win. In an ideal scenario, this
approach works well provided the win rate was over 50%.
There is nothing wrong with trading this way, if you have a solid
strategy and you are disciplined enough to patiently allow your trades to
run their course. Unfortunately, what most traders do is either set their
initial stop loss too tight on the trade, or they ignore their risk strategy
rules and enter the trade with too big a position size, or they
micromanage their trade and take profit at the first opportunity. This
then completely messes up what was initially a decent trading plan.
There are many ways to trade, and essentially, there is no right way or
wrong approach. As long as you maintain overall profitability and keep
your account drawdown under control, the specifics of your trading
system become less significant.
The trick is finding the trading system that you are comfortable with and
then sticking with it through both the good and bad times. Most traders
will find something that works initially, but then they have a few losses,
and without giving the system time to recover, they will either tinker with
it by changing some of the rules, or they will disregard it and move on to
the next system. Like I mentioned earlier, these types of traders have
their expectations set too high, and/or lack patience and discipline.

8
REALISTIC RETURNS
The ‘high expectations’ problem has a straightforward solution. Traders
need to realise that a monthly return ranging from 2% to 6% is far more
realistic, and achievable, than the exaggerated percentage numbers
that are sometimes thrown around by marketers in this space. Keep in
mind that they are trying to convince you to buy their product,
capitalising on people’s greed and FOMO (fear of missing out). Like
any salesperson marketing a product, they will always try to make their
product as attractive as possible and embellish the product’s features
and potential returns a little. The same applies to the trading space
where you often encounter people selling trading systems, whether
manual or automated, trading courses, mentoring, or trade signal
services.
One thing that bothers me is when others make a statement along the
lines of ‘If Warren Buffett only makes 20% per year, what makes you
think you are a better trader than him?’ Well, for starters, Mr Buffett is
not a trader as he is considered more of a long term investor, so we are
comparing apples to oranges here. Also Mr Buffett runs a very
successful fund called Berkshire Hathaway, which has many
restrictions on risk etc. due to the industry’s tight financial rules and
regulations. These same rules and regulations don’t really apply to your
average retail trader, which includes most of the readers of this book
and me. These rules and regulations apply to all hedge funds, big
institutions and the like. For the record, Berkshire Hathaway has
suffered some major drawdowns over the years, anywhere from 30% to
50%+, so it hasn’t always been smooth sailing for the fund, albeit they
have been super successful when you look at the big picture.

There will be traders who achieve more than that 10% per month, and
may even have exceptionally higher percentage returns, but they are
rare and tend to be skilled traders who invest a considerable amount of
time and effort in achieving those results. Whether this level of
performance is sustainable, I’m not too sure, possibly.
Let’s do some maths to show you what I mean with a base starting
point of $1,000. You can add or subtract zeros if like, but many new
traders typically deposit around $1,000 into their brokerage account.
First up, you could simply deposit this $1,000 into your local bank
account as an investment. In Australia, this would be a secure
investment for me as there are laws protecting my funds from potential
issues. It involves minimal effort, requiring only a deposit, and I can
leave it until I need to withdraw that money. So, very little effort is
required to receive a return on investment. Here is the catch: I’m
unsure about the interest rates in your country, but in Australia
depositing with one of the Big 4 banks will earn approximately 3.5% 5% per year if you put those funds into a Fixed Term Deposit (as of
December 2023). At the end of one year, your $1,000 would have
grown to the princely sum of $1,050. This seems hardly worth the
effort, and that’s without considering things like bank fees, tax, inflation
etc.
Australians generally stick to the basics when it comes to investing.
They often consider options like bank deposits, shares or stocks
(mutual/managed funds) and property (real estate). Of course, there
are plenty of other investment options like art, collectibles, various
types of trading, precious metals and more. There are even Aussies
who consider lottery tickets, a trip to the racetrack or visits to the casino
as an investment. Returning to the more serious options mentioned
earlier, there is risk and/or time involved in all of them, and whether you
would see a positive return on your $1,000 is debatable due to the
various factors involved.
Now let’s discuss trading. This could be any type of trading, but since
I’m predominately a Forex trader, this is what I’ll refer to. I touched on
industry figures earlier referring to the number of successful traders
there are, so straight away you know there are risks involved. There is
also a time component, where you have to both learn how to trade (at

least know the basics) and then the time required to actually trade,
which depending on your trading style, could be anything from five
minutes a day to eight hours plus a day. Whether trading is your full
time job or not is neither here nor there, but with $1,000 in your
account, I presume it is not.
Assuming you have learnt to trade and you’re pretty good at it, let’s
explore some figures when it comes to monthly returns. To make it a
little more interesting, I will compound the returns. This basically means
you maintain the same risk as your trading balance grows, or shrinks.
So if you risked 2% on a trade when your account balance was $1,223,
you would also risk 2% on a trade when your account balance was
$2,467. You are only risking 2% of your account balance at any one
time. The position size will vary depending on your account balance. I
know I’m probably over simplifying things here, but I want to make sure
that everyone understands this. Let’s get into the numbers.
Starting with $1,000 in the trading account, and a profit of
2% in the first month brings the account balance to $1,020,
nearly halfway to the amount by leaving it in a bank account
for a year. I’m already seeing an upside here. Maintaining
the same trade risk, another 2% profit in the second month
gives us a profit of $20.40, so the account balance now sits
at $1,040.40. If we continued this for one full year, the
trading account balance would be a healthy $1,268.24,
which equates to a 26.8% return. This is quite impressive
and if this remained constant for 5 years, the account
balance would potentially grow to around $3,281.
Now you won’t make 2% every month; it might be 5.6% one
month, then -2.3% the next month, 3.1% the following
month and so on. You may miss months, or change your
risk parameters or trading style. The same could apply to
any investments as there are many variables and life tends
to get in the way sometimes. I’m keeping the numbers
simple here, so let’s imagine we are in a perfect world for
these examples.
Our trading improves, and now we are earning a 4% return
every month, starting with a new $1,000 trading account.

So clearly, we are earning double the previous return. In the
first month you would profit $40, and after one full year, you
would have an account balance of $1,601.03. If we did this
for 5 years, the account balance would reach $10,519.
Compare that to the 5 year return of 2% per month of
$3,281 and you can start to see the power of compounding.
Here are the numbers for 6% per month. After 1 year, your
account balance would be $2,012.12 (doubled), and after 5
years, the account balance would be at $32,987.
Now let’s have a look at a 10% profit per month. After 1
year, the account balance would be sitting at $3,138.43,
and after 5 years, it would be a healthy $304,000.
I’ll give you one more example to emphasise the point. Let’s
consider 20% profit per month, a figure which some course
providers and Forex promoters promote as an achievable
number. Starting with a $200 profit in the first month, the
account balance would be at $8.916.10 after a year, or a
891% gain. Now this is where it gets good, as after 5 years
the account balance would be at approximately
$56,000,000. That is not a typo, that is 56 million dollars.
Based on the 20% per month profit that the EA (Expert
Advisor/Trading Robot) the marketer is promoting, who
wouldn’t deposit at least a $1,000 into a trading account
and let it compound for 5 years. I can wait 5 years for $56
million. Look, this is not going to happen. If it was that easy,
then we’d all be rich and the markets would be destroyed.
I appreciate that the above examples are overly simplified,
as there would be many factors other than trading results
and discipline that would affect the trader turning $1,000
into $56 million. There is obviously the psychological side of
things, because as the account grows, the trading position
sizing also increases significantly, along with the trading
wins and losses. Some people may panic over these big
numbers and won’t be able to handle the pressure of

trading this big. Then there is the issue of broker selection,
as some brokers will shut you down, limit your trade size.
To show you how unrealistic these numbers would be, if
you left the account running at 20% profit for a further 2
years, that is 7 in total, that $1,000 would be then a touch
below $4.5 billion. This is unlikely to happen.
Now let’s get back to more realistic numbers.
I’m quite confident that a skilled trader could achieve an
average return of 4% per month, so I’ll work with that and
base the example on someone that has a normal day job
and has a starting trading account balance of $10,000. So
a reasonable amount to start with and they also deposit
$1,000 into their account every month. Here, we are
probably looking at a trader that is trading off the Daily time
frame, or is a day trader/scalper that dedicates a few hours
each night to trading, or possibly a trader that has an
automated strategy. Their aim is to build their account and
eventually be in a financial position to quit their normal day
job and either trade fulltime or do something else with their
life.
Using the above figures and also compounding the gains,
after one full year, that trader’s account balance would be a
little over $31,000. So everything is going well. If everything
remained constant, then after 2 years the account balance
would be just over $64,000. Then we hit the 5 year point,
and that account balance would be a very healthy
$343,000, with the trader contributing $70,000 of that out
of their own pocket and the remaining derived from profits.
By the 21st month of this cycle, the trader would be profiting
just over $2,000 per month at this point. The $3,000 per
month would be achieved in the 28th month; $4,000 by the
34th month, and by the 54th month, the trader would have
cracked the $10,000 per month barrier. It might be time to
think about leaving the job. If they then continued on trading
the same way, then at the 7.5 year mark, they would have
reached around $1,000,000 on their account balance.

Again, for this trader to succeed as outlined above, they
would require exceptional discipline following the plan.
Now, let’s take this a step further and look at other options
available to this trader. Considering their consistent ability
to achieve an average of 4% profit per month, it’s
reasonable to assume that their account drawdown is under
control, or at the very least, at a manageable level. By
‘drawdown,’ I am referring to any pullback in their account
balance. For instance, if their account balance was at
$10,000, and it dropped down to the $5,000 level at any
point due to losses (whether realised or unrealised) before
recovering and surpassing $10,000 again on new profits,
then that account has experienced a 50% drawdown, which
is not ideal by the way.

9
TRADING OTHER PEOPLE’S MONEY
If this trader could maintain their account drawdown at 10% or less,
preferably 5% or less, then it would attract the attention of investors
looking to place funds with this trader. The trader could set up thirdparty software on their account to independently track and report their
results. Free services like FX Blue and Myfxbook are already available
for this purpose, or the trader could consider having their trading
account professionally audited by a reputable accountancy firm.
What I am saying here, is that if someone is entrusting you to trade on
their behalf, then they will want to see some sort of verified track record
to set their mind at ease. For example, you may have a decent trading
track record and an investor identities you as a trader that could
provide them with a decent return on their money, so they may offer you
$100,000 of their money to trade on their behalf, where you would then
share in a profit split depending on the profits achieved and the
arrangement made with the investor at the time.
So if you made your usual 4% per month and you were to receive 30%
of any profit achieved, then your share would be $1,200 for the month,
by doing what you are already doing. There is no real extra work on
your part as there are trade copying services available that let you trade
as normal and automatically adjust trade position sizing to any copied
account based on those individual accounts money management rules.
There are also prop firms. Prop is short for proprietary, as back in the
day, these firms were actually set up a lot differently to how they are
nowadays. The old prop firm model was basically a trading floor in a
brick and mortar building where potential traders would pay a fee to get
a seat on one of the trading floors. The trader wouldn’t be paid, but

instead would be taught the firm’s proprietary trading system (hence
the name) and then once the trader was profitable, the firm would then
share in a profit split with the trader on any positive returns generated
by the trader, keeping in mind that the trader is using the firm’s money
to fund their account.
Since around 2020, the newer model of prop firms has become really
popular in the Forex trading world. It basically follows the same
business model but without the brick-and- mortar trading floors as it is
all done remotely online. Training with the firm is no longer a
requirement although some do offer training, for those interested. The
entry barrier has significantly decreased with most prop firms requiring
a few hundred dollars to attempt their challenge. By challenge, I mean
you have to pass one (or possibly two) tests to demonstrate your
trading skills and risk management. Once you successfully pass the
challenge/s, you will become a funded trader and can enjoy a healthy
profit split, potentially up to 85% with some firms.
Prop firms sound really good in theory, and I can already hear your
brain ticking over. Imagine, if you manage to get funded with
$2,000,000 sharing 80% of the profits, and you make a 4% gain on that
account, which equals $80,000. Your cut of that at 80% would be a tidy
$64,000. This is too easy, right?
There are a few issues here, or should I say, a few hurdles. Most prop
firms generally have the same rules, but there are variations, and you
need to know these inside and out. Any major breach of one of their
important rules results in an automatic cancellation of your account,
requiring you to start from the beginning again. So, after working hard
to reach $2,000,000 in funding, you would have to go back to the
challenge stage at the $100,000 level, which you would have to pass
and start your journey again.
The main issues are that most traders don’t have a tried and tested
trading system before they join a prop firm. Prop firms love that as they
are making money from the multiple failed challenge attempts by the
novice trader. Then they tend to have very tight drawdown risk
percentage with most of them being in the 5% range, possibly up to
10%. They may also have profit targets, time requirements, rules
regarding stops, limitations on trading over weekends or news events

etc. Then they could have other rules like types of trading systems
permitted, the use of EAs (trading robots), trade copiers etc. Like I
said, these are all things you need to know about.
I’ve failed a challenge because of trade inactivity as I was trading off
the Daily time frame and hadn’t placed a new trade in two weeks, even
though I had been taking partial closes and adjusting stops, which
didn’t comply with their rules. Then you have to stick to these rules at
every level. Admittedly, it does get easier as you get funded as the rules
are relaxed a little, except for the maximum drawdown rules, as they
tend to remain consistent throughout.
As I write this book in late 2023, there have been a few issues with
some prop firms of late being a little dishonest and not following certain
financial rules, resulting in some of these firms being shut down by the
relevant authorities. It is still a bit of a ‘cowboy’ industry, but the bad
ones are being slowly weeded out and it is probably only a matter of
time before the regulators move in and give the industry some stricter
guidelines to follow when it comes to transparency and funding etc.
Please be very careful if considering going down this path, making sure
you do your due diligence first, and that you have your trading nailed
down to comply with their trading rules.
Here’s a bit of trivia. I’ve already discussed what sort of returns you
would expect over the longer term with monthly gains of 2%,4%, 10%.
Recently, I listened to a podcast featuring a CEO of one of the more
established prop firms. According to him, within their company’s
network of over 40,000 successful accounts, the average return was
approximately 2% per month, and those traders were doing quite well
financially. It goes to show that even a modest percentage of profit can
lead to decent earnings in the world of trading.
There are a few other options available for those interested in either
copying other traders’ trades or becoming a trade signal provider. I
won’t go into too much detail here, as these are subjects you can easily
explore with a quick online search. You may see acronyms like PAMM,
LAMM and MAM, usually associated with brokers. Also, most brokers
offer a trade signal service via their platform. Then there are other
companies like Darwinex, which have been around for a long time,
where they match investors with traders. And another popular way of

following other traders is via what they call social copying platforms like
eToro and ZuluTrade.
There are plenty of options out there, but you will have to establish your
trading system first, maintaining consistency, keeping drawdown under
control and building a track record.

10
CONTINUING WITH MY THOUGHTS
As I have mentioned in my previous books, and many times on my
social media platforms, my aim is to provide readers with some trading
ideas or something to think about, or even a basic framework, take this
information and personalise it. Trading is very individual, and as a
trader, it is important to be very comfortable with your trading system,
become very good at it so it becomes routine – so familiar that it
becomes almost boring.
Trading boils down to a numbers game. You don’t need to be right all of
the time; just more right than wrong most of the time. Some successful
traders maintain a success rate of around 30% or so. However, what
matters is that your winning trades should eventually outweigh your
losses and your account drawdown is at acceptable levels.
Some traders may be comfortable with their account being down 2530% at any one time, whereas others would prefer a drawdown of 10%
or even lower. Every trader is different. Personally, I prefer the ‘sleep
test’. If I can hold open trades overnight and sleep soundly, then my
position size doesn’t concern me. If I find myself waking up in the
middle of the night in a cold sweat or unable to sleep due to my
overnight trades, then there’s a problem. It could be that my position
sizing is too large or I have too many trades on, both of which relate to
overall risk.
Trading is not only a numbers game; it is also a mind game. It has the
potential to mess with your head a lot of the time, especially if you are
not confident in your system or with your risk parameters. There is a
common belief that trading is about 20% actual trade planning and
execution, and about 80% psychological. It is hard to argue with these

statistics at times, because anyone that has traded a live account for
even a short time would have experienced a variety of different
emotions, from one end of the spectrum to the other. Like I said, trading
will mess with your mind at times, this I can guarantee.
How does a trader know whether they have a solid trading system?
Practice, and lots of it. By this I mean, the trader should spend a lot of
time on historical charts or a simulator. I use a 3rd party commercial
simulator called Soft4FX, which has a one-off fee of about US$100 at
the time of writing this book. I wish I had this simulator when I was first
starting out as it would have saved me a lot of time. It is not necessary
to have, but if you can afford it, then I would strongly suggest you get a
hold of it here (https://bit.ly/42iq4Lq). Even after my many years of
trading, I am on the historical charts or simulator for quite a few hours a
week.
I appreciate that what’s happened in the past may not necessarily work
in the future, but it does provide confidence that it will more than likely
work in the future when there’s been a decent history of success.
Trading is based on human thinking, or the collective of many minds,
which hasn’t changed much over time. While market conditions can
vary, they also go through cycles and often repeat patterns. A
commonly discussed idea is whether the market is self-fulfilling. For
example take the 200 Moving Average (MA). If you look at any chart
with this particular MA on it, you will notice that price comes back to it
many times. Now, the actual price has no idea that there is a 200 MA
on the chart, but then again the maths might determine that price
should touch it at least a few times, as it is an actual average of price.
Or traders may see that 200 MA and automatically think of what may
happen around this very popular level. So, orders will be placed in the
vicinity of it, whether they are buy/sell orders for entry or exiting
positions. A lot can occur when price gets close to the MA, prompting
the question: Which came first, the chicken or the egg?
As with any trading system, it is not only important to test it via the
historical charts or the simulator, but also to forward test it, either with a
free demonstration (demo) account or a small live account. When
backtesting systems on historical charts, there is a tendency for the
trader to have a bias based on what they are thinking at the time. Not

only can they see what is coming up next, but they also tend to focus
only on the good setups and skip the poor ones. The same can be said
on a simulator and a demo trading account to a certain extent, as even
though you don’t know what is coming up next, you don’t have any real
money at risk, so you tend to become a little more relaxed and blasé
about it, as it doesn’t really matter if you win or lose. But forward test
with a live account, even a small live account, then you have some skin
in the game and real money at risk. This tends to motivate you a little
better and put you under a little more pressure to actually put some
thought into your decision-making process. As I mentioned above, the
mind games then come into play.

11
BROKERS
One of the advantages of setting up a Forex trading account is that it is
relatively simple to do and can also be funded with a small amount of
funds to begin with. If all my readers were in the same country, in
similar financial positions, and trading the same way, recommending
brokers and suggesting account sizes would be straightforward.
As my readers are from all over the world, from various financial
positions in life, and looking at different trading styles, everyone will
have different requirements, whether that be broker choice or account
type or initial deposit etc. There is no one size fits all as different
countries have different rules and regulations when it comes to opening
a brokerage account, and then you would have to decide what type of
account you require based on your trading style and available funds. As
you can see, there are a few variables to consider.
There are hundreds of brokers to choose from and most offer very
similar, if not identical, trading platforms. Many use white label thirdparty trading software, which they lease from the software developer
and then rebrand to give the appearance that it is their own platform.
This is very common.
If you are struggling to find a suitable broker, then I would strongly
suggest that you contact my friends at Forest Park FX
(https://bit.ly/4bfFioF) as they will assist you with identifying the best
broker that suits your individual needs. They are based in the US but
deal with clients from all over the world. There is no cost to you as they
make their money from the brokers. If you do use their service, you may
also be entitled to cash rebates based on your trading volume. Also, if
you have an issue with the broker for whatever reason, they may be

able to act on your behalf to help you resolve that issue.
You will also see that different brokers give their account types different
names, which may confuse some new to trading. You will see terms like
True ECN, Raw or STP, or accounts called Micro, Mini, Standard,
Cent, Islamic, Scalping etc. Your head is probably already spinning and
confused. This is understandable, but a lot of the above doesn’t really
mean that much to the average retail trader, especially when starting
out. It’s only when you get serious about your trading and you are
trading a decent account size balance, then you would drill down more
on broker and account selection. But if you do want to know more about
the above terms then Google or YouTube is a great place to start, or
you could visit this site (https://bit.ly/3HH2zSM) which covers this in
more detail.
What I will say about broker selection is that you should put some
thought into it, even if you are only going to initially deposit a small
amount of money into a live account. One thing that is very important to
consider with brokers is where they are regulated. This means that a
broker should be following the financial rules and regulations set by the
country they are based in. This gives the trader some protection if
something does go wrong with the broker, like the January 2015 Swiss
Franc de-pegging. Most brokers are regulated, but some aren’t.
Regulated brokers have different rules to follow depending on their
location. For example, a UK broker may have stricter guidelines to
follow than a broker based out of a small Pacific Island. Ideally as a
trader you want the broker that better protects you. However, don’t
assume that all brokers outside your home country are inferior or a
scam. Many reputable brokers have offshore offices to help their
traders avoid some of the very restrictive rules and regulations in
certain jurisdictions. I strongly recommend that you don’t go with a
broker that is not regulated at all. Read the fine print on their website
and ask them questions about this if you are in any doubt.
If you are serious about your trading, here are some other things you
should consider with broker selection. The higher the leverage you can
get, the better. Leverage is not the enemy if you are smart about it. As
discussed earlier in the book, higher leverage provides more options.
You also want an account that allows hedging, which basically means
you can have open buy and sell trades on the same pair at the same

time. This makes looking at the big picture a lot easier.
Unless you have a very specific trading strategy, you need to avoid
what they call MT5 netting accounts, which a few brokers offer. For
example, in a netting account, if you took a buy trade for 0.40 lots on
the EUR/USD, and while that was still open, you decided to take a sell
trade for 0.30 lots on the EUR/USD, then the platform would deduct the
0.30 lots from your 0.40 buy trade, leaving you nett +0.10 long still.
Whereas a hedging (non-netting) account would keep the 0.40 buy
trade open and also open a 0.30 sell trade. You would still technically
be +0.10 nett long, but you have more trade management options here.
There is also the issue of FIFO in some jurisdictions. FIFO means ‘first
in, first out’ when it comes to trade execution. So, if you have multiple
trades on the same pair in the same direction, then when it comes to
closing them, you are required to close the oldest trade first. There are
slight variations on this rule depending on the actual position sizes, but
again it is a rule that can restrict the trader somewhat when it comes to
trade management.
To give you an idea of maximum leverage available in some of the
major jurisdictions, in the USA it is 50:1, Europe 30:1 and Australia
30:1. But if you were to set up an account with a broker from Vanuatu
or Seychelles, you may have access to leverage of 500:1 and possibly
higher.
There are ways around some of the previously mentioned issues, and
by no means am I suggesting you do anything illegal here. When it
comes to money and trading, you will want to be as above board and
legal as possible. For example, if you are an Australian trader, and you
want higher leverage on your account, either the broker you are with
may offer you an option of an offshore office that they also control, or
they may allow you trade on higher leverage if you meet certain
criteria/requirements with them. These normally involve a larger
account balance and a minimum trade volume, but every broker has
different requirements. If you are in the US and you want to be able to
buy and sell the same pair at the same time, you may consider opening
a 2nd account (sub-account) with the same broker (or a different one)
and then spreading your trades between the multiple accounts, keeping
each account as balanced as possible.

You may have other options available to you to circumvent certain rules
and regulations (or restrictions) by setting up an LLC, trust account,
company etc. I’m not in a position to give any legal advice in any
jurisdiction, so this is something you as the individual would have to
investigate further. Whether that is by contacting the authorities in your
jurisdiction, or contacting a legal representative (attorney, lawyer,
solicitor) or some other qualified financial advisor. Do not rely on
information from social media or an author writing a book on Forex
trading that has no formal qualifications in this area. Do your due
diligence, especially if you want to ramp up your trading to a decent
level. It is best to have this sorted right from the outset.
Another piece of advice I will offer to those of you with a large amount of
funds to deposit with a broker is that I would strongly suggest you don’t
deposit all of your funds with the actual broker. For example, if you
were considering opening a broker account with $50,000, then I would
suggest that you only deposit say $10,000 with the actual broker and
have the remaining $40,000 sitting in your much safer bank account.
Then if the broker has some financial problems for whatever reason,
the majority of your funds are safe with your bank account. You can
always trade your $10,000 with the broker as though you have $50,000
with them, as the leverage will allow this. These days, once you set up
a broker account, transferring funds can be done in hours or even
minutes, depending on the transfer system you have set up. For
example, I am using one of my crypto exchanges to fund one of my
broker accounts, and those transfers are done in around 5 minutes. So
if you do require additional funds to be added to your broker account
from your bank account, then this can be done quickly and generally
you will see this coming anyway and you will have plenty of time to act.
The final advice on brokers, which is especially relevant to beginner
traders, is that when you open a demo (practice) account, try and set it
up on the same broker you will be using for live trading, and also try to
set it up with the same amount of funds that you are planning on
depositing into your live account. Most reputable brokers offer a demo
account anyway and normally they operate close to a live account. The
main difference is that some demo accounts won’t take slippage or requoting into account, as the trade orders are filled at the exact same
price level as requested, whereas on a live account, this may not
happen. The same can be said about the price spread on the demo

account, where it may not accurately reflect the same spread on the
broker’s live account.
There are two main reasons we use a demo account. One is to get
used to the platform itself, without risking real money. For example,
doing a partial close of a trade on MT4 or MT5 is not that obvious, so
practising this on a demo account will help you out and familiarise you
with all of the platform’s functions. The second reason is to forward test
your actual trading system and see how it performs in real time. Sure,
you can backtest a trading system on historical charts or a simulator,
which would only take minutes or hours, where you wouldn’t experience
the drawdown over an extended period of time, nor would you really be
aware of your margin requirements.
I understand that demo trading can take some time and you would think
you are not getting any return on your time invested. I’d probably
disagree with that statement as what you do in preparation for your
trading career will stand you in good stead if you develop good trading
habits right from the beginning. You get this right, and even though it
may take you some time, you will then be able to slowly ramp up and
then write your own pay cheque as your trading career progresses.
Hence why you should try and start with a demo account from the same
broker as your live account, and have close to the same amount of
funding in each.

12
TECHNICAL INDICATORS
As a chartist, I use a combination of default and custom indicators to
give me trade signals and assist with trade management. There is one
thing I want to clear up first, before I hear people complaining about
indicators and how useless they are because they are lagging etc. I’ve
heard it all before and I would agree to some extent. For example, if you
were to solely rely on a fast and a slow Moving Average cross for an
entry or exit, then sure there will be times when you are late to get in
and late to get out. I understand this.
Remember though, very few traders can pick the turning points
(absolute highs or absolute lows), even the very opinionated Price
Action traders. Not that I have anything against Price Action traders, as
the majority of them generally also need some sort of confirmation
before taking a trade signal, which may be an indicator or something
else. All I am saying is that by using a combination of indicators and
some smart trade management strategies, you will experience enough
winning/profitable trades to make it worth your while.
All I ask is that you have an open mind when it comes to indicators and
give them a fair go and see for yourself if they work or not, or even if
they are something you can add to your own trading system. Also, keep
in mind that indicators don’t move the market as such, but historical
chart testing shows that certain setups have worked nicely in the past
giving a slight edge and the chances of those setups again happening
in the future is what we are hoping for. History tends to repeat on the
charts, with the same patterns and setups occurring many times over.
Some of you may already be familiar with some of the indicators if you
have read any of my other books, or you are a member of any of the

JAGfx social media sites.
Here is the list of indicators I will be referring to in this book.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

​Moving Averages (MAs)
​Bollinger Bands
​QMP Filter
​MACD Platinum
​QQE Adv

As part of the book’s download package you will receive most of these
indicators for MT4 and MT5, and also templates for both platforms to
make things a little easier for you. You will not receive the MAs as they
are a default indicator on all platforms, and even though the Bollinger
Bands are also a default indicator on most platforms, my version allows
you to modify the colours of the indicator a little differently. With regards
to TradingView, the indicators are sometimes called scripts, and they
have been built a little differently so they can all be applied to the
cheaper subscription versions of TradingView. The download package
will also include instructions on how to upload the indicators and
templates to the platforms (on Windows).
Now, you are probably thinking that there are a lot of indicators on that
list and way too many to be adding to a chart. I would agree with you to
a certain extent, but they all serve a purpose and seem to work well
together. I will also add that it is up to the reader to pick and choose if
they would like to use all of the indicators or not. Some may prefer a
cleaner looking chart, where for example, you may decide not to include
the MAs on the chart. Or you may decide to lighten them up in colour or
line width, to make the chart a little easier to read. It is up to the
individual on how they would like to display their charts or set up their
templates. Remember, I’m only providing ideas here.
I’ll run through the list and give you an explanation about the indicator
and the settings used. With regards to the settings, these are what I
use and always use. They are not perfect and I have no real reason as
to why I use these particular settings, other than they seem to work well
for me. Feel free to change the settings or play around with them to suit
your own needs. Keep in mind there are no perfect settings. I also like
to keep it very simple and use the same setup for all the different pairs

and all the different time frames. So please don’t ask me anything
about any changes to them as I am happy with what I am using.

12.1 Moving Averages (MAs)
The Moving Average is a very common default indicator that is
available with every trading platform on the planet. You can Google
“Moving Average” for a technical explanation as to how they work, if
that is something you are interested in. I use three of them, and those
being the following:
1.
2.
3.

​50 EMA
​100 EMA
​240 LWMA

EMA stands for Exponential Moving Average and LWMA stands for
Linear Weighted Moving Average. You will see me refer to them as the
50MA, 100MA or 240MA throughout the book.
They are there to give me an idea of the trend, both in direction and in
strength. If the MAs are stacked to the upside, and by this I mean the
50MA on the top, the 100MA in the middle and the 240MA on the
bottom, and spreading apart, then you can assume that it is a healthy
up trend on the market. The opposite for a down trend. If the MAs are
all tight and flat, or crossing, then there is indecision with the trend,
where the market is either range bound or there is a potential reversal
forming.

Figure 3 shows
a big down trend first up, followed by a reversal to a big up trend. As you can see the
MAs are stacked correctly on both sides, with the brown line being the 50MA, the
purple line the 100MA and the grey line being the 240MA.

When it comes to taking trades with a trend, then I am looking for price
to come back to the 50MA, or at least very close to it. Not always, but
most of the time. They can also be used to assist with a trail stop
placement, as this is something I currently do if there is no other
obvious place to move my stop to, as I may trail it at the approximate
half way point between the 50MA and 100MA. They can also be used
as a dynamic support/resistance level, and this tends to apply more to
the 240MA, especially when there are other factors involved. So, the
MAs are more of a guide, albeit sometimes a very useful one, and
nothing more. As already mentioned, if you are confident enough with
your market structure reading skills, you may decide against adding the
MAs to the chart to avoid a cluttered look on the price chart itself. This
is your call.

12.2 Bollinger Bands
Bollinger Bands (BB) are a very common indicator these days and can
be found on most platforms as one their default indicators. If you want
to know more about Bollinger Bands and how they actually work, there
is plenty of information about them on the internet. I use the default
settings of Period of 20, Deviation of 2.0 and applied to the Close.
When applied to a price chart it will show three lines that form an upper
and lower band, with a centre (middle) band. With my settings, that
centre band is the same as a 20 Simple Moving Average. I also use
them with the settings of Period of 80, Deviation of 3.0 and applied to
the Close. These different settings will be explained in more detail later
in the book.
These are a little trickier to describe how they actually work, but as
mentioned above, they are made of three bands, where the upper and
lower bands expand and contract depending on the movement of the
market. In big trending markets, the bands expand, with price generally
hugging the upper or lower band depending on trend direction. In a
sideways market where the trend is not obvious and things look tight,
then the upper and lower bands contract and tighten right up.
Some traders take their trade signals based on price closing on the
outside of the upper or lower band, entering a trade in the same

direction. They are basically looking for a trend continuation and looking
to have big wins on big moves. This is a viable system and can produce
some very good results.
The problem with trading this way is that it tends to have a low win
percentage strike rate. For example, it may only win 27% of all trades,
which means it is losing 73% of all trades, and even with some decent
risk/reward involved where the trader would be overall profitable, losing
on 73% of your total trades will mess with the average trader’s mind, so
it will be a tough system for most to trade with confidence. I’m possibly
repeating myself here, and it is okay to say you can handle those sorts
of numbers, but going through it in live trading is a whole new ball
game.
So I am now looking at how the majority of traders use the Bollinger
Bands, and that is as an overbought/oversold indicator. That means
when price hits the upper band, I will be looking to sell, and when price
hits the lower band, I’m looking to buy. There is obviously more to it
than that, and that is something I will get to as we go through this book.
But most of the time, if I am looking to take a sell trade then I want to
have seen the price at least touch the upper Bollinger Band at some
point prior to that sell signal. The opposite for a buy signal, where price
should have at least touched the lower Bollinger Band at some point
prior. Like I said, it’s not always necessary, but most of the time it is.
And please don’t ask me what is the maximum number of candles you
should look back for this touch.
There is no hard and fast rule for this as it should be fairly obvious, as I
am referring to the price movement prior to this new signal and after the
last signal. You will know if it is valid or not by looking at it. I am also
using the upper and lower bands as a potential warning signal to assist
with trade management if already in a trade.
Then we have the centre band, which as previously stated, is the same
as if you had placed a 20 SMA on your chart (with 20, 2.0 settings). I
am using this centre band as a potential filter for both entry into a trade
and also as a potential warning signal to take some action if already in
a trade, as it can be used for both trade entry and trade management
purposes.

Figure 4 shows
the Bollinger Bands on the chart with the settings of 20 & 2.0, where the blue lines are
the upper and lower bands, and the yellow line is the centre band.

Now the next three indicators on the list are probably considered as
custom indicators as they are not that popular, and you are unlikely to
find them as default indicators on any trading platforms. I have
collected these custom indicators over the years from various sources.
I don’t fully understand the workings of them, but I do know how they
combine to give me certain trade signals on the charts. It is a bit like
driving a car where I don’t necessarily know how the car works but I do
know what it can do for me. If I put my foot down on the accelerator
pedal, then the car moves, and if I put my foot down on the brake
pedal, then the car will slow down. I have a basic understanding of how
a combustion engine and brakes work, but that is all. Same can be said
about the custom indicators. I know the basics but I don’t know the
detailed maths calculations behind them, and I don’t really need to.
From my previous books, one thing I did learn is that some of my
readers do want to get ‘down and dirty’ and fully understand how things
work, where I was criticised for not explaining how these indicators
calculate their signals. So, in this book I will go into a bit more depth
either via an explanation or by linking to articles to explain things better.
I am also happy to share the MT4 or MT5 source codes of these
indicators with any of my readers so you can see the inner workings of
the indicators for yourself. I’ve nothing to hide here.

12.3 QMP Filter
The first of the custom indicators is the QMP Filter. These are the red
and green dots displayed on the price chart. QMP stands for (Q)QE
Adv and (M)ACD (P)latinum. If you remember from above the QQE
Adv and the MACD Platinum were two of the indicators on my list. The
settings for the QMP Filter are as follows:
Higher Time Frame : Current
Fast : 12
Slow : 26
Smooth : 9
Zero Lag : True
SF : 1
RSI Period : 8
WP : 3

OR

SF : 10
RSI Period : 14
WP : 2

The next two input fields refer to setting up either a pop-up box or push
notifications for the indicator, so it is up to you if you wish to use these
features or not.
You will notice above that there are two different settings for the QQE
Adv component of the QMP Filter, where it will either be 1,8,3 or
10,14,2. These different settings will be explained later in the book.
The QMP Filter is made up of a combination of a new coloured dot on
the MACD Platinum that is in sync with a cross on the QQE Adv. The
MACD Platinum settings are the Fast, Slow, Smooth and Zero Lag in
the above list, and the QQE Adv settings are the SF, RSI Period & WP
in the above list. Often the QMP Filter dot and the MACD Platinum dot
will occur on the same candle, but not always, and it is not necessary
that they do.
The QMP Filter is not an actual signal itself, but more of a visual aid for
the two other indicators (MACD Platinum & QQE Adv) as it saves you
having to display both of these indicators on your chart and then using
the Data Window and crosshair to determine the syncing between the
dot and the cross on these two indicators. I don’t actually need the
QMP Filter, but it makes trading a lot easier.

The QMP Filter dot will only appear once a candle is closed, where the
trade signal is taken on the open of the new candle. So there will never
be a new QMP Filter dot displaying mid candle, which could then
disappear (this is known as repainting) if the actual signal was not
confirmed. Once the QMP Filter dot appears on the chart, it is there to
stay, hence it is not displayed until the current candle closes and the
signal is confirmed. These dots will also always appear in order of red,
green, red, green or green, red, green, red etc. There will never be two
green dots or two red dots in a row.
These QMP Filter dots are the trigger points for trade entries when all
your other rules are in confirmation. As an example, if everything was
setup for a potential sell signal and there were 5 minutes left on the
current 4hr candle, then once that 5 minutes pass and that current
candle closes, and if a new red QMP Filter dot appears above that
closed candle, then you would take the sell trade on the open of the
next 4hr candle. You will not see that dot until the candle closes, so
there are no false signals mid candle.

Figure 5 shows
the QMP Filter on the chart with the red dots showing potential sell trade signals and
the green dots showing potential buy trade signals. If taking a trade, then it is entered
on the open of the following candle after the signal candle.

At times the QMP Filter also assists with the closing of open trades, or
the addition of hedging trades. But more on this later.

12.4 MACD Platinum
Next is the MACD Platinum, which is a zero lag MACD. The settings for
this indicator are as follows:

Fast : 12
Slow : 26
Smooth : 9
Zero Lag : True
Show Markers on Cross : True
The next two input fields refer to setting up either a pop up box or push
notifications for the indicator, so it is up to you if you wish to use these
features or not. These are the only settings I use with this indicator. And
like the QMP Filter dot, the dot on the MACD Platinum will not appear
until the candle is closed and the cross has been confirmed.
When you upload the MACD Platinum to your trading platform, you will
notice a horizontal line that basically splits the indicator in two
(midpoint). This horizontal line is by default set at the zero level, and
generally you would be looking for buy trade signals when it is below
the zero level, and sell trade signals when it is above the zero level.
However there are times where there is divergence and the MACD
Platinum could be on the wrong side of the zero level, but you could still
decide to take the trade.
As the MACD Platinum is considered to be an oscillator type indicator,
it can also be used to determine potential divergences with price, and it
can also be used as an early warning signal for some trade
management. This will all be covered later in the book with some
examples.
The secret behind this indicator is the ‘zero lag’ feature. Once that is
activated, and it is by default, it gives the MACD a whole different look
compared to a standard MACD. You can Google ‘zero lag MACD’ and
you will find some information on it and other versions of it, or very close
to it. Generally you will find something like this, ‘Zero Lag MACD is a
technical indicator that attempts to remove “lag” in the Moving Average
Convergence Divergence indicator. It does this by using a Zero Lag
Moving Average instead of a traditional moving average. The Zero Lag
Moving Average places greater emphasis on recent prices, and less
emphasis on older prices’. You can also check out this article
(https://bit.ly/4bnChCU) for a breakdown of the maths formula involved.

Figure 6 shows
the MACD Platinum below the price chart, and as you can see, it oscillates around
that white dotted horizontal line, which is the zero level. Generally you should be
looking to buy when it's below the zero level and sell when it's above the zero level.

If you turn the zero lag feature off, then it looks like a standard MACD. If
you don’t know what a MACD is, you can find a great deal of
information on Google or YouTube. MACD stands for Moving Average
Convergence Divergence and is sometimes referred to as MACK D or
M.A.C.D. and it is one of the most popular technical indicators used in
all forms of trading.

12.5 QQE Adv
The final custom indicator is the QQE Adv, which stands for Qualitative
Quantitative Estimation Advanced, and is a fairly technical indicator in
how it actually works, but the guts of it is that it is based on a rather
complex calculation of the smoothed RSI indicators. As a result you get
two lines in a separate indicator window — one fast and one slow.
If you are interested in a more in depth understanding of the QQE Adv,
then I recommend you visit the following websites:
https://bit.ly/42muYXO
https://bit.ly/3OphMvC
The settings I use are as follows:
SF : 1
RSI Period : O
8
R

SF : 10
RSI Period :
14

WP : 3

WP : 2

I have also added three horizontal levels to the indicator, with these
being the 35, 50 and 65 levels. The 50 level is considered the midpoint
(like the zero level on the MACD Platinum) and I always have this level
displayed on the indicator when using it. The 35 and 65 levels are
optional, and are explained below.
The 10,14,2 are the main settings I use with this indicator when it is
used as a stand-alone indicator attached to the bottom of the chart. I
say this because when you read about the QMP Filter above, you
would have seen the same two sets of settings for the QQE Adv
component of that indicator. They have slightly different uses and will
be explained with examples later in the book.
Also later in the book I will discuss a bonus trading system that does
use the stand-alone QQE Adv displayed on the chart using the default
settings of 1,8,3. This system uses a trendline break for its trade
signals.
The QQE Adv is also considered an oscillator as it uses the RSI as a
part of its makeup. Traders generally use the RSI as an
overbought/oversold indicator. I did mention above that the 35 & 65
levels could be added to the QQE Adv, and these would also be used
to determine the overbought/oversold conditions. But concentrating on
the 50 level first, I’m generally looking to buy when both QQE Adv lines
are below the 50 level and sell when they are both above the 50 level. If
using the 35 & 65 levels, then I’m generally looking to buy when it has
gone below the 35 level and sell when it has gone above the 65 level.
I’m not too concerned if the 2x QQE Adv lines have crossed or not, but
it is a bonus if they have crossed in the preferred direction. The QQE
Adv can also be used as a filter to assist with managing and exiting
trades, and there is also the occasional time it can be used to identify
potential divergence with price.
If you were to attach the indicator to a MT4 or MT5 chart without using
my template, you would have to go into the Properties box for the
indicator and adjust the settings and colours. I would also suggest that
from the Properties box, you go into the Levels tab and add the 50
level.

This will put a horizontal line across your QQE Adv that basically splits
it in two. If you wanted to add the 35 and 65 levels, then I prefer to have
these two lines a different colour from my 50 level, so I don’t add them
via the Properties box, but instead hand draw these on the indicator
using the Horizontal Line tool offered on MT4 and MT5, and then make
them a different colour to my 50 level.
Or you could add the 35 & 65 levels via the Properties box and the 50
level via the platform’s drawing tool. Once you have everything set up
on the chart as you like, you can then save it as a template on either
MT4, MT5 or TradingView, so it is easy to go back to it when required.

Figure 7 has the
QQE Adv with the settings of 10, 14 & 2 added below the price chart. I have also
displayed the 35 & 65 overbought/oversold levels as marked by the green horizontal
lines, and the 50 level as marked by the yellow horizontal line.

All of the above indicators may seem a little confusing to you at first, but
once you see them on the charts and start looking back on historical
charts or use a simulator, you will soon get a good feel for how they
work and what to look for. I would even suggest that you load them onto
something like a 1 minute chart and watch it for an hour or so as this
will give you a better understanding on how they form, move and react
etc.

13
TRADING THOUGHTS
Following a brief overview of the chart setup and the indicators used, I
will go into more detail on these with trade examples and how to use
them in various scenarios. Like I keep on saying, there are many ways
to trade and many ways to approach the market. The same can be said
about how we use the different indicators and how we can use them to
our advantage. I want you to take my ideas from this book, test them
out and see what works for you, and if you find something that you like,
then make it a part of your trading system. It is very difficult for any
trader to blindly follow another trader and replicate their success, which
is why you should be building your own trading system where it
becomes second nature, routine, and hopefully overall profitable.
Some traders prefer to trade with the main trend only, or use stops on
every trade, or have a certain risk/reward ratio. That’s fine, and I have
no problem with that. Others like to use Fibonacci levels, Pivot levels,
Stochastics, RSI, Support/Resistance levels, lunar cycles etc. Once
again, I don’t have a problem with that. The goal is to think about your
trading from a different perspective. If you see potential in one or more
of my indicators or ideas, that’s great and I look forward to seeing what
you come up with.
There are a lot of so-called ‘gurus’ out there in the Forex trading space
who insist that it’s their way or the highway. That’s not my style as I
encourage traders to do their own thing and develop their own trading
systems. Also these ‘gurus’ will charge you large sums of money for
broken promises. I’m not saying that there aren’t any decent educators
or traders out there willing to help you with courses or training, but be
careful as the Forex world is full of sharks. Do your due diligence. It is
amazing what you can find on Google and YouTube these days if you

dig around a bit. And at the end of the day, you can always ask me for
my opinion via email or via any of the JAGfx social media platforms, as
I am more than happy to help where I can.
Occasionally, I will recommend other resources, educators and
products that I either use or have a good understanding of. The reason
for this is that I receive many requests for mentoring, trading courses,
broker recommendations, however my main focus is my own trading,
writing a few books to help others in this space and providing some
free email and social media support. I have no real desire to go into that
side of the Forex world. But like I said, I'm happy to help where I can.
Most of my trading is done on the higher time frames. If I am using
MT4, then it would be the 4hr charts and the Daily charts. My first
preference is for the Daily charts, but that is more to do with a lifestyle
choice than a trading choice. The Daily charts give me free time to do
other non-trading related things. I also believe that the Daily charts tend
to show the more stable trends and are not as affected by the major
news releases as other smaller time frames may be. I understand that
some traders get bored trading off the Daily charts, or they believe their
stops have to be too big, which will then limit their position size due to
their risk management rules. I don’t necessarily agree with that, but I
can understand where they are coming from. I also appreciate that a lot
of traders want to trade the lower time frames like the 5m or 15m
charts. They figure more trades will give them more money. True, in a
sense, but very hard work, with quick decision making and falling right
into the broker’s hands. Brokers want the turnover as they make their
money on the spreads. They also know that the majority of day traders
will burn out eventually, or keep adding funds to their accounts. There
are some very good lower time frame traders out there, but they are far
and few between. The majority of successful traders I am aware of, are
swing traders or longer term traders. I’ve been on the shorter time
frame charts, and I understand the appeal of being an active trader, but
hopefully you will see the light and gradually go out to the longer time
frames.
If you trade off the MT5 platform or TradingView, then they do offer
other time frames by default like the 6hr, 8hr and 12hr charts. All
decent time frames to trade in my opinion. And if you insist on trading
off MT4 and want to use one of these non default MT4 time frames, you

could always use a free demo MT5 or TradingView platform for
analysis and then take the actual trades on your MT4 platform. There
are options.
I would also suggest that for any trading you do, you keep a detailed
Trading Journal. This is especially true if you want to trade different
time frames or even different trading systems. It makes sense to do so
as it will give you something to look back on so you can evaluate your
trading history to see what’s working or what’s not working. I can’t
stress this enough. You need to know how your trading is going as you
may have to discard a pair or trading system, tweak a trading system,
modify your stop placement, adjust your risk percentage, etc.
It is up to you how you want to do this. There are some excellent
commercial 3rd party Trading Journals available or you could do what I
do, and that’s use Google Docs (word doc) and Google Sheets (excel).
These can be saved to the cloud and are accessible from any device.
Some traders will have separate trading accounts for different styles of
trading. For example, a trader may have one account for their longer
term trading, i.e. trading off the Daily charts, and a second account for
their Day Trading activities, i.e. scalping off the 5 min charts. This
probably isn’t necessary, but it may be a good idea for some, especially
those that may have a bit of a gambling issue. If you don’t have
separate accounts, then at least keep the different trading results, or
even different time frames, separated on individual spreadsheets. Or
have them clearly marked so that you know which is which. Again, all
for re-evaluation purposes.
Another suggestion regarding recording your trades is to take a
screenshot of every trade entered and save these to a dedicated folder
in the cloud. I do this with every trade I take and call in the JAGfx
Facebook Group and store them in a dedicated folder on Google Drive.
You could even expand on this and take screenshots as the trade
progresses so you have a running record. Up to you, but you want to be
able to do this quickly and reliably. I personally use a free software tool
called Lightshot, which is easy to download, and very simple and quick
to use. You will also find that MT4, MT5 and TradingView have settings
that allow you to take a screenshot of your charts.

There are also free 3rd party commercial accounts or portfolio tracking
software that can collate all of your trading statistics for you and display
them in various formats, which you can even share with others. These
include the popular options of MyFXbook and FXblue. Both are fairly
easy to set up and normally pretty reliable. And as always, there are
other more expensive options out there that can do the same thing.
You could even consider split testing your system. For example, if you
want to know whether taking profit at a certain risk/reward level would
be better than trailing a stop, you could split your position in two and
trade both independently according to the rules and record the results.
Once you have enough data, then you can compare and see what the
better option for you was. I think I have mentioned it before, but I’ll
repeat it, there may be some work required by you to make this venture
work long term.
As previously mentioned, most of my personal trading is done on the
Daily time frame. That is a lifestyle choice for me. I sometimes trade on
the 4hr, 6hr, 8hr and 12hr charts. Every now and then, I will do a bit of
day trading, which for me, normally involves the 3m or 10m charts. I’m
not a fan of day trading as I don’t like sitting staring at my computer
screen for hours on end. I use the same chart set up and rules for all
time frames. Nothing changes there. The only difference is that if I am
day trading, I tend to choose a certain trading session and only
concentrate on one or two of the major pairs only.
If I’m trading the Daily charts, then I am only looking at those charts
once every 24hrs. If I’m trading the 12hr charts, then I’m only looking at
those charts every 12hrs. 8hr charts every 8hrs and so on. I am not
babysitting my trades and watching every pip move.
There are many ways to trade, and here are some different approaches
to the market:
Trade multiple pairs
Trade multiple pairs on multiple time frames
Trade one pair on one time frame
Trade one pair on multiple time frames
Trade one system only
Trade multiple systems
Trade using stops

Trade without using stops
Trade using profit targets
Trade without using profit targets
Trade using trailing stops
Hedge trading
Dollar cost average trading
Enter trades at market with full position
Scale into a full position
Use limit orders to enter
Use a combination of at market & limit orders to enter
Scale out of trades
Close trades on opposites trade signal
Use higher time frame to filter trades
Use lower time frame for optimal entries
Consider fundamentals when trading
Only trade with the trend
Only counter trend trade
Reversion to the mean trading
Trendline break trading
And so on.
This list is by no means exhaustive. I‘m trying to keep it fairly relevant to
my chart set up and the way I look at the charts. And as you can see,
there are many options available, and the thing is, not one option is the
right option. As I keep repeating, you have to find something you are
comfortable with.
To give you an example of this, say I am trading the High Probability
trading system from one of my earlier books on the Daily charts. A new
trade signal presents, which I then take at market with my full trade
position size, with a risk percentage based on my analysis of the
strength of that trade signal. I then set a stop loss on that trade and
walk away from the chart. I do not set a profit target. I will then look at
that same chart approximately 24hrs later and make any necessary
adjustments. This may include things like doing nothing, closing the
entire trade, adjusting the stop loss, closing half and adjusting the stop
loss, depending on what has happened in the last 24hrs.

The majority of these trades, similar to the example mentioned earlier,
tend to move against me initially. This raises the question: Why don’t
you set a limit order for entry or drop down to a lower time frame and
look for a more optimal entry? Both are valid suggestions, but as I said
earlier, this is about lifestyle for me. I don’t want to spend more time on
the charts than necessary, nor do I want to use the extra brainpower to
work out where to place a limit order that may or may not be hit.
This is generally followed by the question of why I don’t set a profit
target or indicate what my risk/reward is. Again, both are valid
questions. For me, I have no idea of where a market is going to go and
then turn, so I like to try and get as much out of a move as possible.
Hence, I rarely set a profit target. I tend to scale out and then trail my
stop loss. Risk/reward is not a concern for me either, and it is a statistic
that I don’t place too much emphasis on. I can recall one of my older
results spreadsheet running at an overall negative risk/reward where I
was basically risking $1 to make $0.92, and this was overall profitable
as my trade win percentage was up around 76%. Some trading gurus
would not agree with this at all, and I'm not sure why.
Generally, with a high risk/reward trading system, the system tends to
have a lot more losers than winners, whereas a low risk/reward system
tends to have more winners than losers. Both scenarios could be
overall profitable, which is great, but then the mind games come into
play. If you had results like the super successful Turtle traders, with a
win rate of just less than 30%, could you handle the 70% in trade
losses? When they won, they won big, and when they lost, they lost
small. But it took plenty of discipline, patience and courage to trade like
this.
I could possibly improve my results if I used a limit order for entry or
had a profit target set and was conscious of having a positive
risk/reward. However, I don’t like to see an entry missed due to no
pullback to my limit order entry, followed by a big move in my desired
direction. The same could be said about a profit target, for instance, if
my target was 150 pips and then the market moved 1050 pips. These
are things that mess with my head, so I trade in a way that I am
comfortable with and do things that make me feel warm and fuzzy. As
long as I am long term profitable and my drawdown is acceptable, then
I’m happy with that.

So, in a roundabout way, please don’t ask me why I don’t do this or
that, or why I trade the way I do. I trade this way because it’s what I am
comfortable with.

14

TRADING IDEAS
Now it is time to look at some different trading methods, and I touched
on some of them previously. All I ask is that you approach all of these
methods with an open mind. I appreciate that some of them won’t be
suitable for some traders for whatever reason, and I fully understand
this. I will try and give warnings where I can with regards to risk and
also give you some suggestions on trade and/or money management
ideas for each.
Note: There will be high risk ideas presented, and I would
suggest if you are not comfortable with these, then stick with
the lower risk, more traditional ways of trading.
There are basically three ways of trading. One is with the trend, the
second is against the trend and the third is trading in a range. I could
get a little more specific here and argue that there are also breakout
trades, pullback or retracement trades etc. But generally, you are either
trading with an established trend or you are looking for a turning point
in that trend and trading in the new direction or you are trading within a
specified zone on the chart.
How do you determine a trend? The simplest way is to look at the chart
from left to right. Sometimes the trend will be obvious and sometimes it
won’t. You could use a multitude of other indicators to do the same.
You could use my three MAs with the settings already discussed, or a
popular one is a 200 Moving Average where if price is above it, then it
is considered in an uptrend, and if price is below it, then it is in a
downtrend. If it is flat and price meandering around it, then the market
is probably in a range or a sideways type market. I wouldn’t get too
caught up in it though as you will easily see when the market is in a

huge trend and it may not be smart to enter a trade against it. Generally
these are fairly obvious.
Keep in mind that markets don’t move in straight lines. For example, in
an uptrend a currency pair may move up 200 pips, and then pull back
50 pips, before heading up another 150 pips, and then pull back 35
pips before heading back up again. The same can be said about a
downtrend. It’s a matter of having a look at some historical charts on
any time frame and this will be very obvious to you. If you are reading
this book, then I can assume that you already have a decent
understanding of how markets move and how to identify trending or
ranging markets, so I won’t dwell on this, but understanding market
structure is a good skill to have and will help your trading immensely.
My initial entry into trading in the late 90’s was via some basic WD
Gann training, which was all about market structure, which gave me a
good grounding on this subject. Also spending hours on historical
charts will help hone your skills in this area.
One thing I would like to point out here is that we are trading Forex here
and not Stocks. Stocks tend to have a bullish bias where a lot of the
times it is not wise to short (sell) them. Not always, but most of the time.
Whereas with Forex, each trading instrument is made up of two
currencies, so each individual currency is showing strength and
weakness at various times, where governments/central banks also
keep an eye on their value. Look at a pair like the AUD/USD over the
last few years and see how it moves between the 0.6200 and 0.7500
price levels. These sorts of movements allow us to comfortably trade in
the buy or sell direction at any time. This is one of the advantages of
Forex trading, in my opinion.
The ideas I’m going to present in this book can be traded on any time
frame and just about any trading instrument. It is simply a matter of
adding the template to the chart of your choice and going back in time
to see if the system had worked or not. The majority of my trading is on
Forex, so I am not in a position to comment on other trading
instruments, but there is nothing stopping you from having a look
yourself.
As a trader you have a few decisions to make once you have decided
on a potential trade entry. For example, what is your risk percentage (or

position size) on the trade, where would you like to place your stop loss
and profit target (if using either). Everyone has a different way of looking
at things, a different risk tolerance, and a different trading personality.
But I am here to at least give you some ideas on these subjects.

15
STOP LOSSES
Sticking with the standard low risk is the conservative way of trading
and when electing to use a stop loss, your stop placement needs to be
far enough from the entry to give the trade room to breathe. Yet, it
should be in an area where, if the structure of the market has changed,
you should be out of the trade anyway. How much you risk on a trade
is again up to you. The industry standard seems to be the 0.5% to 2%
risk per trade.
You might even consider adjusting the risk on how you rate the trade
setup. For example the setup may be an A+ where all the planets align;
you might decide to risk 2% on that particular trade. On the other hand,
the trade setup may only be considered a B-, and you may decide to
risk 0.5% on that trade. The more you risk, and with all the same
settings, the larger your position size will be, obviously.
A great tool for determining risk per trade is the freely available Position
Size Calculator in MyFXbook (https://bi6t.ly/3SmIwOr). There are
plenty of other similar tools available, but I’ve used this one for years
and it works well for me.
Regarding the placement of stop losses, there is no perfect position.
There are times where you will be stopped out of a trade by a pip or
two, and then the market reverses in the original direction that you had
originally traded. Here you might think that you were stop-hunted by the
brokers, and that everyone is out to get you, but that’s the way it is
sometimes. Everyone basically places their stop loss in the same area,
which is normally just above/below a recent high/low, or on the other
side of a particular indicator (e.g. 200MA) or some other significant
level on the chart.

The banks and big institutions know where these stops are, and they
may make a run towards them to flush other traders out to assist with
their own positions. Get used to it if you are using stop losses, as this
will happen from time to time. Place your stop somewhere smart, and
try not to follow the herd. Even if it is a few more pips further away, and
you may then have to reduce your position size to accommodate your
risk, it will at least keep you away from the majority, and it may not be
such an easy target. Using a tool like the ATR (Average True Range)
may assist you with initial stop placement, and there are plenty of
articles and YouTube videos about this method.
The problem with stop loss placement, as previously mentioned, is that
there is no perfect way to determine where to place them, and you will
hear many opinions on the subject. It is up to the individual trader, and
once money management is considered (which is a must), it becomes a
matter of finding somewhere that works for you.
I’m assuming that the readers of this book are smarter than the
beginner trader who may think a 20 pip stop with a 100 pip profit target
on all trades is the answer to all of their financial dreams. We know that
this rarely works. For a start, every pair and every time frame is
different, as well as the actual trade setup itself. Please be smart about
stop placement when using them and don’t be afraid to go out a bit
further if required.

Figure 8 shows
a basic chart with the QMP Filter attached. If you were to take every buy and sell trade
as per the red and green QMP Filter dots, then the small blue horizontal lines
represent where I would consider setting the stops for those trades. Not directly
above/below a previous high/low, but a few pips clear of it.

Other than a 20 pip stop loss probably being a bit too tight when
trading Forex, especially on the higher time frames, this scenario would
wreak havoc on the minds of most traders. Here, I am referring to the
trading psychology side of things. I won't go into too much detail on the
complex subject of trading psychology in this book as there are plenty
of other resources that you can refer to, but it is a significant factor and
something to consider. One thing about live trading is that it can mess
with the mind. No, I’ll change that. It WILL mess with your mind! You
will experience feelings that you never thought existed in your makeup some good, some bad, some in between, and some you wouldn’t wish
on your worst enemy. Trust me on this, as I’ve probably experienced
most of them. If you don’t, then you are either a machine or an outlier.
I’ve touched on this previously, but it is worth going over again. Going
back to the sample of 100 trades where you win 30 and lose 70. Even
though, in theory, you were overall profitable, most traders will struggle
with the mental side of losing 70% of the time. It is highly unlikely you
will win 1 trade and then lose 2 trades, followed by 1 winner and then 2
more losers. Imagine if you started with your new trading system, and
your first 7 trades were losers. The mind will be doing backflips, with
thoughts like ‘this trading system is crap.’
This could then be followed by another 7 losing trades. Now you have
had 14 losing trades, and if you weren’t starting to have doubts about it
after the first 7 losers, you would be by now. Then you have your 5
winning trades and you end up back in profit, but at what toll on your
emotions? Can you see where I am going with this? In a perfect world
where you are a machine and you have total faith in your fully back
tested trading system, then it wouldn’t be a problem. But that is not the
way it is. Things don’t always go to plan, and the mental side of trading
is a huge obstacle for most.
I’ve probably gone off track a little here as I touch on the subject of
trading psychology, but hopefully you see my point. This side of trading
is not the sexy side, that’s for sure, but to help you with the whole
trading package, I would strongly suggest you do some of your own
research on this subject. I do discuss it in my first book, Forex
Trading: The Basics Explained in Simple Terms, but there are
many good books out there that concentrate on this one subject alone
and may be worth a read for some of you.

16
ACTUAL TRADING IDEAS
Now I will go into a bit more detail on how to use the indicators on the
charts. Here I will cover many ways of looking at entries and trade
management. It may be information overload for some, but I am trying
to give you as many different ways as possible to approach the market.
Now I don’t suggest you go with all of my ideas, but instead find
something that resonates with you and run with that. And like I have
been saying many times already, make sure you do your own testing,
so you know that what you have chosen, actually works in real time and
not only in theory.
Like I said, there are many ideas now coming your way. Take your time
and go through them one at a time, and hopefully there will be
something here that you can build a trading system around or even
improve your current trading system. All I ask is that you go in with an
open mind and filter out what you like and what you don’t like.
I will start with the very basic first and work up from there. Probably the
simplest is to add the QMP Filter to a higher time frame chart, with the
Daily time frame the preferred option here. Here I would be using the
1,8,3 settings on the QMP Filter as they tend to get closer to the
tops/bottoms of price. Basically, trade from dot to dot without worrying
about any other indicators. You can have a look at the 10,14,2 settings
if you wish, but they will tend to get you in later to a trade, but having
said that, they should keep you in the trade longer due to there being
less QMP Filter dots presented compared to the 1,8,3 settings.

Figure 9 shows
exactly that. Here is the same chart over the same time period stacked on top of each
other. The top chart with the red and green QMP Filter dots are the settings of 1,8,3
and the bottom chart with the yellow and blue QMP Filter dots are the settings of
10,14,2.

So if there is a new green QMP Filter dot, then take the buy trade on
the open of the next candle. You then have a couple of options here
when it comes to trade management. The safe option would be to place
a stop loss below the most recent low that the green QMP Filter dot
appeared on, which is the lowest point in price prior to the signal
candle. You could also use something like a 1.5x ATR or something
similar. Make sure you give the trade a bit of room to wiggle though, so
no super tight stops. Then it is up to you whether you want to place a
profit target or not, but if you do go down this path, then I would suggest
a 1/1 risk/reward, or even a 1/1.1 risk/reward, to give yourself a bit of a
buffer. So if your stop loss was 120 pips, then you would be looking for
+120 pips or so in profit. This also lets you take the trade and walk
away from it if you so choose (set and forget), where either your stop
will be taken out or your profit target would be achieved.
If you weren’t going to use a profit target, then I would suggest that you
manually manage the trade on a Daily basis. This may include a partial
closing of the position and the use of a trailing stop. This would be my
preferred option, keeping in mind that whatever time frame you are
trading, you only really need to check the trades at the open of each
new candle on that time frame. No need to micromanage trades here.
Another option would be to consider not using a stop and then going
with one of the Loss Recovery techniques, mentioned later in the book,
as these techniques work well with this type of trading. You would only
go into loss recovery mode if the trade went against you and there was

an opposite QMP Filter dot. You could also use the Loss Recovery
techniques even if you did use a stop loss, as not much really changes
there, as a loss is a loss, no matter how it happens.
But we can always improve on using the QMP Filter as a stand-alone
indicator. So let's have a look at a few different options here and how
the use of the QMP Filter can be combined with other indicators.
You could put the MAs on the chart, and then only take trades in the
direction of the trend. If the trend is not clear, then stay out of that
market. Your call, but if the MAs are tight and flat, then generally I am
happy to take trades in either direction as there is a possibility of a
breakout setup forming. But playing it safe with the MAs when they are
stacked and spreading, I would only be taking trades in the same
direction as the MAs.

Figure 10 shows two charts on top of each other. The top one is a down trend where
the MAs are clearly stacked the correct way, where you would only take sell trades.
The bottom chart is an obvious up trend according to the MAs, so you would only
take buy trades. You won’t win them all, but the odds are in your favour to win more
than you lose.

The Bollinger Bands can also be used. For example if price had hit the
upper band at some point and that was followed by a red QMP Filter
dot, then you could take a sell trade here. The opposite for a buy trade,
where price had hit the lower band at some point and that was followed
by a green QMP Filter dot. This could also be considered as a trade
entry filter also, where your rule may be that if the upper or lower bands
weren’t touched prior to the QMP Filter dot, then you would disregard
that trade setup.

You will get plenty of trade setups using the Bollinger Bands with the
20/2.0 settings, but the trade setups will be a lot scarcer using the
80/3.0 settings. But having said that, the 80/3.0 setup will have a higher
win rate, but it could be a long time between drinks.

Figure 11 shows
a price chart with both the QMP Filter and the 20/2.0 Bollinger Bands attached. I have
marked up all the valid sell signals with red vertical lines and the buy signals with
blue vertical lines. Again not all winners, but better than 50/50 at least.

With regards to the Bollinger Bands, you could also look at using the
centre band as a filter for taking trades. For example if you were taking
a sell trade and price had already hit the upper band, you may only
consider taking that sell trade if the signal candle closing price was still
above the centre band. It is the opposite for a buy trade, where price
had already hit the lower band, you may only consider a buy trade if the
signal candle closing price was still below the centre band.

Figure 12 shows a price chart with the QMP Filter and the 20/2.0 Bollinger Bands
attached, with the blue vertical lines showing the valid buy signals and the red

vertical lines showing the valid sell signals. Then inside the red circles there are trade
signals that were invalidated because price closed on the wrong side of the Bollinger
Band centre band.

The MACD Platinum is the next option, whereas mentioned previously,
if the MACD Platinum is below the zero level, then generally you would
only be looking for buy trades, and if above the zero level, then
generally only sell trades. This rule is not set in stone though, as there
may be the case of a divergence setup or some other great setup that
gets me excited, where you may decide to ignore this rule. But most of
the time, you will be buying when it is below the zero level and selling
when it is above the zero level.

Figure 13 shows a price chart with the QMP Filter attached and also the MACD
Platinum below it. The red vertical lines represent valid sell signals and the blue
vertical lines represent valid buy signals, if using the MACD Platinum zero level as a
filter. As you can see there were a few QMP Filter dots that there were no trades taken
at all.

And finally the QQE Adv, and there are also a couple of options here
when using this indicator. The simplest one is very similar to the MACD
Platinum where you would only take buy trades when both QQE Adv
lines are below the 50 level, and sell trades when both QQE Adv lines
are above the 50 level. The second option is to use the
overbought/oversold levels only, which will greatly reduce the number
of trades, but should produce higher quality results. So if any of the
QQE Adv lines touch or go above the 65 level, then you would be
looking to sell, and if any of the QQE Adv lines touch or go below the 35
level, then you would be looking to buy.

Figure 14 shows a price chart with the QMP Filter attached and the QQE Adv (10,14,2)
below it. The red vertical lines show the valid sell signals and the blue vertical lines
show the valid buy signals when looking at the 50 level of the QQE Adv. You will also
notice that if we were only to take oversold/overbought type trade signals, then what
looks like a bicycle on the right side of the chart where the QQE Adv lines fell below
the 35 level, would have been the only valid trade signals on this chart, and they
would been buy signals.

All of the above go hand in hand with the QMP Filter signals,
remembering that the QMP Filter dot is the trigger point for all of my
trading setups. And there is no reason you couldn’t use a mix of the
above and find something that works for you.
If you have read my High Probability or Divergence books, then you
would know that the system used in those books is the QMP Filter, the
MAs and the MACD Platinum displayed on the charts, and using them
as mentioned above, which is a solid and robust system in its own right,
but in this book I am looking at ways to possibly improve on that. I’m
giving you a few more options by adding in the Bollinger Bands and the
QQE Adv. And as I mentioned earlier, you may choose not to add all of
the indicators to your chart, in an effort to avoid the chart looking too
busy and cluttered.

Figure 15 shows the original High Probability/Divergence chart set. The QMP Filter
(1,8,3) the three MAs (50,100,240) and the default MACD Platinum. And as usual, the
blue vertical lines represent valid buy signals and the red vertical lines represent
valid sell signals. This is hopefully what we are going to improve on in this book.

17
SUPPORT AND RESISTANCE
Now one thing that seems to work very well in Forex trading, especially
on the higher time frames, are support and resistance levels, whether
that be double/triple tops/bottoms or something similar. I’m not into
other chart patterns like head and shoulders, triangles, candlesticks
etc, so I can’t really comment on them. Nor do I use Fibonacci, pivot
levels, Elliott wave analysis etc. But all are viable tools if used correctly
and if you are overall profitable using them. It’s not my thing, even
though my initial training in trading was basic WD Gann stuff which
revolved around market structure and Fibonacci levels, which I was
grateful for as it gave me a good starting point in my trading journey.
This was in the mid-90s where computers or charting software wasn’t
really a thing. I used to draw all of my charts by hand on huge graph
type paper on a desk I had specifically built for this. Boy, things have
changed since then.
Going back to the support and resistance levels, when considering a
trade setup, it always pays to look left on the chart and see if one of
those levels are present, keeping in mind that many other traders are
also looking at these levels, so there will be plenty of orders in the
market around them. This goes back to the question of whether it is
self-fulfilling or not, but that’s neither here nor there, as it gives us
another tool in our trading arsenal that may give us a better chance of
being profitable on that trade. Also these levels give us a good spot to
place a stop loss (if using one), but make sure that the stop loss is a
few pips on the other side of that level and well clear of any potential
taking out of stops. By that, I mean not too tight and not where
everyone else is placing their stops.
You could always consider zooming out on a chart, or even going up to

a higher time frame to give you a clearer picture of market structure.
For example if you were trading on a 4hr chart, you may have a look at
the Daily chart, or if trading off the Daily chart, you may have a look at
the Weekly chart. I’m not one to forecast price moves too much into the
future other than what I think may happen immediately next based on
my current trade setup, but nothing wrong with looking back a bit to see
what has happened, or looking at a higher time frame, and how it may
assist you with the current setup.

18
ROUND NUMBERS
Big round numbers also work on some pairs. By big round numbers, I
am referring to something like the EUR/USD being at 1.0000 (parity),
or the AUD/USD around the 0.7000 level. If you look back to October
2022 on the USD/JPY, you will see that price poked up through the
150.00 level before falling away.
As I write this book in late 2023, the USD/JPY had also gone up above
the 150.00 price level and then fallen away over the next few weeks.
Nice resistance level (double top) at a big round number.
If you were trading Gold (XAU/USD), then recently it has been stuck
between $1800 and $2000. There tends to be a lot of orders placed by
traders around these big round numbers, which you could also use to
your advantage.

Figure
16
shows two charts. The top one is the USD/JPY Weekly chart showing the 150.000
level as a strong point of resistance over a long period of time. The bottom chart is
the XAU/USD (Gold) Weekly chart with the $2,000 level marked up, and as you can
see it has trouble breaking through this level and remaining above it.

19
EXTREME LEVELS
Now I will discuss what I call extreme levels. By this I am referring to
times when price moves hard and fast in one direction where it creates
a fairly substantial gap between it and the MAs. The same could be
said about the Bollinger Bands where price hugs the upper or lower
bands for an extended period. Generally things will settle eventually
and there will possibly be a retracement on price back to the MAs or to
the centre Bollinger Band. This sort of move may present a decent
trade setup, but keep in mind that this will normally be against a trend
and therefore could be considered a higher risk trade.
The extreme levels also refer to the MACD Platinum and the QQE Adv.
Both of these indicators are oscillators so the MACD Platinum will
eventually come back to the zero level and the QQE Adv will eventually
come back to the 50 level. When they are a fair distance from the zero
and 50 levels, and a decent trade setup presents, then this is
something that can be taken advantage of. Again, it could be
considered a higher risk trade so risk percentage needs to be seriously
considered.
The extreme levels are potentially good setups that don’t come around
that often, but be careful here as the trend may continue in the same
direction for a lot longer than you expected. Like most trading,
sometimes it is easier to go with the trend than against it, so be smart
when it comes to risk percentage on these types of trades.

20
DIVERGENCE
Going back to my call on always looking left when considering a trade
setup, you should be doing this every time you check your charts
anyway. The reason being is that divergence may have formed, and as
I have already written an entire book on the subject, then obviously I am
a big fan of it and consider it to be an important part of my trading when
it presents.
I won’t go into too much detail about it in this book as it is well and truly
covered already in my Divergence book, but I will cover some of the
basics. Divergence basically means that price is moving in one
direction and an indicator is moving in the opposite direction, which
means something is not quite right with the market and there may be a
correction in price at some point in the near future. Some traders refer
to divergence as a leading indicator, unlike the traditional indicators as
mentioned above, which are sometimes referred to as lagging
indicators.
There are two types of divergence - regular divergence and hidden
divergence. They are then broken down into bullish and bearish
divergences, which gives us four chart patterns to look for. These being
the following:
1.

​Regular Bullish Divergence

2.

​Regular Bearish Divergence

3.

​Hidden Bullish Divergence

4.

​Hidden Bearish Divergence

Most traders are familiar with the regular divergences as they are fairly

common and easy to spot on a chart, but a lot of traders struggle in
identifying hidden divergences on the charts. It can be a little confusing
for some, and it took me a while to wrap my head around hidden
divergences, but with the help of cheat cards next to my computer and
plenty of time looking for them on historical charts, they now come easy
to me. And trust me, if you are going to use divergence as a tool, then
you really want to understand hidden divergences as they tend to work
out very well most of the time. Not always, but certainly worth your time
mastering the identification of them.
The main difference between regular divergence and hidden
divergence is that regular divergence tends to be looking for a turning
point in the market, or a trend reversal, whereas hidden divergence is
normally a trend continuation pattern. So straight away you can see that
it would be advantageous to trade hidden divergences over regular
divergences, as it is much easier trading with a trend than against it.
But having said that, when you do find a turning point in the market with
regular divergence, it can lead to some very handsome profits as the
moves can be substantial. But the problem is that with regular
divergence, it may fail a few times before it eventually plays out in your
favour, if at all.

Figure
17
shows a chart with the QMP Filter and MACD Platinum presenting a number of
different divergences. I have numbered them 1 to 6 from left to right.
1.

​Regular bearish divergence

2.

​Hidden bullish divergence

3.

​Hidden bearish divergence

4.

​Regular bullish divergence

5.

​Hidden bearish divergence

6.

​Hidden bearish divergence

21
TRENDLINE BREAKS
Trendlines are also something I use at times. Like my divergence
trendlines you sometimes see on my charts, the basic trendline is also
hand drawn using the platform’s drawing tools. The popular way of
using trendlines is to draw them on charts as a dynamic support or
resistance level on price. This is very similar to the horizontal lines of
support and resistance, except the trendlines are at different angles i.e.
sloping up or down. Traders then sometimes look for a confirmed break
of the trendline to then take a trade.
The way I use them is similar to the above, but with a slight twist. At
times you will see a red or green QMP Filter dot on the price chart
where you take the trade, and then price goes against that signal for a
substantial period of time, however it does not present an opposite
QMP Filter dot. The original signal will remain valid, which in turn may
present an opportunity to draw a trendline across the price highs/lows,
where you would then wait for a confirmed break of that trendline,
before taking another trade in the original direction. For example, it may
have been a green QMP Filter dot (buy signal), and price continues to
drop lower, however there is no red QMP Filter dot, so the buy signal
remains valid. If possible, you could then draw a trendline across the
price highs and once there is a candle that closes above the trendline,
then you could consider taking a 2nd buy trade. This could either be a
new buy trade if you had been stopped out on your original buy trade,
or an additional buy trade if you are still in the original trade.

Figure 18 shows two basic charts with the QMP Filter attached. The left one shows a
red QMP Filter dot where a sell trade could have been taken. And as you can see
price continues higher but there is no opposite green QMP Filter dot. A trendline is
drawn across the lows and once there has been a confirmed break of that trendline to
the downside, a 2nd sell trade could have been taken on the open of the next candle.
It is the exact opposite for the chart on the right as that shows a potential 2nd buy
trade setup.

And staying with trendlines, there is no right or wrong way to draw
them, and you will hear various traders spruiking about how they should
be drawn. Some will say they should be at the extreme highs/lows of
candles (end of the wick), whereas others, including myself, are happy
enough to draw them across the main body of the candles. So, there
are no hard and fast rules when it comes to Trendline drawing, as long
as you are consistent on how you draw them. Also keep in mind that
they don’t always work out, where you may have to actually draw more
than one trendline on the same setup as price continues to bounce
around without any clear direction.

22
FURTHER TRADING IDEAS
Another conservative way to trade any of these methods would be to
use multiple time frame analysis. Sometimes you will hear this referred
to as top down analysis. For example, you identified a great looking buy
setup on the Daily chart using the rules above. Instead of taking the
trade signal based on the Daily chart, you would instead drop down to
either a 1hr or 4hr chart, and then only take valid buy signals based on
either of those time frames. You could even consider dropping down to
a much lower time frame like the 15 minute chart for an optimal entry
and stop loss placement. You could use the exact same rules as above,
or you could use a completely different system that identifies buy
signals. There is nothing stopping you taking the actual Daily trade
signal, and other trade signals from the other time frames at the same
time. Obviously you would have to consider your overall risk as the
position sizes accumulate, as this is something very important and has
to be monitored closely. If things go bad, then you will be affected on all
time frames.
Taking the multi time frame scenario a little further, it may be the case
that you are trading this system on multiple time frames but not using
them to filter trade direction. By this I mean, you may be trading the
EUR/USD on the Daily chart, where a sell signal presents, and at the
same time you may also be trading the EUR/USD on the 4hr chart
where a buy signal presents. Now some traders would avoid the 4hr
trade setup as it is not in alignment with the Daily signal. But there is
nothing wrong with treating each trade setup individually, where you
would take both trades even though they oppose each other.
I understand that some jurisdictions, i.e. the USA, and some brokers
don’t allow trading on the same pair in opposite directions at the same

time, but that can be worked around by either having two or more
trading accounts. And some traders are not comfortable trading like
this, which I fully understand. Just because you are long and short on
the same pair does not mean you will lose on one and win on the other,
as it may be the case you could win on both, or even lose on both. Each
time frame has a different setup and objectives. For example a 200 pip
move on a Daily chart is not that uncommon, but a 200 pip move on a
1hr chart or 4hr chart may be considered a big move. So if you made
200 pips on the Daily signal, then that is not bad, and if you made 100
pips on the 4hr signal, then that also is not bad. It’s all relative.
Another option is to try and take further advantage of a decent Daily
trade signal. If you thought you had an A+ trade signal, you may wish to
try and cash in on this by increasing your return potential by using a
commercial EA that trades a completely different way. Here I am
referring to something like a grid trader, or an EA that takes multiple
positions (and possibly of various sizes) and tries to exploit a bigger
move. For example, the trade signal on the Daily chart may present a
200 pip move in your favour, whereas if you added an EA to a lower
time frame, it may end up profiting a 1000 pips from that same 200 pip
move. Now I’m trying to give you ideas here and get you thinking out of
the box a little. There is no need to be the one signal, one trade entry
type trader. This type of trading is not for everyone and you have to be
super disciplined when it comes to risk management and monitoring
these trades.

23
TRADE MANAGEMENT IDEAS
I have already discussed quite a few trade entry ideas and also some
filters to assist with those trade entries. But to be honest, I do believe in
the school of thought that states that most traders fail because of poor
trade management. It is not that hard to enter trades, but then it is what
you do with those trades once you are in that will determine if you are a
successful trader or not. There was some mention of this already in the
above section of the book relating to traders’ expectations and what
can let traders down at times.
In this section, I’m referring more to the traditional type of trading where
you have a stop loss in place and then manage the trade individually
from there. The Loss Recovery, Hedging and DCA trade entry
techniques, that are mentioned later in the book, are a type of trade
management plan in their own right, but the below mentioned ideas can
also be applied once the trade is in an overall profitable position, no
matter what your intentions were at the time of entry.
I want to make one thing clear here. It doesn’t matter how good your
trade setup is or if you have the perfectly placed stop loss, there will be
times when price goes against you and takes you out of the trade for a
loss. Accept that and you will handle the psychological side of trading
much better, albeit you may be a little frustrated at times. It is a part of
trading. Forget about the perfect trading system as it does not exist.
So the obvious place to start is by discussing actual stop losses. I’ve
discussed this in detail already but generally they should be placed far
enough from your entry point at a place on the chart that if hit, then you
could assume that the market structure has changed and you shouldn’t
be in the trade anyway. A stop loss is there to protect your capital and

control your loss on that trade if it is stopped out.
Unless you have a very specific trading system that requires a very
tight stop loss, I would suggest you avoid doing this. You will get
stopped out way too many times which will in turn mess with your mind.
And again, unless you have a very specific trading system that requires
it, you shouldn’t be moving your stop loss further from your entry level
at any time. In a nutshell, if moving your stop loss, it should only be in a
direction heading closer to your entry level or past it, either reducing
risk or locking in profits.
And don’t be in a rush to move a stop loss. As already mentioned, you
should be only checking your trades at the open of the new candle on
the time frame you are trading. As most of my personal trading revolves
around the Daily charts, I’m only checking my trades once every 24hrs.
The only time I may move a stop loss mid candle, is if there is really big
news coming out and I feel I need to take some action on the trade for
whatever reason, whether that be to lock in profit or reduce risk. But
this is fairly rare.
Now let's have a look at how we can use the Bollinger Bands to assist
with trade management. Earlier I mentioned that you could use the
centre band as a trade entry filter, where you would only take buy
trades if the signal candle closed below the centre band, and only take
sell trades if the candle closed above the centre band. The opposite
could be used for trade management, where if price then closes on the
other side of the centre band, then you could consider a possible partial
close of your trade, and/or, moving your stop loss to a better position.
For example if you had taken a buy trade when price had closed below
the centre band, then when price closed above the centre band, you
could consider closing half of your trade and moving your stop loss up
to an overall break even level. It would be the opposite for a sell trade.
There will be times when using this method, that you may be taken out
of a trade early because the current price and your stop loss may be
too close, where you could be stopped out prematurely. There will also
be times when there isn’t really enough profit on the table to make it a
viable option, so you may have to use some discretion here, and
possibly consider waiting for another candle or two.
Then you have the upper and lower Bollinger Bands which can also be

used to assist with trade management, where you may target the
opposite band for a place to take some action on your trade. For
example, you took a buy trade after price had at some point prior,
touched the lower band. You would then wait for price to touch the
upper band, where you would then consider taking some action on the
trade. And when I say take some action on a trade, I mean something
like a partial close and/or stop loss adjustment.
A note on stop loss adjustment, as there are some options here also. It
may be the case that if you did take a partial close on a trade, you may
consider moving your stop loss to an overall break even level, or the
point of entry level, or another relevant level. To give a simple example
of what I mean by an overall break even level, if I was in a buy trade for
0.20 lots and it had gone up +30 pips where I then decided to close half
of my trade (0.10 lot), then to put me in an overall break even position
on the entire trade, I would move my stop loss up to 30 pips below my
entry price. So if the remaining 0.10 lot gets stopped out, then the
overall result for both parts of the trade was an overall break even result
(+30 pips on 0.10 lot and -30 pips on 0.10 lot). But if you had moved
your stop loss up to the point of entry after closing the first half at +30
pips, then if you were then stopped out on the remaining half, the
overall result would be a +15 pip profit. That’s ignoring spread and any
overnight night interest rates (swap fees) etc.

Figure 19 shows a price chart with the QMP Filter and Bollinger Bands (20 & 2.0)
where the buy signals are marked by the blue vertical lines and the sells with the red

vertical lines. As the buy trade opens below the centre band, which is marked by the
lower yellow line, then price goes up and closes above the centre band as marked by
the upper yellow line, you could close half your position and move the stop up to the
red line, so not only does it give the trade room to develop further, it also puts you in
an overall ‘no lose’ position with the trade. It is the opposite for the sell trades. And as
you can see, price on five of them continued to the opposite outer band, so you could
have even trailed the stop up and locked in further profit.

Then we get to the MACD Platinum and how that can be used to assist
with trade management. If you have read my High Probability or
Divergence books, or followed me on any of the JAGfx social media
sites, then you will be well aware of this one. Remembering that the
majority of the time I am taking buy trades when the MACD Platinum is
below the zero level and taking sell trades when the MACD Platinum is
above the zero level. Not all of the time, but about 95% of the time
anyway. So the obvious thing is when the MACD Platinum crosses the
zero level to the opposite side, it may be a good time to consider taking
some action on your trade. Again, this could be a partial close and/or a
stop loss adjustment. And again, depending on the whole trade setup
and where price is in relation to your entry level, it may not be a viable
option for you, where you may have to look for another trade
management option.
Which brings me to my next point with the MACD Platinum where you
may consider using an opposite coloured dot on this indicator for trade
management purposes. An example of this is where you have taken a
buy trade when the MACD Platinum was below the zero level and that
trade was based on a recent green MACD Platinum dot. It may be the
case that the MACD Platinum then crosses the zero level to the upside,
but for whatever reason, it wasn’t viable to take some action on the
trade, hence you may wait and see if a new red dot presents on the
MACD Platinum when it is above the zero level, which may in turn give
you a better option on taking some action on that trade. It would be the
exact opposite for a sell trade.
One final note on the MACD Platinum when it comes to trade
management is that you may want to consider the overall market trend
when it comes to taking some action based on this indicator. It is
sometimes a little hard to see in my screenshots and the colours that I
use, but the MACD Platinum is made up of two lines that cross and
create the red & green dots on that indicator. On MT4/5, these two

lines are called Macd & Avg in the Properties Colors box. The Macd is
the faster of the two lines, so it will normally cross the zero level first.
And how I use this, is when in a trade against the main trend, I will tend
to look for the faster line (Macd) crossing the zero level, even though
the more obvious slower line (Avg) has not yet crossed the zero level,
and take some action at this point. So basically, not waiting for the
slower Avg line to cross the zero level. And for your information, when I
say the obvious slower line, by that I mean it is the more obvious full
coloured reddish line that is the first thing you see when you look at the
MACD Platinum, whereas the faster Macd line is normally a dotted faint
coloured blue line on my black background charts which makes it a bit
harder to spot.
You will also find that when in a trade against the trend, then a lot of the
time, price will come back to the MAs and this will coincide with the
faster Macd line also crossing the zero level. You will find that this is a
fairly safe and smart place to take some trade management action, as
a lot of the times price is not actually reversing, but it is more of a
pullback (retracement) before the main trend resumes.

Figure 20 shows a chart with the QMP Filter and a MACD Platinum attached. The buy
trades are marked by the blue vertical lines and the sell trades by the red vertical

lines, with the small yellow horizontal lines representing the entry levels. If you work
from left to right on the chart, you will either see one or two grey vertical lines to the
right of the blue/red entry lines. The first grey line is the confirmed break of the MACD
Platinum zero level, and the second grey line shows the opposite MACD Platinum dot
on the opposite side of the zero level.

There are times, as in the sell trade on the far left, where there probably
wasn’t enough profit to consider taking some partial profit, where you
may consider letting it run a little longer hoping that price will continue
down where the 2nd grey line is confirmed. There is also nothing
stopping you taking any trade management action at any time between
those two grey lines. Also keep in mind that if you are trading against
the trend or you are not comfortable with the setup, and there is
minimal profit or even a small loss when the MACD Platinum breaks the
zero level, exiting the trade altogether may be the smart thing to do.
And in the trade examples above, I was only using the slower red line
on the MACD Platinum for the zero cross, but like I said, if it is a risky
trade, then you may want to consider using the faster blue dotted
MACD Platinum line for trade management purposes.
The QQE Adv can also be used to assist with trade management, and
as you have probably already guessed by now, it is very similar to the
MACD Platinum, but instead of talking about the zero level, we would
be using the 50 level on this indicator. And like the MACD Platinum, the
QQE Adv is also made up of two lines. On MT4/5 these are called
RsiMa and Slow, with the RsiMa line normally the faster line which I
have coloured blue, and the Slow line is, you guessed it, the slower line
which I have coloured orange. Most signals on this indicator are based
on the action of the blue RsiMa line, with the orange Slow line only used
for some confirmation at times.
So if in a buy trade, once the QQE Adv fast blue line crosses up
through the 50 level, then it is a good time to consider taking some
trade management action. The opposite applies to a sell trade, where
we would take some action once the QQE Adv fast blue line crosses
down through the 50 level.
You could also use the overbought/oversold levels on the QQE Adv to
assist with trade management. These being the 65 & 35 levels. When
the QQE Adv goes from one level to the opposite level, it may be a

good time to take some trade management action. Whether this be
from overbought 65 level down to oversold 35 level, or from the
oversold 35 level up to overbought 65 level. Remember that there is
nothing to say that price won’t continue up once it reaches the
overbought 65 level, or continue down when it reaches the oversold 35
level, however it is a fairly safe place to take some trade management
action in any case.

Figure 21 shows a price chart with the QMP Filter and the QQE Adv (10,14,2) attached
to it. And again buy trades are the blue vertical lines and sell trades are the red
vertical lines, with the small yellow horizontal lines being the entry levels. The grey
vertical line to the right of the vertical entry line is the confirmed crossing of the QQE
Adv 50 level by the faster moving blue line. Most of the time this move is sufficient,
but at times it may not be, so you may want to wait until the slower moving orange
line also crosses the QQE Adv 50 level.

The 2nd sell trade is a little different as there was also a new green
QMP Filter dot after that and before the QQE Adv had crossed the 50
level. Not a problem as you could have either taken the 3rd sell trade as
an additional trade, or if you had closed the previous sell or had been
stopped out on it, then this 3rd sell would help offset that loss. You will
also notice a 2nd grey vertical line on that 3rd sell trade as the QQE
Adv had also reached the 35 oversold level, which is another good
place to take some action with regards to trade management.
I discussed the use of divergence to assist with trade entries, but it can

also be used for trade management, or at least give you a reason to
tighten things up on a trade. For example, you may be in a buy trade
that has been going nicely in your favour, but as price continues
upwards, you may observe that the MACD Platinum is heading down at
the same time, which is potentially setting up for regular bearish
divergence. This is like an early warning signal, where it may be smart
to consider moving your stop up on the buy trade and locking in some
profit. And like I have said many times before, the higher the time frame
you trade, the more time you have to look at the charts and make these
decisions, where there is little pressure on you to do so. Take your time
on each chart and consider all the options.
Here is another tip for you when it comes to trade management. If I am
in a trade with the trend, I tend to give it a little bit more room to move
when it comes to stop placement, and tend not to be in such a rush to
tighten things up on it. Whereas with a trade against the main trend, I
tend to watch it a lot closer and take trade management action quicker,
especially if I have some doubts. Better to play it safe than be sorry.
I will now discuss another way I look at trade management, which is not
popular with all traders, and here I am referring to having multiple
trades open on the same pair on the same time frame at the same time.
By multiple trades, I am referring to both buy and sell trades open at the
same time. It may be a case of one buy trade and one sell trade, but it
could also include multiple buy trades and/or multiple sell trades at the
same time. If you have already been following me in any of the JAGfx
social media groups, you would have seen me do this many times.

Figure 22 shows
the usual price chart with the QMP Filter and the MACD Platinum. First up there is a
buy trade as per the blue vertical line, with the small yellow horizontal line being the
entry level. Now I’m assuming that there would have been some trade management
action taken when the MACD Platinum crossed through the zero level. This leaves a
partial buy trade in play. Price continues up where I then notice that the MACD
Platinum has risen past the previous high point to the left as marked by the red
trendline, however price seems to be struggling to rise past its previous high. I
suspect that potential hidden bearish divergence may be forming here, so I would
then tighten up the stop on the remaining buy trade to the level marked by the red
dashed horizontal line. The sell trade presents with confirmed hidden bearish
divergence, which I take, however I would more than likely leave the remaining buy
trade on to give me a little protection (insurance). I can’t lose on it even if it was
stopped out, and if that was the case (as it would have been), then the sell trade
would be in a nice profit also.

The reason some traders don’t agree with this method, is that they are
of the opinion that if you decide on a trade direction, then your full focus
should be with that setup, and all other trades should be closed. So for
them, if a new buy trade signal presented and they were still in a
profitable sell trade, then they would close the sell trade and then open
the buy trade, giving the new buy trade all of their attention. I have no
problem with that line of thinking, but it's not for me, as sometimes I like
the protection or insurance of an opposite trade. It also helps me
psychologically as it gives me peace of mind at times when I have that
insurance. It may not be the smartest way to approach trading from
purely a profit earning approach, but I do sleep better when trading like

this.
I don’t always trade this way, but it may be the case where I am in a
buy trade that is with the main trend, and I have already closed ½ of
that trade and moved my stop up to a level where I can’t lose on the
trade at all now. Then a new sell trade signal presents that is against
the trend, which I would consider a higher risk trade. Now instead of
closing the remaining buy trade which is already in an overall no loss
position, I would instead leave it open and then take the sell trade also.
This gives me some protection if the sell trade were to be stopped out,
as the remaining buy trade would be increasing in profit, which would in
turn help offset the loss from the sell trade. If in fact, the sell trade went
in my favour with price heading down, then there is a chance the
remaining buy trade would be stopped out and the sell trade would be
in profit, keeping in mind that I wouldn’t have lost anything on the buy
trade. Works most of the time like that, but there are times when price
will whip around where both trades are stopped out quickly resulting in
an overall poor result, that may be a little frustrating, especially when
price then decides on a trade direction which I should have been on.
Like any protection or insurance, there is a premium (cost) to be paid.
And that is one of the arguments against this way of trading.
Why not close out the buy trade at maximum profit before taking the
sell trade, and potentially give up some profit on that buy trade?
Like I said, it’s peace of mind for me.
And then there is the problem of some brokers/jurisdictions not allowing
this type of trading. I have mentioned this previously, including ways
around this. And like I said, if you are serious about your trading, you
really want to be able to access every advantageous tool available to
you to help make you a consistently profitable trader.

24
SUMMARY OF TRADE ENTRIES
1.
​QMP Filter dot is the signal for all entries if other criteria are met
depending on your own trading system rules.
2.
​If using the Moving Averages (MAs), are you trading with the
trend or against the trend, or is the market undecided? And did price
come back to them?
3.
​If using the Bollinger Bands, has price touched the upper/lower
band, and is price still on the correct side of the centre band?
4.
​If using the MACD Platinum, is it on the correct side of the zero
level?
5.
​If using the QQE Adv, is it above/below (or touched) the 65/35
levels, and/or on the correct side of the 50 level?
6.
​Look left on the chart. Is there a decent support/resistance level
(double/triple top/bottom)? Or is there some form of divergence?
7.
​Also consider if price is at an extreme level ie big distance from
the MAs. The same could be said about the MACD Platinum and QQE
Adv.
8.
​Depending on the time frame you are trading, you may also want
to be aware of major scheduled news events that may affect your trade.
9.

​If using multi time frame analysis, are all charts in alignment?

25
SUMMARY OF TRADE MANAGEMENT TOOLS
1.

​Exit on an opposite QMP Filter dot?

2.
​If using the MAs, and you took a trade a fair distance from them,
and now price has come back to the MAs. Possibly time to take some
action.
3.
​If using the Bollinger Bands, has price closed on the other side of
the centre band or touched the opposite upper/lower band?
4.
​If using the MACD Platinum, has it crossed to the opposite side of
the zero level, or has there been an opposite coloured dot on the other
side of the zero level? Are you trading with the trend or against the
trend? This may get you looking at the different lines on the MACD
Platinum when considering trade management.
5.
​If using the QQE Adv, has it crossed the 50 level, or has it gone
to the opposite overbought/oversold level?
6.

​Is there opposite divergence potentially forming?

7.
​Is price approaching a major support/resistance level, or even a
big round number?
8.
​Are there any major scheduled news events coming up that may
affect your trade?

26
TRADE ENTRY CONSIDERATIONS
I will use an example of a simple buy trade setup and run through a few
different scenarios. I rarely use orders other than Market Orders, so I
am not even going to mention or consider Stop Orders or Limit Orders.
Everything refers to Market Orders in my world. If you don’t know the
difference between these different types of orders, then I’m sure Google
will be able to help you out there.
I will be looking at 4x different types of trading techniques, and have
given them names that seem appropriate and will make it easy for you
to relate to what I am talking about. So here they are, with no.1 being
the lowest risk to no.4 being the highest risk.
1.
2.
3.
4.

​Traditional
​Loss Recovery
​Hedging
​Dollar Cost Averaging (DCA)

I will now go through each of them in more detail.

26.1 Traditional
The traditional type of trade setup is where you take the trade and
immediately place a stop loss. Your position size would be based on
your risk percentage parameters. You can either place a profit target or
you can manage the trade as you see fit. This is the safe and traditional
way to trade, and how most traders actually trade. You would then end
up with a result on this trade one way or the other, and then move on to
the next trade and follow the same guidelines. That was the easy one.

Note: The next 3x techniques mostly use variable position
sizing. You will also hear me refer to a sequence of trades. A
sequence is when there are at least two or more trades on the
same pair looking for the same result. Basically, a group of
trades that are treated as one big trade. Sometimes you will hear
this referred to as a basket of trades.
I am loosely basing my trades position size sequence on the Fibonacci
numbers. The actual Fibonacci sequence is 1,1,2,3,5,8,13,21 etc, but
I am using 1,3,5,8,13,21 etc., so very close. Now there is nothing
stopping you from using whatever sequence you want. For example
you may want to do something like 1,2,3,4,5,6 or 1,1,1,1,1,1. There are
many options and can all be easily tested with a bit of time on the
historical charts or on a simulator. To take this a little further, you may
even consider reducing your position sizing with a sequence like
5,3,2,1. Like I said, there are many options, but throughout this book I
mainly refer to the 1,3,5,8,13,21 or the 1,1,1,1,1,1 position size
sequences. This will be clearer when I show some examples.
And to make life a little easier for you, I have included a Multi Trade
Spreadsheet in the download package that will help you with the
necessary calculations when you have numerous trades open.
Basically it will tell you your overall position size, trade direction, and
your overall break even price level. It will also give you the same
information for all of your buy and/or sell trades on the right hand side of
the sheet.

26.2 Loss Recovery
There are actually two variations to this technique, and I will cover both.
Again we use the same traditional type of trade setup as mentioned
above, so nothing changes there. But here you will adjust your initial
position size to something smaller, taking into consideration that you
may later be entering a 2nd (or even 3rd or 4th) trade/s in the same
direction or opposite direction. This initial trade position size is
considered your base lot. If this trade ends up profitable, then no harm
done, however your profit may be less than a traditional no.1 trade due
to having a smaller position size on this trade. But if you were stopped

out on this trade, then obviously you would lose a little less than if that
were to happen on a traditional no.1 trade.
The 1st variation of the Loss Recovery technique is mainly used if you
have a strong commitment to one side of the market. For example, the
MACD Platinum may be below the zero level where you are only
considering buy trades. You take your 1st buy trade with a stop in
place. If this trade is stopped out, you would take the loss and then
wait for another potential buy trade, which happens a lot with my chart
setup. So with this variation, you are normally only in one trade at a time
on each Forex pair you are trading.
You would then record your loss for your trade in pips and then take the
next buy trade with a larger position size. For example if your 1st trade
was with a base lot of 0.10 lot, then this 2nd trade would be for 0.30
lots. And that is why you have to reduce your initial position size if using
this technique.
There would also be a stop loss in place for this trade. With this 2nd
buy trade, you would be looking to recover the previous loss from the
1st buy trade, and then hopefully continue on with the remaining portion
of this 2nd trade and make a profit. Best way to demonstrate this is with
an example, assuming 1 pip equals $1 on a 0.10 lot position size. I
won’t consider swaps (overnight interest rates) or spread, just to keep it
simple.
The 1st buy trade with 0.10 lot suffered a 40 pip loss. The 2nd buy
trade is with 0.30 lots and the first price target I would be looking for is
the entry price plus 20 pips, and if this was reached, then I would close
out 0.20 lots of my 0.30 lot position size. This would cover the previous
loss of 40 pips based on the 0.10 lot size, and then I would still have a
base lot of 0.10 lot still open on the 2nd buy trade.
1st trade : 40 pip loss with 0.10 lot = 40 x $1 for a $40 loss
2nd trade : 20 pip profit with 0.20 lots = 20 x $2 for a $40
profit
Therefore previous loss recovered, and leaving 0.10 lot still
in play

Figure 23 shows a chart example of a similar scenario as to the one above, where the
1st buy trade is stopped out for a loss, which on this chart was for -102.8 pips. Then a
2nd buy trade was taken as the MACD Platinum was still below the zero level.
Because this trade is a larger position size, in order to recover the previous loss,
price only has to move up 52 pips from the 2nd entry. This is marked by the blue
dashed horizontal line, which was achieved quite easily.

You could then consider your stop loss options once the loss has been
recovered. Either it can be left in the original position, brought up to
break even, or placed in some other relevant position.
That’s a good outcome when the 2nd trade recovers the loss from the
1st trade, but this doesn’t always happen, whereas you could end up
with a loss on the 2nd buy trade also if it was stopped out prior to
getting to the loss recovery target. Here you could either cut your losses
and wait for a much better setup on a reversal type trade, which in this
case would be a sell trade.
Or you could then wait for a 3rd buy trade to present, and then take
that, looking to recover the losses from both the 1st and 2nd buy
trades. I’ll use the example of there being a 50 pips loss on the 2nd buy
trade, so let's have a look at the maths below.
1st trade : 40 pip loss with 0.10 lot = 40 x $1 for a $40 loss
2nd trade : 50 pip loss with 0.30 lots = 50 x $3 for a $150
loss
So the total pip loss so far is 40 + 150 = 190 ( or $40 +
$150 = $190)

Remember that everything is based on the original base lot position
size, which was 0.10 ($1 per pip) in this example.
The 3rd buy trade would be for 0.50 lots, and it too will have a stop loss
in place. Here I would be looking for price to get to a certain profit level
where I could then close out 0.40 lots of this 3rd buy trade which would
recover the previous total losses, leaving the 0.10 base lot left in play.
This is how you would work out that loss recovery level for the 3rd buy
trade.
190 / 4 = 47.5
190 is the total pip loss to date, which I divide by 4, which represents
0.40 lots out of the 0.50 lot position size. This gives a result of 47.5
which is rounded up to 48.
This number then represents the number of pips required, so the entry
level price plus 48 pips will be the first price target I would be looking
for, where I would then close 0.40 lots, leaving a base lot of 0.10 lot still
in play.
48 x $4 = $192 and previous losses are recovered.

Figure 24 is an
expansion on Figure 23. Basically the same set up but this time there are three buy
trades with the MACD Platinum remaining below the zero level the entire time. The
trade sequence would have been for 0.10 lot, 0.30 lots and 0.50 lots, where once the
loss recovery blue horizontal dashed line was hit, then 0.40 lots would be closed,
leaving 0.10 lot still in play.

If the 3rd buy trade was also a loser, then if you were to take a 4th buy
trade and attempt to recover the losses, then the 4th buy trade would
be for 0.80 lots, where you would close out 0.70 lots when the recovery
target was reached, again leaving the 0.10 base lot still in play.
If for example the 3rd trade resulted in a successful loss recovery for
the losses on the 1st and 2nd trades, but you then lost on the remaining
base lot of 0.10 for that 3rd trade, then your next loss recovery trade
would only need a position size of 0.30 as the sequence has re-started
again.
This will be made clearer with chart examples, and like any of my
explanations, if you are a little confused, it may pay to read the relevant
paragraphs a few times and take some notes. This always tends to
help me when I’m struggling to understand things.
This was an example of using the loss recovery technique with a trade
position size sequence of 1,3,5,8 etc. You may decide to use a different
sequence of position sizing, or you may decide to go for total recovery
on the 2nd trade and call it quits on that sequence.
These examples all referred to buy trades, where that sort of scenario
would more than likely happen when you are taking multiple buy trades
in a steady down trending market and you keep getting stopped out
until there was a decent reversal so you could recover your losses. This
may happen when regular bullish divergence presents, and it takes a
few attempts before it works out.
There may also be opportunities to take sell trades during this period,
especially if you think that the downtrend is gaining momentum to the
downside. Here you may decide to pivot (reverse your bias) and use
the next sell signal as your attempted loss recovery trade. It may even
be the case, depending on your trade setups, that you could be in
multiple sequences of trades at the same time i.e. buy sequence and a
sell sequence. There are options.

Figure 25 gives
an example of when it would be a good time to pivot. Working left to right on the
chart, the 1st trade was a buy for 0.10 lot, which was stopped out on that big bearish
candle with the red QMP Filter dot above it. You can also see that price appears to be
picking up steam in a down trend so you may be getting a little nervous being in a
buy trade sequence. The 2nd buy trade for 0.30 lots is then taken and continues up
nicely but doesn’t reach the loss recovery price level. In the meantime the MACD
Platinum also breaks up through the zero level, and as price falls back to the
downside, a new valid red QMP Filter dot is presented. There is also hidden bearish
divergence confirmed by this, which is a good thing and a great reason to now
consider pivoting (changing my bias) to the sell side. Therefore I would close the
second buy trade for a small loss, and at the same time, take a sell trade for 0.50 lots,
where again I’d be looking to recover my previous losses from the 1st and 2nd buy
trades. Price then continues down, where it then hits the target (blue horizontal
dashed line) where you would close 0.40 lots of the trade, leaving 0.10 still in play.

The 2nd variation of the Loss Recovery technique is a little different in
that you can be in multiple trades on the same Forex pair at the same
time. And depending on your broker, you may not be able to trade this
way as it involves taking buy trades and sell trades on the same pair at
the same time. Now this technique works much better on big moving
pairs - basically pairs that trend nicely. I also find that it works better
when price or indicators are at extremes. By this, I am referring to when
the market may be considered overbought or oversold, so looking for

reversals back to the mean, or a decent pullback in price where there
would be enough to profit from that move. I like using this setup on the
higher time frames when the QQE Adv has gone above the 65 level or
below the 35 level, and I have my QMP Filter QQE Adv component set
at 1,8,3.
Let's look at an example using a buy trade to start the potential
sequence. We can assume that the QQE Adv (settings 10,14,2) has at
some point previously gone below the 35 level (oversold) and now there
is a new green QMP Filter dot (settings 1,8,3). Here I take the buy
trade with say 0.10 lot without a stop loss in place. Now, if price shoots
up and puts me in profit, then great as it will be managed like any other
trade and no need to go into loss recovery mode.
But if price doesn’t head up, but instead turns down and then presents
a new red QMP Filter dot (sell signal), then I would then take the sell
trade for 0.30 lots and also leave my previous buy trade on. So I would
be short 0.30 lots and long 0.10 lot, giving me a nett 0.20 lots short. I
would then upload these entry prices into the multi trade spreadsheet
and that would give me an overall break even price. If price then
reaches that level, then I would exit both trades for an overall break
even result. This is the smart thing to do. It may be the case where
price fell quickly and you didn’t have an alert or orders set, where you
are now in some decent overall profit. You could consider your options
here and exit the buy trade completely and only partially close the sell
trade, and also place a stop to ensure no further risk. Keep in mind that
if price was oversold, I would still be thinking about taking buy trades
only and only using sell trades to help with trade management. So if I
did exit both trades at overall break even, then I would now wait on a
2nd buy trade signal, where I would start the sequence again.
But if that sell trade for 0.30 mentioned above did not continue down in
price, but instead turned and went back up where a new green QMP
Filter dot (buy signal) presented, then I would take the 2nd buy for 0.50
lots and add that entry level to the multi trade spreadsheet. Now I would
be 0.10 lot long, 0.30 lots short and 0.50 lots long, which is overall nett
0.30 lots long. The spreadsheet will then calculate a new overall break
even level, which would be the 1st target of note.
Now I originally wanted to be in buy trades only, so the trade

management may be a little different when (or if) the overall break even
level is achieved, as it would depend on how the trade setup looks and
how I am considering managing it. Again, you could get a little creative
here and start closing some trades completely, or partially closing them,
and adding stops etc.
You keep adding trades as the sequence progresses, hence one of the
reasons you want to be on decent trending pairs using this technique,
and have price levels at extremes (overbought/oversold). You don’t
want to be stuck in a sideways market using this technique as it could
get very messy and a little ugly. Generally it is best to get out when
overall break even is achieved on your non bias side and then wait for a
better setup.
Also keep in mind that markets can be overbought or oversold for a
long time, so if you are wrong on your initial trade, then hopefully the
reversal will offer enough pips to get you out at break even, so nothing
lost other than time spent on the trades.
It may also be the case where for whatever reason, your bias may
change from say long to short, where you basically pivot your position
and manage it accordingly.

Figure 26 shows what started as a buy trade after the QQE Adv went into oversold
territory (below 35) in a down trending market where we had to keep on adding trades
and increasing position sizes accordingly. To be honest, the first sell trade in the
sequence did give me an overall break even level on two candles, but for the
purposes of this exercise, let's pretend I was asleep and missed them both. The QQE
Adv couldn’t even breach the 50 level as price kept heading down, where eventually
we picked up that last move down that well and truly took us through the overall

break even level marked by the blue dashed horizontal line. That was a total of six
trades open at the same time, so your margin availability and potential Swap fees will
have to be monitored.

Figure 27 shows the multi trade spreadsheet used to calculate the break even levels
on the trade screenshot above. When you get in multiple trades like this, it may be
wise to exit at overall break even, or tighten things right up by either closing some
trades or using a tight trailing stop.

Here are a few things to consider if you think these Loss Recovery
techniques may be something you can use. They generally work better
on pairs that trend nicely. So the GBP/USD may be a better option than
the EUR/GBP. They are also higher risk and your trade position sizing
can get out of control if you are not careful. You have to be aware of
your available margin. Also, you don’t have to recover all of your losses.
If a scenario presents where you are feeling a little uncomfortable with
how things are proceeding and there is an opportunity to recover some
of your losses, then it may pay to get what you can and then reset. We
are playing the long game here.
To summarise, these are basically loss recovery techniques, with
higher risk. They are easily tested out on historical charts, but when you
are doing this, you want to choose times on the charts where you think
the technique would struggle, so you could really put it under the pump
with a stress test to see how you would handle it. The majority of the
time, they will generally work out nicely, but every now and then you will
face some challenges, like in any form of trading. So here you want to
be in a position, both financially and mentally to be able to work your
way out of any potential problem trade sequence/s. This will then give

you confidence to trade this way in a live account with real money on
the line, if you choose to use these techniques.

26.3 Hedging
Now I am getting into the higher risk type of trading and again
depending on your broker, you may not be able to trade this way as it
involves taking buy trades and sell trades on the same pair at the same
time.
There are different definitions of hedging, but for me it means that I am
buying and selling the same pair at the same time and have the same
position size on both. This could include two buy trades for a total lot
size of 0.40 lots and two sell trades with a total lot size of 0.40 lots. One
side cancels the other side out so I am basically flat in the market, but
more than likely locking in a loss no matter which way the market
moves. The only way I can lose money in this scenario is via the Swap
fees (overnight interest rate fees), unless of course I break the hedge or
as I like to say, release the hedge. This is normally done by adding
another trade to one side, or on the odd occasion, closing one of my
open trades. Either way, it will then create an imbalance, so if the
market then moves, I’m either losing or profiting depending on market
direction and if I am either nett long or nett short.
This technique also includes increasing position sizing as a trade
sequence progresses. Not always, but most of the time. Again,
something you have to be aware of when it comes to trade risk
management.
I would consider using the hedging technique when I am fairly confident
of the initial trade setup, where I would enter this trade without a stop
loss in place. This could be something like an extremely
overbought/oversold scenario or where there is hidden divergence in
place. Then if this initial trade goes against me, then I would be happy
to hedge and eventually work my way out of it and hopefully end up with
a profit, or at least an overall break even result. That’s the plan anyway.
The best way to describe the technique is via an example, and this will
also be covered with chart screenshot examples.

My 1st trade is a buy trade for 0.10 lot, and there is no stop loss in
place. Now life is good if price heads up and it puts me in a position
where I can take some profit or put a stop loss in place that puts me in
an overall no loss position. But if this doesn’t happen and the market
turns down, I have no downside protection, but you can safely assume
that there will be a sell signal at some point. Now using my chart setup,
this would be an opposite QMP Filter dot, which in this case would be a
red dot. This will more than likely not be a valid sell signal according to
my trade rules, but it is enough for me to take some action. So here I
will be selling 0.10 lot and it too won’t have a stop loss in place.
This puts me in an overall position where I am 0.10 lot long and 0.10 lot
short, where they basically cancel each other out, and I am locking in a
loss. The market can move in either direction for as far as it likes and I
won’t be losing or winning as I am now fully hedged. I will only be losing
on the Swap fees, which can add up depending on which pair is
involved, so this is something you have to be aware of.
A couple of points I should mention here. One is, if for some reason the
sell trade signal was at a higher price level than the original buy trade
entry, then there is no real need to take the hedge sell trade. Here I
would close the buy trade for the small profit and wait for another
opportunity to buy if that’s the desired trade direction. Secondly, some
brokers look at hedging differently when it comes to margin
requirements. As already discussed, some brokers in certain
jurisdictions don’t allow this anyway, but some will charge you double
margin, whilst others will cancel the margin requirements out as you are
fully hedged. This is something to be aware of if you are in many trades
across many pairs, and this is one of the reasons I like to have
accounts with higher leverage.
Getting back to my example now. I obviously can’t stay hedged forever,
so I have to take some action when a new buy signal presents. There
are a couple of options available to me then when this happens. It may
be the case where I am confident of the new market direction, where I
could close the hedge sell trade for either a profit or a loss. Remember
that it is not an issue to take a loss at times. But if I was still unsure of
the overall setup, then I would take the 2nd buy trade. Remember that I
am already in the 1st buy with a hedge sell.

A new buy signal (green QMP Filter dot) presents, so here I take a 2nd
buy trade for 0.30 lots without a stop loss in place. Now I am nett 0.40
lots long (buy trades) and nett 0.10 lot short (sell trade) for an overall
position of nett 0.30 long. I then input these entry levels and position
sizes into my multi trade spreadsheet and that will give me an overall
break even price for all three trades.
I then wait for price to move, and if it does go up to my overall break
even level, and depending on what I think of the whole setup at the
time, I may decide to close all trades for an overall break even result.
But it may be the case where I think the market may still continue up
higher, and if it does, my profit will start to increase due to the fact that I
am overall nett 0.30 long.

Figure 28 shows a basic buy hedge setup, where there is the original buy, followed by
a hedge sell and then a 2nd buy as described previously. You can also see the multi
trade spreadsheet for these trades where the overall break even level of 1.23876 at
the blue dashed horizontal line was easily achieved. This type of setup is quite
common.

Price then may get to a point where I am considering taking some
action on my trades, where ideally I would like to lock in some profit and
reduce my overall risk in this trade sequence. Most of the time I would
be looking to close both the original buy trade and the hedge sell trade,
and also close a portion of the 2nd buy trade, and then set a stop loss
on that remaining position. This should put me in a risk free trade with
some profit already locked in. Most of the time, but not always, I am
looking to get my remaining partial trade back to the base lot trade size,

which in this case would be 0.10 lot. And ideally I would like to have my
stop loss on this remaining 0.10 trade in a position where I can’t lose on
the overall sequence, or locking in some further profit on that remaining
trade.

Figure 29 is basically the same, but in this case it started with a sell trade and the
overall break even result as marked by the blue dashed horizontal line was again
easily achieved. And in both examples you can see that the MACD Platinum remained
on the correct side of the zero level so that could have been used for trade
management when it did cross to the other side of the zero level.

But there are times when I may have to take a 2nd hedge sell trade. For
example, continuing on from above, if on the 2nd buy trade, price didn’t
go high enough to reach the overall break even level, but instead
dropped back down presenting a new red QMP Filter dot. Here I would
take a 2nd hedge sell trade for 0.30 lots without a stop loss, so my
overall position would now be nett 0.40 lots long (buy trades) and nett
0.40 lots short (sell trades). So once again I am fully hedged, and
locking in an overall loss, and now waiting on a reason to release that
hedge, which would more than likely be a 3rd buy trade for 0.50 lots.
Again the data is uploaded into the multi trade spreadsheet and a new
overall break even price level is calculated.
A tip for you on using the multi trade spreadsheets. I set up folders on
my desktop with these and use individual spreadsheets for all of my
watchlists and pairs. If you just used one spreadsheet for all of your
calculations, then you would have to input several fields every time you

changed pairs, so having the individual spreadsheets prepared with
most of the fields already filled in makes it so much easier.
Here are a few ideas for you if you are thinking about doing something
like this. If you get to the point where you have multiple trades in a
sequence, it may pay to get out at overall break even if the opportunity
presents. This is especially the case if you are thinking that the market
may not go in your favour for some time yet.
You could also consider closing certain trades in your sequence if you
have confidence that the market is heading in a particular direction.
This may include reversing your actual sequence direction. For
example, in my above mentioned example the initial trade was a buy
trade, so I was looking for price to head up, even after taking further
trades in that sequence. But if I thought the market may then head
down, I may consider closing some of the buy trades in profit and then
set up the sequence to profit on a downside move in price. There are
options here, and by using the spreadsheet and a pen & paper, you
could nut out some different scenarios based on your thoughts on the
market at the time.
Another consideration may be that you decide to cap the maximum
position size you wish to take. For example, if the above mentioned
trade sequence kept on bouncing around in price where it got to the
stage I was in trades for 1.30 lots, then I may cap all of my subsequent
trades at this size. Which means I may have trade position sizes at
0.10, 0.30, 0.50, 0.80, 1.30, 1.30, 1.30 and so on. If you get to that
stage, then seriously consider getting out at overall break even or even
for a small loss, if the opportunity presents. No use tying up all of your
margin if there are better trade opportunities on other pairs that you
may miss out on.
There is also nothing to stop you having multiple trade sequences in
place. By this I mean that you could be in a buy sequence like
mentioned above, but for whatever reason, the charts presented a new
valid sell signal, then you may decide to take this also, independent of
the buy sequence already in play. It may be the case where you take
two trades on that same sell signal, where one would be a hedge for the
original buy sequence and the other one would be for the actual start of
a completely new sell sequence.

It can get confusing at times, hence good notes on your chart are
required as well as saving your multi trade spreadsheets in a folder. It
may even get to a point where you can combine two sequences on the
one spreadsheet, and see if that provides you with a viable exit for an
overall break even result.

Figure 30 is an example of multi sequences using this hedging technique. If you look
down at the MACD Platinum you will see how it has been separated by the small
yellow vertical lines depending on which side of the zero level it is. So the 1st
sequence starts with a buy trade, followed by a hedge sell trade, and then a 2nd buy
trade, which just touches the overall break even level. But say I missed getting out
there, then I would have to take a 2nd hedge sell trade, which is then followed by a
3rd buy trade. Price never reaches the overall break even level, and in the meantime,
the MACD Platinum goes up through the zero level.

This is then followed by a sell signal, which would be the 3rd
hedge sell for sequence 1, and also a new sell for the
commencement of sequence 2. Price then heads down nicely
but nowhere near enough to reach my overall break even price
as I am only nett 0.10 lot short at this time. But the MACD
Platinum does go back down through the zero level and a new
buy signal presents.
This new buy signal is the start of sequence 3, and it is also the
4th buy trade for sequence 1 and the 1st hedge buy trade for
sequence 2. It may be the case where you decided to treat the
sequence 2 sell trade as a stand-alone trade and manage the
trade accordingly, as by the time this new buy trade presented
the sequence 2 sell trade was in very good profit. It’s your call

on this.
But if you did take the hedge buy trade on sequence 2, then on
this buy signal I am entering three trades at the same time. This
now puts me at overall nett 0.90 long and an overall break even
price for all sequences at 1.37701, which was then easily
achieved as you can see price breaking through the final blue
dashed horizontal line. It does get a little messy and a little
confusing; hence the need for tracking all trades on the
spreadsheet/s and keeping the charts up to date. The S1, S2 &
S3 on the chart represents the start trade of each trade
sequence.

Figure 31 is the multi trade spreadsheet for the previous chart. You can see the three
sequences recorded and the same entry prices in each of them. There were ten trades
open at the end but I was only nett 0.90 long as a result. Now whether you would
have been happy to get out of all trades at overall break even, or even get a little
creative and try to squeeze a few more pips out of the market when considering the
MACD Platinum position, it is up to you. But if I have been in a lengthy sequence of
trades, then I like to reduce my risk as soon as possible.

And if things are going nicely for you in a sequence, and if you can, it is
always good to aim for a few extra pips at times as this will help cover

any Swap fees or commissions. This only needs to be a couple of pips
depending on how many position sizes you have open.
Make sure you are always checking the charts at the new candle open
when using this technique, as once you are committed to it, you really
need to see it through. If you miss a trade signal, it may have been the
one you needed to put you in an overall break even or profitable
position, and it could mess everything up for you and put you on the
back foot. Be vigilant and also consider all of your options as the
market changes directions.
It can get confusing at times, hence good notes on your chart are
required as well as saving your multi trade spreadsheets in a folder. It
may even get to a point where you can combine two or more
sequences on the one spreadsheet, and see if that provides you with a
viable exit for an overall break even result.
Again it is important to consider your initial base lot entry trade size in
comparison to your account balance and the account leverage
available to you. An initial 0.10 base lot trade may not seem like much
on a $20,000 account, but if you end up with multiple trade sequences
open, with 1.30 lot trades in play, then this may get you sweating
bullets. It is a high risk technique and not suitable for everyone, so be
very careful if you do use it.
Another obvious point is that it is easier to use this technique on the
higher time frames where you have much more time to think and
consider all of your options, especially when your number of open
trades/sequences start to build up. Trust me, it is much easier doing
this on a 4hr chart than a 5m chart.

26.4 Dollar Cost Averaging (DCA)
I described this as dollar cost averaging (DCA) as that is a common
concept in the investing/trading world and fairly well describes what I
am doing here. Not so much the reference to the dollar, but the way I
am taking trades. In a nutshell, if I think the market will go up and I take
a buy trade, but then the market then heads down, I will consider
continuing to buy as the market heads down, hoping it will eventually
turn up, where I can then get out of all of my trades at overall break

even or better.
This is a very high risk technique which I have discussed in my
previous books. There are plenty of traders out there that think this is a
dumb idea, and there are traders that use this technique all of the time
with great results. Like any high risk technique, be smart about it and
always consider your overall risk.
It is very similar to the hedging technique above, but it doesn’t involve
any hedging. That probably sounded stupid, but you will see what I
mean soon. So if using the same initial buy trade example as
mentioned above, and any sell signals present, then they are ignored.
So the 1st buy trade is for 0.10 lot and there is no stop loss placed.
Price goes against me and a new sell signal presents, but that is
ignored. I have no downside protection here at all, so that is something
you need to be very aware of.
I am now waiting on a 2nd buy trade signal, and when that presents, it
is taken with a 0.30 lot position size and no stop loss. So now I would
be nett 0.40 lots long with the 2x buy trades only. Again I’m plugging
the numbers into the multi trade spreadsheet and working out my
overall break even price.
The sequence continues if price continues to go against me, where I
ignore the next sell trade signal but then take the 3rd buy trade signal
for 0.50 lots, and so on.
Again you may want to look for getting out at overall break even if it
presents and you have multiple trades on. Sometimes this is the smart
thing to do.
When would I consider using this technique? Mainly on trade setups
with the trend or when hidden divergence presents, keeping in mind
that hidden divergence is normally a trend continuation pattern anyway.
It may come to the point where even though my intention was to go with
this technique initially, something may have changed in the market
conditions eg a big market move due to news, where I then may
consider switching to the hedging technique where I would use the sell
trade signals for some downside protection. Again, there are options.
As already stated several times, this is a very high risk approach, so be

careful with your initial base lot trade size. It is also a very easy
technique to practise on the historical charts or on a simulator. But be
very careful if you choose to use this technique in live trading.
It is not a technique I use that often, but sometimes I may be in a
normal hedged sequence that involves both buy & sell trades, where I
will either close out all of my buy trades or all of my sell trades, and then
go into DCA mode. This is normally after an extreme move in the
market where I would be confident of a reversal in price, where I have
cashed in on one side and looking to recover to at least break even on
the other.
I also want to mention that there will be times when it would be
advantageous to use the Hedging technique over the DCA technique,
and other times when it wouldn’t. By advantageous, I mean an overall
break even price that is closer to the current price, so there would be
more of a chance of actually achieving that overall break even price.
I will use the example of an initial buy trade again, and I’ll stick to 2x
buy trades max in the sequence. So in the Hedging scenario, it would
be a buy trade, a hedge sell trade and then a 2nd buy trade, whereas in
the DCA scenario, it would be a buy trade and then a 2nd buy trade
only. The Hedging scenario would be nett +0.30 lots long, and the DCA
scenario would be nett +0.40 lots long. Now depending on how far the
hedge sell trade entry was from the initial buy trade entry, and then how
far and in what direction the 2nd buy trade entry occurred, will
determine whether it would be advantageous to go with one technique
or the other. But of course, this is very difficult to determine at the start
of a sequence, so this explanation is more for your information, as
sometimes the figures (the maths) can play tricks with your mind. This
is something to be aware of.

Figure 32 shows four buy trades on the chart with the first one being taken based on
hidden bullish divergence, hence I decided against hedging (taking any sell trades),
and in hindsight this proved to be the wrong decision as I could have been at overall
break even a lot sooner if I had included hedge sell trades. But in the end it still
worked out as you can see on the right side of the chart where the blue dashed
horizontal line at 182.536 represented the overall break even level as per the multi
trade spreadsheet. The idea here was to show the concept in action on an actual
chart.

One thing I will mention, which is fairly important, is that some pairs
work better than others when it comes to using the Hedging or Dollar
Cost Averaging (DCA) methods. For instance, the JPY pairs tend to
give me some grief at times as they can be big movers, but in the
wrong direction for a long time. The Bank of Japan is not the easiest
central bank to get a read on, so the JPY can bounce around a bit
before doing the unexpected. Like all pairs really, but the JPY pairs
tend to do this more often, and they also tend to move in sync with each
other, so be careful here.

27
BONUS TRADING SYSTEM
I have decided to add another potential way to enter trades using the
same indicators. Like I said, I’m bombarding you with various ways of
approaching the markets and this is another way of doing so. It is a little
tricky to explain in written words, so bear with me on this. This method
is very simple and can be very profitable, and I do know of one trader
that made millions from trading this way. The only difference being that
this trader used a standard RSI indicator, whereas I am going to use
the QQE Adv, which is a modified and a little more complicated RSI all
the same.
The setup involves adding the QQE Adv to the chart with the standard
settings of 1,8,3. But then you would go into the Properties box and
under the Colors tab you would adjust the Slow line colour to none,
which is the top selection of the dropdown menu if using MT4 or MT5.
This basically makes the slow line invisible on your chart, leaving the
RsiMa line displayed on the chart. You would then go into the Levels
tab and add the 35 and 65 levels to the indicator. You also need the 50
level displayed, but as I like to have this a different colour from the 35 &
65 levels, I don’t add it to the indicator via the Properties box. Instead I
use the platform’s drawing tools and add it via the horizontal line
drawing tool. Once you have your chart all set up with the colours and
indicators you like, you can save it as a template so you don’t have to
go through this full setup each time you open a new chart, as you apply
your template with one or two mouse clicks.
This method involves drawing trendlines across the QQE Adv when it
goes from overbought to oversold or from oversold to overbought.
Oversold is when the QQE Adv line goes below the 35 level at any
time, and overbought is when the QQE Adv line goes above the 65

level at any time. When you look at the QQE Adv on the chart with this
setup, you will notice that it rarely moves from the 35 to 65 (and vice
versa) in a straight line. It sort of has these jagged moves that give you
high and low points, which is something you could draw a trendline
across.
If you were looking for a buy trade, then the QQE Adv line would have
had to have gone from above the 65 level and then fallen back down to
below the 35 level. Here you would draw a trendline from some obvious
point above the 65 level and down across an obvious high point
towards the 35 level, so the trendline would cover the entire distance
from the 65 level down to the 35 level, meaning all the action would be
below the trendline. Then when there is a confirmed break of that
trendline to the upside on a candle close, then you could consider
taking a buy trade.
If you were looking for a sell trade, then the QQE Adv would have had
to have gone down below the 35 level and then headed back up to
above the 65 level. Here you would draw a trendline from an obvious
point below the 35 level and up across an obvious low point towards
the 65 level, where all the action would be above the trendline. Then
when there is a confirmed break of that trendline to the downside on a
candle close, then you could consider taking a sell trade.
This is much easier to describe by actual screenshots of potential trade
setups, and also something that requires plenty of practice on historical
charts or a simulator. So be prepared to do some work and test this
system out before fully committing to it.
There may be times where you may have multiple entries, or the
potential for multiple entries, all depending on how you are managing
your trades using this system. For example, you may not be using a
stop loss and using the DCA technique, where if for some reason after
a trendline break entry, it may be the case that the QQE Adv again
goes back up or down to the 65 or 35 levels, which in turn could create
a new touch point for a 2nd trendline on the same buy/sell setup. This
could go on for a while, keeping in mind that a market can be
overbought (above the 65 level) or oversold (below the 35 level) for a
long time. But if you were using stop losses, then more than likely your
initial trade would have been stopped out, where you would have

another attempt at the same setup with a new trendline.
There is no problem using the Loss Recovery, DCA or even the
Hedging techniques when trading like this if not using a traditional stop
loss on each individual trade.
You may also consider using other indicators or some discretion when
taking these setups. For example if the market was in a decent down
trend, then you may decide against taking any buy setups. Or you may
use the position of the MACD Platinum in relation to the zero level to
assist with trade entries, or you may decide that you won’t take the
trade signal if the break is above the QQE Adv 50 level for buy trades
or below the QQE Adv 50 level for sell trades. There are many options
to consider, where it is a matter of finding something that works best for
you.
With regards to the QQE Adv and the 35 and 65 levels, I can guarantee
you that it will oscillate between these two levels at some point in time,
but when that is, I don’t know. As I stated above, price can be in the
overbought/oversold zones for a long time, so this is something that you
have to be aware of when it comes to trade risk management. I would
also suggest that I have found this system to work better on the higher
time frames, but having said that, I’ve never exhaustively tested it on
the lower time frames. Well nothing below the 1hr charts anyway, so it
is hard for me to say whether it works or not on the lower time frames.
Again, your own back testing will clarify this one way or the other.

Figure 33 shows the chart setup described above. The trendlines are only drawn on

the QQE Adv and the entry is taken on the open of the candle following the close of
the candle that confirms the trendline break. You would wait for the QQE Adv to go
from 35 to 65 (or vice versa) and then start looking for areas to draw your trendline.
The white dotted horizontal lines on the QQE Adv are the 35 and 65 levels, with the
red dotted horizontal line being the 50 level. And as you can see, there can be
multiple setups on the same buy or sell play. Plenty of practice is required on the
historical charts.

Figure 34 shows another chart with the same setup but I have also added the MACD
Platinum, which could be used to filter trades or assist with trade management. Like I
said, you have many options when building any trading system, including this one.

And here are a few ideas on how to manage these types of trades. The
most conservative would be to take some action on the trade when the
QQE Adv closes on the other side of the 50 level. For example, if you
were in a buy trade and you had taken it when the QQE Adv was below
the 50 level, then once the 50 level has been crossed to the upside,
then you may consider closing part of the trade and/or moving your stop
loss (or even setting one). It would be the opposite for a sell trade,
where you would wait for the QQE Adv to cross the 50 level to the
downside. And as usual, this would mean waiting for the current candle
to close where the actual crossing of the 50 level is confirmed.
Another option is to stay in the trade until the opposite level is reached
on the QQE Adv. For example if you had taken a buy trade, then you
would then wait for the QQE Adv to hit the 65 level, and if it had been a
sell trade, then you would be looking for the QQE Adv to hit the 35
level. As mentioned above, as this indicator is an oscillator, it will

always go from one level to the other, eventually.
Then you could use other indicators as previously mentioned for trade
management techniques. This all depends on how you have set up
your charts to trade this system, but you could use the Bollinger Bands
upper and lower bands, or even the centre band to assist with trade
management.
The MACD Platinum crossing the zero level is also another option. And
obviously you could look at things like support/resistance levels on
price, big round numbers, or even take some action prior to major news
releases. And as we all know by now, there are many ways to manage
trades, but also keep in mind, there is no one way that works in all
situations. Some discretion, experience and smarts should also be a
part of your decision process.

28
A CHART SETUP I USE
In this chapter I will give you an idea on how I personally approach the
markets. This works well for me but it will not be suitable for those that
can’t be long and short the same pair at the same time, and it is also
much better with higher leveraged accounts as there can be many
trades open at the same time.
I’ll go over my chart template first. I don’t use the MAs as I’m
experienced enough to understand trend direction and market
structure. On the price chart I have two Bollinger Bands and two QMP
Filters. Then below the price chart, I have the MACD Platinum, and
below that I have the QQE Adv.
The settings for the Bollinger Bands are 20 & 2.0 and 80 & 3.0. The
two settings already mentioned in this book previously. The 20 & 2.0
BB has the black upper & lower bands with the black dotted centre
band whereas the 80 & 3.0 BB has the purple upper & lower bands and
the purple dashed centre band.
The settings for the QMP Filters are 1,8,3 & 10,14,2, as also previously
mentioned. The 1,8,3 QMP Filter has the smaller red & green dots,
whereas the 10,14,2 QMP Filter has the larger orange & blue dots. And
please be aware that sometimes there will be the same setup on the
same candle, so the dots from the two QMP Filters will overlap. It is a
little difficult to see due to the colours, but you should be able to see the
smaller dot inside the larger dot. Zoom in on your chart if you are in
doubt, or change the colours to suit yourself.
The MACD Platinum is the standard default settings of 12,26,9 as
nothing ever really changes here.

The QQE Adv has the settings of 10,14,2 and also has the oversold
and overbought levels of 35 & 65 marked. The 50 level is also marked
up.

Figure 35 shows
my preferred chart setup as explained above. I like to use MT5 charts for this as I’m
more comfortable on this platform than I am on TradingView. It is a busy chart and
will look a bit overwhelming at the moment, but all will be explained.

And as previously discussed, TradingView has various subscription
plans. Their free plan is called Basic and it allows a maximum of two
indicators per chart and only the one chart layout. Their cheapest paid
plan is called Essential, and it allows a maximum of five indicators per
chart and also five chart layouts.
So if you wanted to use my full trading setup on the Basic plan, your
only option would be to set up various templates with the different
indicators, and toggle through those templates on each pair as you go
through your watchlist. The problem here is that you are not seeing the
full picture, it’s time consuming, and you will lose any chart notes that
you have written.
If you were on the Essential plan, then you could also do the above,
plus you would have the option of adding additional chart layouts, if you
thought that was a better option. For example on the 1st chart layout
you could have a template with one Bollinger Band, one QMP Filter, the
MACD Platinum and the QQE Adv. Then on the 2nd chart layout, you
could have a different template with the other Bollinger Band, the other
QMP Filter, the MACD Platinum and the QQE Adv. This would give you
four (4) indicators on each chart layout.
Another option would be to set up the one template and have one

Bollinger Bands, one QMP Filter, the MACD Platinum and the QQE
Adv. Here you would go through your watchlist once, and once done,
you would then change the settings on the Bollinger Bands and QMP
Filter to the other settings, and then go through your watchlist a 2nd
time. It is time consuming and not ideal, but it is a bit of a work around if
you insist on using TradingView and can’t afford the more expensive
plans.
I subscribe to their Plus plan which allows a maximum of ten indicators
per chart, so I have no issues using TradingView if need be. But I
actually prefer my charts on MT5 as I am more comfortable with that
platform.
One of the main reasons traders like TradingView is that it is web
based so you can see the same setups on your phone or other mobile
device. This chart would be too cluttered for me on a phone, especially
with my old man’s eyes, so I’m okay with just using MT5 for this.
As I said, there is a lot happening on the chart, but once you
understand what is happening, it is fairly easy to follow. You have to be
prepared to keep good notes and use the multi trade spreadsheet/s
when required. The longer time frames are preferred by me as they
tend to work better, trend better and give me more time to make smart
trading decisions.
I’m looking for a number of different trade setups and I also trade some
of these a little differently. There are four chart setups I am looking for
here.
1.
​Using the QMP Filter 1,8,3 with the MACD Platinum on the
correct side of the zero level. Ideally I want price to touch the upper or
lower Bollinger Band (20 & 2.0) before taking the sell or the buy. It is
also preferred if the candle closed above the centre band for sell trades
and below the centre band for buy trades. My trade management filters
include the Bollinger Bands centre band and the MACD Platinum zero
level. The MACD Platinum zero level is the target where I would like to
be at least at overall break even or better when this level is crossed.
2.
​Using the QMP Filter 10,14,2 with the QQE Adv on the correct
side of the QQE Adv 50 level. I only take trades when both lines are
either above or below the 50 level. The 50 level is also the target,

where once the QQE Adv fast line has crossed this, I’m looking at
taking some trade management action.

Figure 36 shows
the same chart as in figure 35, but I have marked up all the valid buy & sell trades
based on the QMP Filter 1,8,3 only. Pay close attention to the Bollinger Band centre
band and the MACD Platinum zero level for trade management purposes. Busy chart
already, and I’m just getting started.

Figure 37 again
shows the same chart where I have marked up all of the valid buy & sell trades based
on the QMP Filter 10,14,2 only. There were a few setups ignored as the QQE Adv
wasn’t on the correct side of the 50 level, which is also the first target for some
potential trade management action.

3.
​Using the Bollinger Bands 80 & 3.0 when price either touches the
upper or lower band, where I trade back towards the centre band. The
trade signals are taken on the QMP Filter dots with the 1,8,3 settings.
These trades are far and few between as price is normally at an
extreme if those bands are touched. I use various methods for trade
management on these trades, whether that be the 20 & 2.0 BB centre
band, the MACD Platinum zero level or the 80 & 3.0 BB centre band.
There are no hard and fast rules here as I tend to manage these trades

based on what I am thinking of the setup at the time.

Figure 38 is the
same chart showing the valid buy & sell trades using the Bollinger Bands 80 & 3.0.
There is nowhere near as much action here.

4.
​Using the QQE Adv whenever it goes into overbought or oversold
(65/35 levels), where I trade back towards the centre line (50 level).
Again, the QMP Filter with the 1,8,3 settings is used for my entry
points. Trade management options are very similar to what was
mentioned above for the Bollinger Bands 80 & 3.0 setup. It all depends
on what the market looks like to me at the time, and I’ll make my
decision based on that.

Figure 39 is the same chart showing the valid buy & sell trades using the QMP Filter
oversold & overbought levels. Again not much action with the two setups on the right
side of the chart. There were a couple of close buy setups on the left, which were
both Bollinger Band setups, but not to be as they didn’t quite reach the 35 level as
required.

When it comes to position sizing for these trades, with options 1, 2 & 4
shown previously, I will use a constant position size for all of my trades.
There are no stop losses set for any of these trades and I will use the
hedging technique if the trade goes against me. The minimum trade
size would be 0.02 lots as I need to be able to at least close half (0.01
lot) for trade management purposes. So if using 0.02 lots, then all
trades taken would be for 0.02 lots. I’m not increasing position sizing at
all for these types of trades.
For option 3 (BB 80 & 3.0), I will be using the hedging technique but
instead of a sequence of 1,1,1,1, etc (0.02, 0.02, 0.02, 0.02 etc), I will
be using the 1,3,5,8 etc sequence, which would be 0.02, 0.06, 0.10,
0.16 lots etc. Again there will be no stop losses placed at the time of
entry.
And on any setup where hidden divergence presents, I’ll also be using
the hedging technique with the 1,3,5,8 sequence. As most traders that
already follow me, know that I am a huge fan of hidden divergence so I
am happy to try and play these setups out when they initially go against
me. This only refers to any setups involving the QMP Filter with the
1,8,3 settings.
So with the four trade setups, I’m taking all trades that present, so it
can get very busy and confusing very quickly, hence the requirement
for good notes and the use of the multi trade spreadsheets. I keep
notes both on my actual charts and also in a notebook, and have
organised my spreadsheets into folders for the individual pairs and also
the individual trade types, including a combined spreadsheet for the
pair.
I label my trade setups as Q12 for option no.1 above, Q26 for option
no.2, BB for option no.3 and OB or OS (overbought or oversold) for
option no.4. The numbers 12 & 26 come from the settings added
together (1+8+3=12 and 10+14+2=26), so nothing too tricky there. So
in my folder for each individual pair, I will have a multi trade
spreadsheet for each of these plus a 5th combined spreadsheet.
The reason for the combined spreadsheet is so I know where I am at all
times and if things are getting a little confusing or overwhelming with
open trade numbers, or even if I want to have a break from trading,
then this will give me an overall break even price for all open trades.

Sometimes it is good to have a complete reset on a pair and start
afresh.
So when trading all of these setups, I am treating them as individual
sequences most of the time. By this I mean there may be multiple trade
signals at the same time, eg Q12, BB and OB sell setups, where I
would enter all three trades, so if my position sizing was a 0.02 base
lot, then I would be taking three 0.02 sell trades at the same time. Now
say if the Q12 sell trade went into trade management mode e.g. price
closing below the BB centre band or the MACD crossing the zero level,
I would look at closing half of this trade and then placing a stop loss in a
position where I can’t lose on that individual trade. It may then be the
case that a new Q12 buy trade setup presents, where I would then take
this buy trade even though I may still have the BB and OB sell trades
still on. Or it may be the case that I have also taken some trade
management action on those sell trades.
I’m always looking at the big picture, but at the same time keeping an
eye on the individual trade sequences. Like I said, it can get a little
confusing, hence the need for keeping track of all trades and knowing
your overall break even price level at all times.
It may be the case where I am stuck in a Q12 sell sequence which may
have dragged out for longer than expected, where a new new Q12 buy
trade presents. If the Q12 sell sequence was not yet at the overall
break even level, then here I would take a hedge buy trade on that
sequence and also take a new Q12 buy trade, beginning a 2nd Q12
sequence. It may be the case with the combined Q12 sequences, I
may be able to exit all trades at overall break even due to the fact that
I’d actually be nett 0.02 long in this example (if all trades were for 0.02
lots), which depending on market conditions at the time, might be the
smart thing to do.
I know it all sounds a little confusing, so I will go through some trade
examples to give you an idea of how it all fits together. Ideally you want
to be taking small profits out of the market fairly regularly, which will
slowly build up your account balance. So if one or more trade
sequences get into trouble (drags out too long), then hopefully these
small profits will help offset your losses if you are forced to take any at
any time. The good thing is by keeping most of the trading at a constant

lot size, then the losses don’t actually increase that much even when a
sequence goes against you for an extended period. But if you were
using the trade position sequence of 1,3,5,8 etc, then the losses can
accumulate quickly. So this is a lot more conservative doing it this way
and reduces the overall risk considerably.
But remember what I said earlier in the book, if you think that things
don’t look right on either an individual trade or a trade sequence, either
close out and take the loss, or work on a Plan B where you may
consider pivoting your bias (change from buy to sell or vice versa)
where you may close certain trades to put your overall nett long/short
position in your new preferred trade direction.
Now I will go over the same chart I have been using previously and
work my way from left to right and explain my thinking behind the trade
entry and trade management. For your information, I have been using
the AUD/USD 4hr chart from 20th September 2023 to 13th November
2023. I have zoomed in on the chart and also centred it to make it a
little easier to follow, and the yellow vertical line is the start point for this
exercise. I have also numbered the trade entries so there is no
confusion.

Figure 40 is the start point.

Trade 1 is a Q26 Buy only. There was also a Q12 dot on the same
candle but it wasn’t valid as the candle closed above the BB centre
band. So I would have entered 1x buy trade only for 0.02 lots. Price
didn’t go much higher before falling away, and a couple of candles
later, the QQE Adv blue line just crossed above the 50 level. But at this
point the price was below the entry level, so I would wait and see if the
orange QQE Adv line would also cross the 50 level, which it didn’t.
Trade 2 is simply a hedge sell trade for the above Q26 buy trade. So
here I would sell 0.02 lots, which locks in a loss. I would then start

updating my multi trade spreadsheets.
Trade 3 is a combination of a Q12 buy and also a BB buy. So 2x buy
trades taken here, both for 0.02 lots each. The spreadsheet would be
updated, which would show that I am now nett 0.04 lots long and I
would then have an overall break even level for all trades.
Trade 4 then presents on the next candle, which is the 2nd Q26 buy,
where I would then buy another 0.02 lots. Update the spreadsheet and
this then puts me overall nett 0.06 lots long.
The lowest blue dashed horizontal line is my overall break even price
for all trades. I would be reluctant to take any action here as that is still
below the BB centre line, the MACD Platinum zero line and the QQE
Adv 50 level. Basically no rush to close anything out as yet. The next
big bullish candle does close above the BB centre band so I would be
taking some action here on the Q12 and BB buy trades, where I would
be closing out ½ on each and putting a stop in place so I couldn’t lose
on either.
In the meantime, that upper blue dashed horizontal line is the stand
alone overall break even level for the Q26 trades. But as the QQE Adv
is still below the 50 level, I can sit tight here for now. Then a few
candles later, price jumps up and touches the upper BB and also
breaks the QQE Adv 50 level, therefore it is time to take some action.
Here you may decide to close the 1st Q26 buy trade, the Q26 sell trade
and ½ of the 2nd Q26 buy trade, and then place a stop in an area
where you can’t lose overall. This then leaves me with 3x partial buy
trades still in play, and all with stops, where I can’t lose on any of them.
It’s a matter of trailing the stops or closing the trades from then on.
Now onto the next trades.

Figure 41 is a
continuation of this same chart.

I can assume all the previous buy trades had now been stopped out, so
now Trade 5 presents, followed by Trade 6 on the very next candle. A
Q12 sell followed by a Q26 sell. Both entered with 0.02 lots, and as you
can see, both would have profited nicely. Trade management on the
Q12 when the BB centre band was crossed, and definitely tightening
things up on both trades when price hits both BB lower bands. So it's
all very straightforward here.
Trade 7 is actually two trade signals on the same candle. A BB buy and
a Q12 buy, so 2x new buy trades taken here for 0.02 lots each. A few
candles later, Trade 8 presents, which is a Q26 buy where I then open
another buy trade for 0.02 lots. I am now overall nett long 0.06 lots,
assuming that my previous sell trades had closed out. The very next
candle, price goes up nicely and closes above the BB centre band,
where I would then close ½ of both the Q12 and BB buy trades and
place a stop for each where I couldn’t lose on either. Remember I am
also continually updating my multi trade spreadsheet as I take these

actions. I am now overall nett 0.04 lots long with all trades combined.
On the candle before Trade 9, price spiked up and touched the upper
BB so I would consider moving my stops up on the Q12 and BB buy
trades up to at least the point of entry. Then Trade 9 does present and
that is a Q12 sell trade which is entered with 0.02 lots. One candle
later, price closes below the BB centre band so I’m closing ½ of the
Q12 sell and placing a stop at overall break even.
Then 2x candles later, the QQE Adv 50 level is confirmed as crossed to
the upside so I am closing ½ of my Q26 buy trade and placing a stop at
overall break even. Price then meanders for a few candles where
eventually my remaining Q12 sell would have been stopped out for an
overall break even result, and I would have trailed the remaining Q26
buy trade up.

Figure 42 is a
continuation of this same chart.

Trades 10, 11, 12 & 13 are fairly straightforward. They were a Q12
setup followed by a Q26 setup. Look for a close on the other side of the
BB centre band for the Q12’s trade management and a cross of the 50
level on the QQE Adv for the Q26’s trade management, followed by the

tightening of stops as price reaches the outer BBs.
This is when life is good.

Figure 43 is a
continuation of this same chart.

Trade 14 is a tricky one. It is a valid Q12 buy trade but price had
already previously closed above the BB centre band before dropping
back down below it and then presenting the QMP Filter dot, which was
on a big bearish candle. It doesn’t look like a great setup and it wouldn’t
be an issue if you gave it a miss altogether. As you can see, it worked
out eventually and possibly could have made a few pips. You could
have even gone with a 2nd buy trade on the break of the trendline I
drew.
Trades 15 to 20 are all Q12 and Q26 buy and sell trades. All very
straightforward where using the BB centre band and the QQE Adv 50
level for trade management, and then possibly looking for an opposite
upper/lower BB to tighten things up. No losing trades here, and
potentially Trade 18 may have been a runner if I had left the 2nd stop
adjustment at the point of entry, as it would never have been threatened
as price eventually took off to the upside.

Figure 44 is a
continuation of this same chart, which also brings me to the end date of the chart
example, as marked by the yellow vertical line.

Trade 21 is a Q26 sell, and as you can see a few candles later, the
QQE Adv 50 level was just touched by the blue line only, and probably
not enough profit to really do any trade management here. Here I would
wait a few candles to see if the orange QQE Adv line also crosses the
50 level, which it didn’t. So assuming I left it open, then Trade 22 is the
hedge buy for this Q26 sequence. It is not a valid Q12 buy trade at all.
Trade 23 is both a Q12 sell trade and a BB sell trade. Now if you hadn’t
already, it would be a good time to start updating the multi trade
spreadsheet. Then Trade 24 is a hedge buy trade both the previous
Q12 & BB sell trades. Update the spreadsheet again. So far, all trades
are just for 0.02 lots.
Trade 25 is an interesting one as it represents a few setups here. It is
the 2nd Q12 sell trade, the 2nd BB sell trade and the 1st OB sell trade,
keeping in mind that the BB trade sequence is different to the other
setups, so this 2nd sell trade would be for 0.06 lots. Update the
spreadsheet again.
Trade 26 is the 2nd Q26 sell trade (0.02 lots only), and as you can see,
price is in a decent uptrend and I am basically betting on the sell side
here. Time to check the updated multi trade spreadsheet and see
where I am at with all of these open trades. But all is okay, as you can

see the overall break even level marked on the chart with the blue
dashed horizontal line. Ended up with 10x trades open and being nett
0.12 lots short.
You may not be in a rush to close out here if you are looking at the
MACD Platinum zero level and QQE Adv 50 level. Potential to increase
profit here, but also it would be smart to reduce risk first by closing
some trades and placing stops.

Figure 45 is the
multi trade spreadsheet for the trades mentioned previously.

Trade 27 was both a Q12 buy and a OS buy, followed by Trade 28
which was a Q26 buy trade. And as you can see, all of these trades
would have worked out nicely, which brings me to the end of the
example chart.
I must admit that I cherry picked a chart that would make things easier
to explain and also show some decent overall results. Not every 2
month period is going to be as easy as that. But hopefully that helped
you understand the different entry methods, and also gave you a good
idea on how to manage trades. And like I have said a few times
already, you have to keep detailed notes and make sure to update the
multi trade spreadsheet/s at all times as it can get very confusing when
you have so many trades open at the same time.
Which pairs and time frames are best to trade with this setup? I can
just about trade any pair, but having said that, as I write this book in
late 2023/early 2024, I have been avoiding the JPY pairs as they have

been tough to trade at times. I’m also very conscious of overall
correlation, so I’ve reduced my watchlist down to about ten pairs. And
as you already know, I prefer the higher time frames, so with trading
like this, I’m trading anything from the 2hr charts and higher.
Remember if you are in a sequence, then it is best to see it through to
the end, so if trading something like the 2hr charts then you have to be
at the charts every 2 hours to catch the new candle open, which means
sleep deprivation may become an issue. You could use alerts or even a
semi-automated EA to help you out here. Most of my working life was
spent in the military, the police and private security, so sleep
deprivation and being awake at odd hours are not an issue for me, so I
can easily deal with something like catching every 4hr candle.
Also remember the basic stuff about trading and market structure,
where if trading with a nice trend, then try and give your trades a little
more space to develop and don’t be too keen to trail the stop too close.
Here you may end up with the occasional runner of a trade, which is
simply a trade that has turned into a big winner once you have cleared
all the obstacles and begin locking in profit. But if trading against the
trend, or you are unsure of where the market is going, it pays to keep
things a little tighter and be a little more vigilant when it comes to trade
management.
And as I mentioned earlier in the book, do your own research on the
pairs and time frames. With the setup I have discussed above, it is very
easy to test it out on historical charts or on a trade simulator. And if you
have the time, you can always forward test it on a demo account.
There is also nothing wrong with trading multiple time frames of the
same pair at the same time, but this may get a little confusing when
using a combination multi trade spreadsheet, so that is something you
have to be aware of. Other things to take into consideration are your
broker account margin requirements, hence it is best to have as high
leverage as possible. You also have to be aware of the overnight
interest rate fees (Swap fees), especially if you have trade sequences
that drag out for a while. If trading the same pair on multiple time
frames at the same time, it may also be best to reduce the number of
pairs you are trading.
The above may have been a little confusing to some. Re-read it a few

times, set the charts up like mine, and then run through various trade
setups using each of the four entry techniques on historical charts, and
then try a combination of these techniques. You will soon see how it
works together and how it can be a good way to accumulate profits
quickly. If it’s not for you, then there is nothing to stop you still using the
same trade entry techniques, but instead use the more traditional way
of trading by placing a stop loss on every trade. Or you may want to get
more adventurous and use different position size sequencing, a loss
recovery or DCA technique on the same setups. Like I always say,
there are plenty of options open to you.

CONCLUSION
As I wrap up this book, hopefully I have given you some trading ideas
that you may be able to use in your own trading. Sure you could straight
out copy any of my ideas, but ideally I would like to see you have a look
at some of them, test them, and look at adding them to your own
trading system. Like I say, I’m happy to provide a framework for you,
but it is probably better that you build your own trading system and fully
understand it. By this I mean that you should know it inside and out,
and trade it as close to perfection as possible, where trading becomes
boring and routine, and hopefully consistently profitable.
One question I get asked a lot is “How much can I expect to earn every
day/week/month/year?” I can’t answer that as I don’t know you well
enough. As I have already mentioned previously in the book, you
should have reasonable expectations, where even if you were earning
2% - 4% per month and keeping your drawdown under control, then
you should be able to generate a very good return over time by either
scaling up (compounding) your private account/s or going down the
investor or prop firm path. Slow and steady wins the race, and by
maintaining your discipline and patience you should be able to be in
this for the long haul. If a trade set up doesn’t look good, or you have
some doubt, then stay out of it and decline to take it, or if you must take
it, go in with a lower risk percentage on that trade. Like I said, there is
no rush and you don’t have to be in the market all of the time.
Sometimes less is better.
I realise the majority of this book refers to trading Forex, but I can see
no reason why you can’t trade other instruments like metals, stocks,
indices, crypto etc. The good thing these days is that both MT5 and
TradingView offer many instruments to trade other than Forex, so there
are plenty of options available to the retail traders. Keep in mind that
different instruments have different characteristics when it comes to

margin requirements, spreads, overnight interest rate fees etc, and they
may also suffer from gaps in the market between close and open times.
These are things that would all require thorough forward testing on a
demo account or simulator before committing to live trading on these
instruments. It may require a bit of work on your part, but if you are
serious about trading and want to make it work for you, then you will do
this work. Don’t be lazy or blasé about this …… and don’t ask me
something like “Will this work on the NAS100 5 minute chart?” Please
find out for yourself.
Previously I briefly mentioned trading robots. On MT4 and MT5, these
are called Expert Advisors or EAs, or sometimes you see them referred
to as bots. They can make life easier for the trader but please don’t be
fooled into thinking they are the magic bullet that will solve all of your
trading problems. They can have a use and will be successful at times,
but like anything, there is no free lunch here as you will have to do
some work with them, whether that be actually building them, testing
them or monitoring/managing them.
You could build your own trading robot for MT4 or MT5 based on my
ideas if you have access to the indicator’s source codes, which I am
happy to share with any of my readers upon request. When I say build
your own and you haven’t got the programming skills yourself, then
having a professional Programmer do it for you is also an option. Or you
could buy a 3rd party commercial trading robot, but be careful here as
there are plenty of scammers out there that will prey on the masses
whilst pitching the lifestyle of lambos and mansions etc. Most 3rd party
commercial trading robots are not sustainable long term, so this is
something you have to be aware of. The ones that are decent do
require some monitoring or adjusting at times, due to changes in
market conditions etc, and then you also have other considerations like
access to a VPS or reliable and stable internet connectivity.
There is also nothing stopping you from using a trading robot as a
semi-automated tool to assist with trade entry and initial stop loss
placement when you are either away from your computer or asleep.
Once you are back at your computer, you could then remove the
trading robot and manage the trade manually if you wished. Another
option would be to identify a decent trade setup on a higher time frame
chart and then add a trading robot to a lower time frame chart to only

take trades in the same direction. Like all trading, there are plenty of
options.
And finally I would like to discuss your life outside of trading. I’m
assuming that the majority of people reading this book are from all
different walks of life, so it is hard for me to give very specific advice on
this subject. But like most people, it is probably best to find a good work
(trading) - life balance. As mentioned earlier, trading will put you
through an emotional roller coaster at times, so this is something that
you want to make as bearable as possible. So looking after your health,
staying fit, getting plenty of sleep etc will all help.
Ideally you want a clear mind when sitting down to trade, so your
physical and mental wellbeing are super important. This may mean
getting into a routine for some, which could include things like
meditation, hypnotherapy, affirmations, praying, listening to focus music
etc. Do whatever gives you peace of mind and you believe works for
you. It’s best to give trading a miss when affected by alcohol/drugs, on
serious medication, suffering from illness, or not in a good state of mind
for whatever reason.
Trading can be addictive for some, especially considering it is a 24/5.5
market and there are some traders that will be on the lower time frame
charts like the 1m and 5m charts, where there could be hundreds of
trade setups a week. This will possibly cause burnout and may affect
relationships etc. A good idea is to avoid this sort of trading, or at least
limit the number of hours each day you dedicate to trading like this. It
always pays to have an interest outside of trading, whether that be a
hobby or some other activity that doesn’t involve staring at charts.
Work-life balance!
So that brings me to the end of the book, where I am hoping that you
got something worthwhile from it, or at least got you thinking about
trading a little differently. There are thousands of different ways to
approach the markets, so the trick is to find something that works for
you, and then stick to it.
Discipline is very important in this game, as is patience to wait for your
rules to show you the trade setup, and then having the courage to take
the trade based on those rules. There will be losses along the way, and
there will be frustration at times. Learn to accept both and play the long

game as it will all be worth it in the end.
If you have any questions or would like to discuss anything trading
related with me, I’m easily contactable via email at admin@jagfx.com
or via any of the JAGfx social media sites, which you are more than
welcome to join. Thanks for taking the time to read this book and I wish
you well in your own personal trading journey.
Cheers.
Jim

DOWNLOADABLE PACKAGE TO
ACCOMPANY PROFITABLE FOREX TRADING
USING HIGH & LOW RISK STRATEGIES
To download the package, type in the following on your computer and
subscribe to receive the download package for MT4, MT5 and
TradingView.:

http://eepurl.com/iLgvC2
(The above is case and space sensitive)
●

You will then be required to enter your preferred email for the
information to be automatically forwarded to you and you will need
to confirm that you are not a “robot”.

●

If you do not receive the direct link to the folder reasonably quickly
(say 10 minutes), please check your spam or trash folder and if it is
still not there, don’t hesitate to send us an email:
admin@jagfx.com

