The Essential Guide to Creating Multiplayer Games
with Godot 4.0
Copyright © 2023 Packt Publishing
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or
transmitted in any form or by any means, without the prior written permission of the publisher,
except in the case of brief quotations embedded in critical articles or reviews.
Every effort has been made in the preparation of this book to ensure the accuracy of the information
presented. However, the information contained in this book is sold without warranty, either express or
implied. Neither the author, nor Packt Publishing or its dealers and distributors, will be held liable for
any damages caused or alleged to have been caused directly or indirectly by this book.
Packt Publishing has endeavored to provide trademark information about all of the companies and
products mentioned in this book by the appropriate use of capitals. However, Packt Publishing cannot
guarantee the accuracy of this information.
Group Product Manager: Rohit Rajkumar
Publishing Product Manager: Vaideeshwari Muralikrishnan
Book Project Manager: Sonam Pandey
Content Development Editor: Debolina Acharyya
Technical Editor: Reenish Kulshrestha
Copy Editor: Safis Editing
Proofreader: Safis Editing
Indexer: Tejal Daruwale Soni
Production Designer: Prashant Ghare and Jyoti Kadam
DevRel Marketing Coordinators: Nivedita Pandey, Namita Velgekar, and Anamika Singh
First published: December 2023

Production reference: 2201223
Published by Packt Publishing Ltd.
Grosvenor House
11 St Paul’s Square
Birmingham
B3 1RB, UK
ISBN 978-1-80323-261-4
www.packtpub.com

To God, who has always been me with me, blessing me with strength, faith, and determination to
take faithful steps throughout this journey. Let this book be a blessing that will allow people to
make amazing creative endeavors.

– Henrique Campos

Foreword
Henrique, better known as Pigdev in the Godot sphere, was one of the first content creators covering
the engine back in the day. He’s always been dedicated to open source software.
We worked together for a couple of years, and I’m glad to see how Henrique has grown into one of
the few old-timers who are still constantly learning and sharing with the community.
Most resources for Godot focus on helping newcomers learn the basics. With this essential guide to
creating multiplayer games with Godot, we finally have a learning resource dedicated to online
multiplayers. At the time of release, it is one of the areas of Godot that lacks learning resources the
most.
I especially appreciated the last three chapters, as they dive into essential techniques such as lag
compensation and optimizing network requests. Serious real-time multiplayer games absolutely need
them, yet information on these topics can be especially hard to find.
I hope you’ll have a great time with this essential guide to multiplayer in Godot, and I can’t wait to
see more multiplayer Godot games thanks to it.
Nathan Lovato
GDQuest founder

Contributors
About the author
Henrique Campos is an indie game developer and game designer working in the industry since
2015. Starting as a university teacher in the Computer Graphics and Artificial Intelligence chairs and
working for the GDQuest team from 2018 to 2022, he also provides consultancy for solo developers,
studios, and schools.
Under the alias of Pigdev, Henrique has been creating game development content on his YouTube
channel since 2016. Among his projects, he wrote the Top 7 Godot Engine Recipes and Platformer
Essential Recipes e-books, where he presents design patterns that people can use to make games with
the Godot Engine.

A passionate open source enthusiast, Henrique has been working and contributing to the Godot
Engine project since 2016.

I want to thank God, my friends, and my family, especially my sister, Ráisa, my mother, Sheila,
and my father, Claudio, for always being by my side and supporting me throughout my journey
of empowering indie game developers.

I also want to thank the whole Godot Engine community for building and supporting such an
amazing tool.

About the reviewer
Yogendra Manawat is an indie maker and computer science student. While he is primarily focused
on development skills, he’s also experienced in programming languages including C++, Python, C#,
TypeScript, and GDScript.
His passion for games and movies led him to explore 3D animation with Blender. Yogendra has over
three years of game development experience, having created several small games. Currently, he’s
focused on his original story-based game, Bleak, built using the Godot Engine.
Yogendra loves learning new technologies and experimenting with development techniques to create
unique games and useful software. He’s an active contributor to the Godot Engine community and
has developed tools, including Coursefy and Vortexorama, using Godot. Yogendra actively engages
in game development forums, collaborating and exchanging ideas with fellow developers.
OceanofPDF.com

Table of Contents
Preface

Part 1: Handshaking and Networking
1
Setting up a Server
Technical requirements
Introduction to a network
Understanding the ENetMultiplayerPeer class
What is the ENet library?
What is the UDP protocol?
How does this connection happen?
Creating the server
Creating the client
Testing our handshake
Summary

2
Sending and Receiving Data
Technical requirements
Understanding packets
Introduction to the JSON format
Serialization
Sending packets with PacketPeerUDP
Creating an AuthenticationCredentials Autoload
Sending players’ credentials
Listening to packets with UDPServer
Authenticating the player

Loading a fake database
Replying to the authentication request
Maintaining the player ’s session
Loading the player ’s avatar
Summary

3
Making a Lobby to Gather Players Together
Technical requirements
Calling functions remotely with RPCs
Introducing the @rpc annotation
What’s necessary for an RPC?
Understanding the multiplayer authority
Comparing UDP and ENet approaches
Remaking the login screen with RPCs
Establishing an ENetMultiplayerPeer connection
Creating the RPC functions template
Authenticating the player
Adding the player ’s avatar
Cleaning AvatarCards
Retrieving players’ avatars
Testing the lobby
Summary

4
Creating an Online Chat
Technical requirements

Understanding data exchange and channels
Reliable and unreliable packets
Understanding channels
Sending chat messages
Updating peer ’s data remotely
Summary

Part 2: Creating Online Multiplayer Mechanics
5
Making an Online Quiz Game
Introducing the online quiz game
Setting up a lobby for the quiz game
Displaying new players
Starting the match
Implementing online turns
Updating players about the round
Turning local mechanics into remote gameplay
Understanding the questions database
Loading and updating questions
Sending players’ answers to the server
Summary

6
Building an Online Checkers Game
Technical requirements
Introducing the Checkers project
Understanding the Checkers Piece scene
Comprehending the FreeCell scene
Introducing the CheckerBoard scene
Serializing players’ turns
Working with MultiplayerSynchronizer
Updating and syncing the CheckerBoard

Handling remote turn shifts
Setting up players’ teams
Enabling and disabling team pieces
Managing win and lose conditions
Summary

7
Developing an Online Pong Game
Technical requirements
Introducing the Pong project
How the player paddles work
Understanding the Ball scene
Managing players’ scores
Tying everything together
Setting up online multiplayer paddles
Changing the paddle’s owner
Assigning the players’ paddles
Syncing remote objects
Updating the ball’s position
Coordinating the paddle’s position
Summary

8
Creating an Online Co-Op Platformer Prototype
Technical requirements
Introducing the platformer project
Understanding the Player class

Unveiling the Crate class
How the InteractiveArea2D class works
Understanding the PlayerSpawner class
Spawning players in the match
Giving players control in PlayerSpawner
Setting up the Player multiplayer controls
Syncing physical objects
Synchronizing the player ’s position and animations
Updating the crate’s position remotely
Summary

9
Creating an Online Adventure Prototype
Technical requirements
Introducing the prototype
Understanding the Player scene
Gauging the Asteroid scene
Unraveling the quest system
Breaking down the World scene
Logging the player in to the server
Authenticating players
Syncing the World scenes
Separating server and client responsibilities
Shooting bullets on all instances
Calculating an asteroid’s damage
Storing and retrieving data on the server
Implementing the quest system’s client side
Implementing the quest system’s server side

Summary

Part 3: Optimizing the Online Experience
10
Debugging and Profiling the Network
Technical requirements
Introducing Godot’s Debugger
Mastering the Stack Trace tab
Debugging with the Errors tab
Exploring the Profiler tab
Exploring the Visual Profiler tab
Exploring the Monitors tab
Getting to know the Video RAM tab
Grasping the Misc tab
Understanding the Network Profiler
Identifying the project’s bottlenecks
Using the Network Profiler
Using the Monitors tab
Summary

11
Optimizing Data Requests
Technical requirements
Understanding network resources
Decreasing the requests count
Reducing the weapon fire count
Decreasing Asteroid’s syncing count

Compressing data with the ENetConnection class
Summary

12
Implementing Lag Compensation
Technical requirements
Introducing lag issues
Dealing with unreliable packets
Common compensation techniques
Implementing server-side motion
Bridging the gaps with interpolation
Playing ahead with prediction
Gazing into the future with extrapolation
Summary

13
Caching Data to Decrease Bandwidth
Technical requirements
Understanding caching
Setting up the HTTPRequest node
Understanding the HTTP protocol
Setting up the scenes and database
Implementing texture caching
Implementing database caching
Going further with caching
Summary

Index
Other Books You May Enjoy
OceanofPDF.com

Preface
The Essential Guide to Creating Multiplayer Games with Godot 4.0 is the ultimate hands-on guide to
understanding how to make online multiplayer games using the open source Godot Engine. In its
fourth version, Godot Engine introduces a high-level network API that allows users to focus on
creating interesting and funny mechanics while letting the engine do the heavy work.
Through this book, you will learn the fundamentals of networks, including the basic UDP, TCP, and
HTTP protocols. You will see how Godot Engine uses its ENet library implementation to seamlessly
integrate these protocols into its game development workflow. Through nine projects, including five
games, one of them an online multiplayer adventure game, you will learn all you need to know to
connect players together in amazing shared experiences.

Who this book is for
This book is made for intermediary Godot Engine users, people who already know how Godot
Engine works, its design philosophy, the editor, the documentation, and its core features. These users
have already made games using Godot Engine. They are looking for something to make their next
project stand out, and adding online multiplayer features is that thing.

What this book covers
Chapter 1, Setting up a Server, explains what a network is and how Godot Engine implements
networking features through its ENet library implementation. You’ll learn how to make your first
handshake to effectively connect a server and a client machine.
Chapter 2, Sending and Receiving Data, discusses the foundation of a network, which is for multiple
computers to exchange data with each other. In this chapter, you will learn that we use a data
structure called packets, and we serialize data to recreate game states on the network. For this, we use
the UDP protocol. At the end, we will have a login screen, effectively retrieving data from the server.
chapter 3, Making a Lobby to Gather Players Together, explains how Godot Engine eases the
process of serializing and exchanging data using the industry-standard UDP protocol by providing
Remote Procedure Calls (RPCs), allowing us to essentially make calls to methods on remote
objects. By the end of the chapter, we expand the login screen into a lobby, adding another client to
the equation and connecting three computers together.
Chapter 4, Creating an Online Chat, explains that with the power of RPCs, we can now change
objects’ states remotely with ease. In this chapter, we learn how we use RPCs to allow players to
exchange messages in a chat. We discuss how we can use RPCs and channels to prevent network
bottlenecks. With that, we prepare ourselves to implement actual game features. By the end of the
chapter, we will have a fully functional chat.
Chapter 5, Making an Online Quiz Game, explains how we can synchronize players’ game states
based on the general game state. We will set up a server that will react to player interactions and
change the game state from waiting for a response to processing a match winner, announcing the
winner, starting a new match, and reaching the end of available quiz questions, effectively ending the
game. By the end of the chapter, we will have an online quiz game where multiple players compete to
answer the most questions correctly.
Chapter 6, Building an Online Checkers Game, moves on to implementing a turn-based multiplayer
online game, and nothing is better than the classic checkers for that. In this chapter, we will learn how
to get the most out of our RPCs while still maintaining the heavy processing on players’ machines.
We will also discuss MultiplayerSynchronizer, a node that allows us to easily synchronize nodes’
properties remotely. We will also learn what Multiplayer Authority is, which prevents players from
messing around with other players’ objects. By the end of the chapter, we will have a fully functional
online checkers game.

Chapter 7, Developing an Online Pong Game, begins the transition from turn-based to action. Action
games rely heavily on players’ reaction times, and the game world should update its state quickly to
allow players to have a smooth experience. Here, we will develop an online Pong game and use the
MultiplayerSynchronizer node to sync the players’ paddles and the ball. We will also learn that some
features should use different syncing processes. We will go even deeper into the Multiplayer
Authority realm to prevent one player’s input from interfering with the other player’s paddle’s
movement. By the end of the chapter, we have a playable multiplayer online Pong game.
Chapter 8, Designing an Online Co-Op Platformer, is where our baby steps stop and we start to
implement interesting features for a custom game. We will prototype a physics puzzle platformer
game where players grab and move crates around to overcome obstacles and reach the level’s goal.
Applying everything we’ve learned in the previous chapters, we will expand the usage of the
MultiplayerSynchronizer by syncing animations on top of objects’ positions. By the end of the
chapter, we will have a working prototype of a physics puzzle co-op platformer game.
Chapter 9, Creating an Online Adventure Prototype, is, if we’re honest, what you have been looking
for throughout this book. Here, we will use all our skills to create an online multiplayer adventure
game. Players can join and leave at any time and the world is persistent, maintaining players’
progress in quests. We will discuss the basics of making an MMORPG game, storing and retrieving
players’ quest progress in a database, syncing players’ spaceships and bullets, and making their
actions affect other players’ experiences. By the end of the chapter, we will have a prototype of an
online multiplayer top-down space-shooter adventure game.
Chapter 10, Debugging and Profiling the Network, moves on from implementing the online
multiplayer features on our top-down space-shooting adventure prototype. We now need to pave the
way for thousands of players to play our game simultaneously. For that, we will use Godot Engine’s
built-in debugging and profiling tools to assess the potential areas for improvements in our game. We
will focus on the network profiler and the monitor debugging tools to assess and propose potential
solutions for the bottlenecks we find in our prototype. By the end of the chapter, we will have two of
the most powerful and necessary skills a developer can have: the ability to debug and optimize a
game.
Chapter 11, Optimizing Data Requests, builds on the understanding of the tools we have at our
disposal to assess the information we need to discover potential areas for improvement; now, it’s time
to get our hands dirty. Throughout this chapter, we will learn how to create custom monitors to gather
data about specific game features and decide the best strategy to optimize them. By the end of the
chapter, we will have refactored our top-down space-shooting adventure, decreasing the bandwidth
and the number of RPCs we make, effectively making our network consumption much lighter. We

will have also implemented several techniques to decrease the network load, assessing each
improvement with the network profiler and custom monitors to see how much better the game is
becoming.
Chapter 12, Implementing Lag Compensation, deals with the issue that due to the improvements
made to decrease network usage, our game may be inaccurately replicated on players’ machines.
With fewer RPCs and more sparse synchronization, the game may become asynchronous among
players. Add latency and packet loss on top of that and you effectively worsen the players’
experience. Nobody likes lag in their game. In this chapter, we will learn how to use Tweens to
implement interpolation, prediction, and extrapolation to compensate for all these issues. By the end
of the chapter, we will have a version of the top-down space-shooting adventure prototype with some
fake latency and solutions for this game-breaking issue.
Chapter 13, Caching Data to Decrease Bandwidth, handles an important issue: throughout our
network engineering endeavors, we have learned that bandwidth is our core resource and that we
should always look to optimize its usage. In this chapter, we will learn how to use HTTP to download
some data and store it on players’ machines so that we can reuse it when necessary. By the end of the
chapter, we will have implemented a feature that allows players to use custom images for their
spaceships, and this new image will be replicated on all other players’ instances of the game. To save
bandwidth, we will implement caching using the user data folder.

To get the most out of this book
This book uses Godot Engine’s ENet library implementation to create several prototypes that explore
the boundaries of this technology. To get the most out of this book, you need to understand how
Godot Engine works, how to code in GDScript, how to use Git, and the basics of the UDP, TCP, and
HTTP protocols.
Software/hardware covered in the book

Operating system requirements

Godot Engine 4.0

Windows, macOS, or Linux

Throughout the book, we use the projects available in the book’s GitHub repository. This book
focuses on the networking aspects of each project, so to save you time, you have ready-to-use
projects available so you don’t need to bother with implementing other features that are not related to
network engineering. In that sense, having Git installed is recommended, although not mandatory
because you can download the code directly through the links provided as well.

If you are using the digital version of this book, we advise you to type the code yourself or
access the code from the book’s GitHub repository (a link is available in the next section).
Doing so will help you avoid any potential errors related to the copying and pasting of code.

Download the example code files
You can download the example code files for this book from GitHub at
https://github.com/PacktPublishing/The-Essential-Guide-to-Creating-Multiplayer-Games-withGodot-4.0/. If there’s an update to the code, it will be updated in the GitHub repository.
We also have other code bundles from our rich catalog of books and videos available at
https://github.com/PacktPublishing/. Check them out!

Conventions used
There are a number of text conventions used throughout this book.
Code in text: Indicates code words in text, database table names, folder names, filenames, file

extensions, pathnames, dummy URLs, user input, and Twitter handles. Here is an example: “One of
the Godot Engine’s Network API core features is the ENetMultiplayerPeer class.”
A block of code is set as follows:
func _process(delta):
server.poll()
if server.is_connection_available():
var peer = server.take_connection()
var message = JSON.parse_string(peer.get_var())
if "authenticate_credentials" in message:
authenticate_player(peer, message)
elif "get_authentication_token" in message:
get_authentication_token(peer, message)

Bold: Indicates a new term, an important word, or words that you see onscreen. For instance, words
in menus or dialog boxes appear in bold. Here is an example: “From there, we first need a server. So,
choose one instance and press the ServerButton.”

TIPS OR IMPORTANT NOTES
Appear like this.

Get in touch
Feedback from our readers is always welcome.

General feedback: If you have questions about any aspect of this book, email us at
customercare@packtpub.com and mention the book title in the subject of your message.
Errata: Although we have taken every care to ensure the accuracy of our content, mistakes do
happen. If you have found a mistake in this book, we would be grateful if you would report this to us.
Please visit www.packtpub.com/support/errata and fill in the form.
Piracy: If you come across any illegal copies of our works in any form on the internet, we would be
grateful if you would provide us with the location address or website name. Please contact us at
copyright@packt.com with a link to the material.
If you are interested in becoming an author: If there is a topic that you have expertise in and you
are interested in either writing or contributing to a book, please visit authors.packtpub.com.

Share Your Thoughts
Once you’ve read The Essential Guide to Creating Multiplayer Games with Godot 4.0, we’d love to
hear your thoughts! Please click here to go straight to the Amazon review page for this book and
share your feedback.
Your review is important to us and the tech community and will help us make sure we’re delivering
excellent quality content.

Download a free PDF copy of this book
Thanks for purchasing this book!
Do you like to read on the go but are unable to carry your print books everywhere?
Is your eBook purchase not compatible with the device of your choice?
Don’t worry, now with every Packt book you get a DRM-free PDF version of that book at no cost.
Read anywhere, any place, on any device. Search, copy, and paste code from your favorite technical
books directly into your application.
The perks don’t stop there, you can get exclusive access to discounts, newsletters, and great free
content in your inbox daily
Follow these simple steps to get the benefits:
1. Scan the QR code or visit the link below

https://packt.link/free-ebook/9781803232614
2. Submit your proof of purchase
3. That’s it! We’ll send your free PDF and other benefits to your email directly

OceanofPDF.com

Part 1:Handshaking and Networking
Throughout this part of the book, we take our first steps into the realm of networking. We start by
making a handshake using Godot Engine’s high-level EnetMultiplayerPeer class. We also learn how
to use the UDP protocol to exchange data and end up by learning how to use Remote Procedure
Call (RPC).
This part contains the following chapters:
Chapter 1, Setting up a Server
Chapter 2, Sending and Receiving Data
chapter 3, Making a Lobby to Gather Players Together
Chapter 4, Creating an Online Chat

OceanofPDF.com

1
Setting up a Server
Welcome to The Essential Guide to Creating Multiplayer Games with Godot 4.0. In this hands-on
book, you are going to learn the core concepts used to create online multiplayer games using the
Godot Engine 4.0 Network API.
Firstly, we are going to understand some fundamental aspects of how computers communicate
through a network and the main protocols, including which ones are more relevant for making online
multiplayer games.
After that, we will understand how Godot Engine 4.0 uses and provides both low- and high-level
implementations for networking using its network API. We’ll understand some core classes that we
can use to pass data around to multiple computers on the same network. And then we’ll focus on the
high-level API known as ENetMultiplayerPeer.
With the fundamentals in place, we’ll use the knowledge we just learned to turn local gameplay
features into online gameplay features. To do that, we will develop five game projects:
An online quiz game
Checkers
Pong
A co-op platformer
A top-down adventure

Then, we’ll learn some techniques we can use to improve our players’ experience by optimizing how
their game sends, receives, and processes network data. We’ll understand that we don’t need constant
updates and that we can do most of the gameplay with small bits of data and let the clients’
computers fill the gaps on their own.
Throughout each chapter, you’re going to do a role play of a network engineer working for a
fictional, independent game development studio. In each chapter, you will apply your recently
learned knowledge to a fictional problem presented by your studio’s peers. You’ll focus on the
network aspect of each project they present, so you don’t waste your precious time trying to
understand unnecessary aspects.
In this chapter, you are going to learn the most important aspect of establishing a network of
computers: to connect them all together. You’ll see how this process happens, the reason for doing

this, what’s required to establish this connection, and how we can do that using the API that Godot
Engine provides.
We will cover the following topics in this chapter:
Introduction to a network
Understanding the Godot Engine Network API
Setting up the client side
Setting up the server side
Making your first handshake

By the end of the chapter, you’ll have a client and server version of an application that establishes the
connection of two or more computers. This is the very core of everything that we are going to see
throughout the book, and with that knowledge, you’ll understand how you can start making
computers communicate within a network, which is exactly what you need to do in online
multiplayer games.

Technical requirements
Godot Engine has its own standalone text editor, which is what we are going to use to code all our
practical lessons.
As mentioned earlier, in this book you will do a role play of a network engineer of a fictional indie
game studio. So, we will provide pre-made projects with all the non-network-related work ready. You
can find them in the book’s GitHub repository: https://github.com/PacktPublishing/The-EssentialGuide-to-Creating-Multiplayer-Games-with-Godot-4.0.
With the project properly added to your Godot Engine’s project manager, open the project and move
on to the res://01.setting-up-a-server folder. Here, you'll find what you need to follow this
chapter (later part).

Introduction to a network
Making a network of connected computers is quite a task. In this chapter, we’ll understand the core
concepts of online networks. We’ll also cover how Godot Engine provides solutions to each of the
problems we may face in our quest to make online multiplayer games.
A network is a collection of interconnected devices that communicate with each other. In this
communication, these devices exchange information and share resources with each other. You can

have a local network, such as in a house or office, or a global network, such as the internet. The idea
is the same.
For these devices to communicate they need to perform what we call a handshake. A handshake is
how one device recognizes another device and establishes their communication protocols. This way,
they know what they can request, what they expect to get, and what they need to send to one another.
A handshake begins with one device sending a message to another device. We call this message a
handshake request. The devices use this message to start the handshake process. The one that sent the
request waits for a message from the one that received it. We call this second message a handshake
response.

Figure 1.1 – The handshake procedure

When the requested device sends the confirmation through the handshake response, they establish
their communication. After that, the devices start exchanging data. This wraps up the handshake
process. We usually call the device that requests data the client. As for the one that provides data, we
call it the server.

Note that we use these names for the very first interaction. After this first interaction, it is common
that these roles change. In that sense, communication is dynamic. The server may request data from
the client, and the client may provide data to the server.
In this chapter, we are going to make our first handshake using the Godot Engine Network API. We’ll
also create and synchronize players’ data across the network. So, hold tight, as you’ll learn the
following:
What the ENet library is and why we use it for games
How we can make a handshake using the ENetMultiplayerPeer class

For that, you’ll create a Godot project that lists connected players and allows them to edit and sync a
line of text. It’s a simple but elegant project that covers the basics of setting up an online multiplayer
environment in Godot Engine.

Understanding the ENetMultiplayerPeer class
One of the Godot Engine Network API’s core features is the ENetMultiplayerPeer class. By using
this class, we can perform a handshake between our game server and clients.
The ENetMultiplayerPeer class is a high-level implementation of the ENet library. Let’s understand
this library and why we use it in online multiplayer games.

What is the ENet library?
ENet is a lightweight, open source networking library that is widely used in the game development
industry. It is designed to be a high-performance, reliable, and easy-to-use library for creating
multiplayer games and other networked applications. One advantage of the ENet library is that it’s
cross-platform and written in C. So, it’s efficient with a small footprint and low overhead.
The library provides a simple and easy-to-use API that makes it easy for developers to create and
manage network connections, send and receive packets, and handle network events such as
disconnections and packet loss.
Packets, in this context, are small units of data that servers and clients transmit over the network. We
use them to transmit information such as game state, player input, and other types of data between
different devices on the network.
The ENet library offers support for multiple channels that allow us to easily create multiple streams
of data, such as voice and video, within a single connection. This is excellent for many multiplayer
games.

Another reason to use ENet in multiplayer games is its easy-to-use networking library that is based
on the UDP protocol. This is a good chance to understand one of the main network protocols, so let’s
do it.

What is the UDP protocol?
The UDP protocol is a connectionless protocol that is well suited for real-time, high-bandwidth
applications such as online gaming. This is because it has low latency and is able to handle high
throughput. Just so we are on the same page, in the world of network terms, latency refers to the time
between the transmission and receiving of data through the network.
For instance, it’s very common to talk about lag in online multiplayer games: the time between the
player performing an action and the game reacting to it. The next figure illustrates how latency works
and is calculated:

Figure 1.2 – Visual demonstration of latency

It’s basically how much time it takes for data to cross the network, be properly handled by the server,
and to provide a response to the client.

Throughput refers to how much data we can send through a given network route within a time period
before it gets overwhelmed. For instance, this is a fundamental concept when we talk about DDoS
attacks, where hackers overwhelm the server with an immense number of unsolved requests,
preventing other clients from accessing the service. In the following figure, you can see a visual
representation of the throughput concept:

Figure 1.3 – Visual demonstration of throughput

The bandwidth is how big the available channel of communication in the network is. You can think of
it as a pipe that streams data. A bigger pipe allows a lot of data, and big data, to be transmitted at any
given time, while a small pipe may not even allow any data, of any size, to be transmitted. You can
see this concept illustrated in the following figure:

Figure 1.4 – Visual demonstration of bandwidth

Unlike the more commonly used Transmission Control Protocol (TCP), User Datagram Protocol
(UDP) does not establish a dedicated connection between two devices before transmitting data.
Instead, it simply sends packets of data to a specified destination address without ensuring that the
packets have been received or acknowledged.
Sounds… bad, right? But it’s quite the opposite.
This lack of reliability is often seen as a drawback of UDP, but in the context of online multiplayer
games, it can actually be an advantage. In games, where responsiveness and low latency are critical,
the overhead of establishing and maintaining a connection can be a significant bottleneck.
By not requiring a dedicated connection, UDP allows for faster and more efficient transmission of
data. Additionally, since UDP does not require the receiver to acknowledge receipt of packets, it is
less affected by network congestion or delays, which can be critical for maintaining a stable and
responsive connection in a high-bandwidth, high-latency environment such as online gaming.
Furthermore, the lack of reliability of UDP can actually be beneficial in the context of online
multiplayer games. In games, where a small amount of packet loss or delay can have a large impact
on the players’ experience, it’s important that the game can adapt to these types of network

conditions. By not providing guarantees on packet delivery, UDP allows the game to handle packet
loss and delay in a way that is most appropriate for the specific game and its mechanics.
Think about the following situation.
We establish a connection. In this connection, we update all players in the network about all other
player avatars’ positions in the world. This way, everyone shares the same world state.
If we use a TCP protocol, everyone will have to wait for every other player to send their position and
confirm that they have received every change in every other player’s position, while also trying to
maintain the correct chronological order in which the positions have changed.
So, in this example, if a player moves five units to the left and sends 15 packets with all the
movement data, including being idle, all other players must confirm that they have received all those
15 packets.
Using UDP, players can ignore every update but the latest one, which is the only relevant piece of
information in real-time experience: what is the game-world state now? It doesn’t matter how it gets
to this point; it only matters that it is there at this very moment.
We are going to see that this causes some trouble as well. But we can create methods and understand
techniques to mitigate those issues. We are going to talk about that in further chapters.

How does this connection happen?
To establish a UDP connection, we need two core things:
The IP address of the peers, mainly the server
The port over which they will exchange data

For test purposes, on all our projects we are going to use the localhost IP address. This is a shortcut
to your local IP address mask. An IP address is like a house or apartment address. It is the exact
location to which a given packet should be delivered and represents the address of the computer in
the network. A port is essentially a specific channel in which the host allows a given communication
to be established; we’ll use the 9999 as our default port. There’s nothing special about this one; it’s
just an arbitrary pick.
With this in mind, let’s see for the first time the ENetMultiplayerPeer class in action. As you can
imagine, this setup requires a two-sided approach. We need to set up a game architecture for our
server and a different architecture for our client.
Let’s start with the server architecture.

Creating the server
The ENetMultiplayerPeer class in the Godot Engine provides a convenient way to create and manage
network connections for online multiplayer games. One of the most important methods of this class is
the create_server() method, which is used to create a new server that can accept connections from
clients. This method is simple to use and, besides having five arguments, it only requires one to get
started:
The first argument of the ENetMultiplayerPeer.create_server() method is the port on which the server will listen
for incoming connections. This is the port number that clients will use to connect to the server. For example, if you want the
server to listen on port 9999, you would call ENetMultiplayerPeer.create_server(9999). This is the only
mandatory argument to call this method.
The second argument is max_clients, which is the maximum number of clients that the server will allow to connect at the
same time. This argument is optional, and if not specified, the server will allow up to 4,095 clients to connect.
The third argument is max_channels, which is the maximum number of channels we allow the server to use per client.
Channels are used to separate different types of data, such as voice and video, and are useful for creating multiple streams of data
within a single connection. This argument is optional, and if not specified, the server will allow an unlimited number of channels.
The fourth argument is in_bandwidth, which is the maximum incoming bandwidth that the server will allow per client. This
argument is optional, and if not specified, the server will allow unlimited incoming bandwidth.
The fifth argument is out_bandwidth, which is the maximum outgoing bandwidth that the server will allow per client. This
argument is optional, and if not specified, the server will allow unlimited outgoing bandwidth.

Let’s create our server in Godot Engine. Open up the project provided in the GitHub link given
previously. After opening the project, execute the following steps:
1. Create a new scene and use a Node instance as the root.
2. Attach a new GDScript to this node, and name it Server.gd.
3. Save the scene and open the script.
4. Define a constant called PORT and set it to our default port number so the server can listen to it:
const PORT = 9999
5. Create a new ENetMultiplayerPeer using the new() constructor. Let’s store it in a variable called peer:
var peer = ENetMultiplayerPeer.new()
6. In the _ready() function, call the create_server() method on the peer variable, passing in the PORT constant as an
argument:
func _ready():
peer.create_server(PORT)
7. Still in the _ready() callback, assign the peer variable to the built-in multiplayer member variable of this node:
multiplayer.multiplayer_peer = peer

8. Connect the peer_connected signal of the multiplayer variable to a function called _on_peer_connected. We’ll
create this callback method next:
multiplayer.peer_connected.connect(_on_peer_connected)
9. Create a new method called _on_peer_connected(), which should receive peer_id as the argument:
func _on_peer_connected(peer_id):
10. In the _on_peer_connected() function, use print() to print the passed peer_id argument on the console:
print(peer_id)

The complete script should look like this:
extends Node
const PORT = 9999
var peer = ENetMultiplayerPeer.new()
func _ready():
var error = peer.create_server(PORT)
multiplayer.multiplayer_peer = peer
multiplayer.peer_connected.connect
(_on_peer_connected)
func _on_peer_connected(peer_id):
print(peer_id)

It’s important to note that this script uses the built-in multiplayer member variable that every Node
instance has on Godot Engine 4.0 Network API, which is an instance of the MultiplayerAPI class.
Done: we have our server ready. Told you it would be simple!

Creating the client
Next up, let’s create our client. The process is quite similar. The major difference is that the client
needs the server IP address to find it on the network.
We use the ENetMultiplayerPeer.create_client() method to connect a client to a server. This
method is very simple to use and requires only two arguments to work:
The first argument of the create_client() method is the address of the server. This can be either the server’s IP or
hostname. For instance, if you want the client to connect to a server with the IP address 192.168.1.1, you would call
create_client("192.168.1.1"). But to make things simpler, we’ll use "localhost", which is a shortcut to our own
IP address mask.
The second argument of the create_client() method is the port on which the server is listening for incoming connections.
This is the port number that the client will use to connect to the server. For example, if the server is listening on port 9999, you
would call create_client("192.168.1.1", 9999).
The third argument of the create_client() method is channel_count, which is the number of channels that the client
will use to communicate with the server. Channels are used to separate different types of data, such as voice and video, and are
useful for creating multiple streams of data within a single connection. This argument is optional, and if not specified, the client
will use a default value of 1 channel.

The fourth argument of the create_client() method is in_bandwidth, which is the maximum incoming bandwidth that
the client will allow per connection. This argument is optional, and if not specified, the client will use a default value of 0,
allowing an unlimited incoming bandwidth.
The fifth argument of the create_client() method is out_bandwidth, which is the maximum outgoing bandwidth that
the client will allow per connection. This argument is optional, and if not specified, the client will use a default value of 0,
allowing an unlimited outgoing bandwidth.
The sixth argument of the create_client() method is local_port, which is the local port that the client will bind to. This
argument is optional, and if not specified, the client will use a default value of 0.

Now, let’s see how we can create the client side of this connection so it can connect with our server
and establish their handshake:
1. Create a new scene and add a Node instance as the root.
2. Attach a new script to it.
3. Save the script as Client.gd.
4. In the script, define a constant called ADDRESS and set it to the server’s IP. In this case, we are going to use "localhost":
const ADDRESS = "localhost"
5. Define a constant called PORT and set it to be our default port number. It’s very important that this matches the number we used
in Server.gd, otherwise these peers won’t be able to find each other:
const PORT = 9999
6. Create a new ENetMultiplayerPeer using the new() constructor and store it in a variable called peer:
var peer = ENetMultiplayerPeer.new()
7. In the _ready() callback, call the create_client() method on the peer variable, passing in the ADDRESS and PORT
constants as arguments:
func _ready():
peer.create_client(ADDRESS, PORT)
8. Assign the peer variable to the built-in multiplayer member variable of the node:
multiplayer.multiplayer_peer = peer

The complete script should look like this:
extends Node
const ADDRESS = "localhost"
const PORT = 9999
var peer = ENetMultiplayerPeer.new()
func _ready():
peer.create_client(ADDRESS, PORT)
multiplayer.multiplayer_peer = peer

Alright, we have our server and our client ready. Now, how do we test them?

Testing our handshake
Godot Engine 4.0 has a useful feature for debugging: the ability to open multiple independent
instances of the game. This feature allows us to test different scenes at the same time, making the
debugging process much easier and faster.
To open multiple instances of the game, we need to select one option from up to four options in the
Debug | Run Multiple Instances menu.

Figure 1.5 – The Run Multiple Instances menu

Then, as soon as we press the Run Project or Run Current Scene button, Godot will launch the
instances we’ve set previously. Let’s stick with two instances for this project.
This feature is incredibly useful for testing online multiplayer games, as it allows us to open a server
and a client in the same run. But, as you can see, it’s not very straightforward. When we run the
project, it actually opens two instances of the same scene.
Let’s create a minimal menu where we can select whether we are a client or a server:
1. Create a new scene and use Control as the root and name it MainMenu.

2. Add a Label node as a child of the root node.
3. Add two Button nodes as children of the root node.
4. Give the first Button the name ClientButton and the second one ServerButton:

Figure 1.6 – MainMenu’s Scene tree structure
5. Set the Button nodes’ text properties to I’m a client and I’m a server respectively and position them side by side in the
middle of the screen.
6. Set the Label node’s text property to Are you a… and position it in the middle of the screen.

Figure 1.7 – MainMenu’s scene UI
7. Attach a new GDScript instance to the MainMenu node and open it.
8. Connect the ClientButton’s pressed signal to a function called _on_client_button_pressed.

Figure 1.8 – ClientButton’s pressed signal connection
9. Connect the pressed signal of the ServerButton to a function called _on_server_button_pressed.
10. In the _on_client_button_pressed() callback, let’s call the change_scene_to_file() method on the
get_tree() instance, passing in "res://Client.tscn" as the argument:
extends Control
func _on_client_pressed():
get_tree().change_scene_to_file
("res://Client.tscn")
11. In the _on_server_button_pressed() callback, do the same as before, passing "res://Server.tscn" instead.

The complete script should look like this:
extends Control
func _on_client_pressed():
get_tree().change_scene_to_file
("res://Client.tscn")
func _on_server_pressed():
get_tree().change_scene_to_file("res://Server.tscn")

Now, let’s make sure we save the scene before we test it. After that, all we need to do is hit the Run
Current Scene button and watch the scene come to life. All the hard work has been done, and now
all that’s left is to appreciate the results.

Once we have the two debug instances running, we need to pick one to be the server first. For that,
we can press ServerButton. This will launch our Server.tscn scene and start listening for incoming
connections.
Then, in the other instance, we need to press ClientButton. This will launch the Client.tscn scene
and try to connect to the server. If everything goes as expected, we should get peer_id printed in the
console of the server instance.
This means that the client and the server have successfully established a connection and are now
ready to start exchanging messages. Congratulations, you’ve just created your first handshake!

Summary
In this chapter, we went through the fundamentals of network connections, which is to establish the
connection through a procedure known as the handshake.
The handshake ensures that two computers recognize each other in a network and establish the
protocols of this communication. This is important to understand, as it is the core of all our further
endeavors. Without this at our disposal, our players and our server would be disconnected. One
would be sending data to the void, while the other would be infinitely waiting for something to
arrive.
Talking about sending data, now that we have our computers connected and open to receive and send
data back and forth, it’s time to see how to do that. Throughout this chapter, you saw how you can
properly establish a connection using the ENet library and how Godot Engine provides a high-level
approach to handshaking, to the point that we can barely see if there was an actual handshake or not.
In the next chapter, we are going to use the UDP protocol to also establish a connection between
client and server. But this time, we are going to dig a bit further and actually send data both from the
client to the server and the other way around.
It’s important to use the UDP protocol to understand what might be happening under the hood when
we finally start to get used to the Godot Engine ENetMultiplayer API.
Now let’s see the dirty and messy world of low-level data transmission in the next chapter, so we can
understand later how much easier our lives are made with the new high-level network API!
OceanofPDF.com

2
Sending and Receiving Data
In the previous chapter, we saw how we can establish a connection between two computers using the
high-level Godot Engine ENetMultiplayerPeer API. But what do we do after that? Why do we
establish connections between computers? The foundation of a network is the communication
between the connected computers, allowing them to send and receive data. This data is transferred by
breaking down the content into small chunks called packets.
Each packet is like a postcard containing the necessary information, such as the sender’s and
receiver’s IP addresses, the communication port, and the message’s content. We then send these
packets over the network, where they can be routed to their intended recipient. Using communication
protocols, such as the UDP protocol, we break the data into packets at the sending end and
reassemble them at the receiving end of the relationship.
In this chapter, we will discuss the fundamentals of how packets are sent and received and what
makes the UDP protocol unique. For that, we’ll need to go a bit lower and use the Godot Engine
UDPServer and PacketPeerUDP classes. These are lower-level API classes, so we will go through some

intense content here.
We will cover the following topics in this chapter:
Understanding packets
Introduction to the JavaScript Object Notation (JSON) format
Sending packets with PacketPeerUDP
Listening to packets with UDPServer
Authenticating the player
Loading the player’s avatar

Technical requirements
In this chapter, we’re going to keep up with our project in Godot Engine, but this time, we are going
to use the files provided in the res://02.sending-and-receiving-data folder. So, if you haven’t
already done so, download the project’s repository using this link:
https://github.com/PacktPublishing/The-Essential-Guide-to-Creating-Multiplayer-Games-withGodot-4.0.

Then, with the project added to your Godot Engine project manager, open the project and proceed to
the res://02.sending-and-receiving-data folder.

Understanding packets
Packets are fundamental building blocks of communication over the network using the UDP
protocol. They are small chunks of data that contain all the necessary information to reach their
intended recipient. This includes the sender’s and receiver’s IP addresses, the communication port,
and the message’s content.
Senders send packets to the receiver over the network. The receiving end reassembles the packets,
allowing the receiver to understand the message sent. This process is known as packet switching.
You can see a visual representation of this here:

Figure 2.1 – Packet switching process

Unlike other protocols, such as the TCP protocol, the UDP protocol does not guarantee that packets
will arrive in the same order as they were sent. This means that the protocol is less reliable but more
efficient and faster.
UDP is also different from other protocols due to its lack of connection state. Each packet contains all
the data it needs to reach its receiving end. We address them individually, and the network routes
them based on each packet’s own information. This contrasts with the TCP protocol as the latter
needs to set up a prearranged, fixed data channel through a traditional handshake procedure.

This means that we can send these packets using the UDP protocol without a handshake. As long as
our server is listening to messages at the specific port we’ve assigned, it will be able to receive the
sender’s message.
Due to all that, the UDP protocol is more efficient for sending gameplay data across a network
because it’s fast and doesn’t need to wait for confirmation of each packet in order at the receiver’s
end. This is a huge advantage for online multiplayer games, especially ones where the player’s
reaction time is important for the gameplay.
It’s also common to use the UDP protocol for quick message systems and even voice calls. One issue
that may come with using UDP for voice calls is that sometimes the audio doesn’t reach the other
side in the correct order, or in any order at all. This causes some issues, but since the communication
is meant to be real time and users can ask the person at the other end of the conversation to repeat,
the UDP protocol has become the go-to solution for this type of service. And this is what is important
to understand—when it is and when it isn’t the proper choice.
Now that we have taken a glance at the protocols in which we can exchange data across the network,
we need to understand what this data looks like. Can we send instances of objects across the
network? How will they assemble at the receiver’s end?
Network communication is a bit lower level in this sense; we need to send only relevant information
in data structures that both the sender and the receiver ends can understand. And for that, we
commonly avoid passing binary data around, such as objects.
Instead, we serialize the important information and transmit the necessary chunks across the network
so that the receiver end can create a whole new clone of the object using only the data we
transmitted. This is way more reliable and allows for smaller bandwidth usage. One common data
structure that we use is dictionaries in the format of JSON files.

Introduction to the JSON format
In network programming, transmitting objects directly through the network is not always reliable, as
the data may get corrupted or lost in transit. Moreover, transmitting objects containing executable
code may pose a security risk if the code is malicious. That’s why it’s a common practice to use data
serialization to convert objects into a format that can be easily transmitted over the network.
One of the most commonly used data serialization formats is JSON. JSON is a lightweight, textbased format that can represent complex data structures such as arrays and objects, making it an ideal
choice for network communication.

When using the Godot Engine network API with UDP, sending and receiving JSON files is a
common practice. With JSON, we can serialize and deserialize data quickly and efficiently. JSON
files are human-readable, making it easier for developers to debug and troubleshoot issues. JSON
files are also flexible, meaning we can cherry-pick only the relevant data we need to send, making
network communication even more efficient.
Unlike binary formats, JSON files are easy to read and modify as well. This makes it easier to debug
and troubleshoot any issues that may arise during the transmission of data.
Now that we understand the advantages and the overall idea behind the JSON format, how do we use
it properly? How does a JSON file help us transmit data around a network and keep players in the
same game context?
As mentioned in this section, serialization is how we cherry-pick only the necessary information
about a data structure, such as an object, and translate it into a format that we can pass around, and
even store, to reconstruct the previous data structure. Serialization is one of the most important skills
to learn in software engineering fields, including networks.
It is through serialization that we can translate the state of our application so that other instances of
our application can further replicate this state through time—for instance, to make a save and load
system or through space, as we are going to do in online multiplayer games. So, let’s understand how
serialization works and how to do it.

Serialization
Serialization in a networking context refers to the process of converting a complex data object, such
as a Sprite2D node, into a simple, linear representation that we can store in a file. For instance,
*.tscn files are serialized files that represent a scene in Godot Engine’s editor.

Serialization involves converting an object into a format that can be easily reconstructed on another
machine or in another context. This can involve encoding the object’s properties, data, and other
relevant information in a standardized format, such as JSON. Serialization is essential in network
communication because it allows data to be transmitted and received efficiently and reliably, while
also enabling interoperability between different programming languages and systems.
For instance, if we want to recreate a Sprite2D node on the client’s side based on data provided by the
server, we can serialize important properties such as its position, rotation, scale, and texture. It would
look like this:
{
"position": {

"x": 2244,
"y": 1667
},
"rotation": 45,
"scale": {
"x": 2,
"y": 2
},
"texture_path": "res://assets/objects/Bullet.png"
}

So, on the client’s side, we instantiate a new Sprite2D node and use this data to ensure it represents
what the server wants the client to see. We are going to use serialization a lot moving forward. In
Godot, we have the JSON helper class for creating and parsing JSON data.
The JSON.stringify() method is used to serialize an object or a data type, such as an integer or a
dictionary, into a JSON-formatted string. This method takes an object as input and returns a string
containing the JSON representation of the input object.
The string can then be transmitted over the network, stored in a file, or used in any other context
where a string representation of the object is needed. The resulting string can easily be deserialized
back into an object using the JSON.parse_string() method.
On the other hand, the JSON.parse_string() method is used to deserialize a JSON-formatted string
back into a recognized Godot data type or object. This method takes a string as input and returns the
deserialized data. The resulting object can then be used in any context where the original object was
needed.
When deserializing the JSON string, the method takes care of mapping the JSON values to the
appropriate Godot Engine data types. This includes mapping strings to strings, numbers to numbers,
and Booleans to Booleans, as well as parsing more complex types such as dictionaries and objects.
With both JSON.stringfy() and JSON.parse_string() methods, Godot Engine provides a simple and
reliable way to convert data into a format that can be transmitted over the network or stored in a file.
We saw how we can translate our relevant data into an understandable standard format that we can
store, transmit, and recreate at the receiver end. Let’s understand how we can pass this data around in
the network.
This is fundamental knowledge when we deal with online multiplayer games because it’s through this
process that we will be able to recreate objects and even the whole game state across players, making
them share the same game world.

Sending packets with PacketPeerUDP

Now, let’s move on to practical knowledge. In this chapter, your task is to implement a login system
for a game. Our project already has a cool user interface and is able to gather player data, such as
their login name and password. Your mission is to make sure that only authorized players can access
the game’s content by implementing a secure authentication feature.
Once a player successfully logs in, you need to display their character’s avatar based on what we
have saved in our database. As a network engineer, you understand the importance of security when it
comes to online systems. You know that a robust authentication system is essential to ensure that only
legitimate users are granted access to the game’s content.
Therefore, you will need to develop a login system that checks players’ credentials against a secure
database and verifies if they have permission to access the game’s features or not.
With your skills and experience, you need to create a system that will provide an excellent user
experience while keeping players’ data secure. So, take up the challenge, and let’s create a login
system that will be a testament to your skills as a network engineer!
In our project repository, open the res://02.sending-and-receiving-data//MainMenu.tscn scene,
and let’s get started.

Creating an AuthenticationCredentials Autoload
In Godot Engine, Autoloads are singletons that Godot loads automatically when the game starts. We
can create and edit them in the editor itself and access them from any script in the game. We use
Autoloads to store game-wide data or to provide global functionality, making them a convenient way
to carry players’ credentials across the game.
One of the main advantages of using Autoloads for carrying player credentials is that they are
available throughout scene changes. This means that any script in the game can access the Autoload
and retrieve the players’ credentials when needed. This eliminates the need to pass credentials from
one script to another, making the code cleaner and easier to maintain.
In addition to that, since Autoloads are persistent throughout the game’s lifetime, as long as players
don’t close the game, we can access their credentials.
This can make the process of implementing a login system with authentication features more efficient
and streamlined.
So, let’s create our AuthenticationCredentials Autoload, as follows:
1. Create a new scene using a Node node as the root node.
2. Rename the root node AuthenticationCredentials.

3. Attach a new script to it, save it as AuthenticationCredentials.gd, and open it.
4. Create a variable to store the player’s username; we can name this variable user, and it should be an empty string by default:
extends Node
var user = ""
5. Then, create a variable to store the session’s token when we successfully validate a login:
var session_token = ""
6. Save the scene, then go to Project | Project Settings and open the Autoload tab.
7. In the Path field, click on the small folder icon:

Figure 2.2 – Autoload tab in the Project Settings menu
8. From the pop-up menu, select AuthenticationCredentials.tscn:

Figure 2.3 – Selecting the AuthenticationCredentials scene from the File menu

9. Leave the Node Name field as AuthenticationCredentials and click on the Add button.

And there we have it. Now, you can access the variables and functions defined in the script of the
AuthenticationCredentials.gd scene from anywhere in your project by calling the
AuthenticationCredentials singleton.

This is useful for keeping track of global state across multiple scenes and nodes in your game. It’s
important to note that this Autoload should only exist on the client’s side of a multiplayer game, and
not on the server’s side. So, make sure to remove it from your server application.
Now, let’s see how we can gather and send players’ credentials to the server. For that, we are going to
work on the very login screen itself! Open LoginScreen.tscn and let’s move on to the cool stuff.

Sending players’ credentials
The LoginScreen scene is the gateway to the game world. It’s essentially a Control node named
LoginScreen with a user interface that captures players’ credentials so that we can authenticate them
and give them access to our world:

Figure 2.4 – The LoginScreen scene’s node hierarchy

The interface includes two LineEdit nodes, one called UserLineEdit and another one called
PasswordLineEdit. These LineEdit nodes allow players to input their login credentials. In case of
any errors, we can use the ErrorLabel node to display any necessary messages.
As we collect the players’ credentials here, we can use the LoginButton node to trigger the login
procedure. With this scene in place, our players can securely access their avatar screen once they
successfully log in.
But now, we need to work on validating their logins before loading their avatar. So, let’s get our
hands dirty. Proceed as follows:

1. Open the LoginScreen.gd script and go to the send_credentials() function.
2. Inside the send_credentials() function, create a dictionary called message that contains the user credentials we will
authenticate in the server.
3. To store these credentials, create a key in the message dictionary called 'authenticate_credentials'; its value should
also be a dictionary. We’ll use it to store players’ credentials.
4. Use the user_line_edit and password_line_edit text properties to capture the player’s input for their username and
password, respectively:
var message = {'authenticate_credentials':
{'user': user_line_edit.text, 'password':
password_line_edit.text}}
5. Instantiate a new PacketPeerUDP object called packet using the PacketPeerUDP.new() constructor:
var packet = PacketPeerUDP.new()
6. Connect the packet object to the server’s address and port using the connect_to_host() method. Here, we are using our
default ADDRESS and PORT constants that represent the IP address and port number of the server to which the client is
connecting. They are 127.0.0.1 and 9999 respectively:
packet.connect_to_host(ADDRESS, PORT)
7. Serialize the message dictionary object into a JSON-formatted string using the JSON.stringify() method, and send it to the
server using the packet.put_var() method:
packet.put_var(JSON.stringify(message))
8. Create a while loop to wait for a response from the server. The packet.wait() method waits for a packet to arrive at the
bound address. It returns an OK error constant if it receives a packet; otherwise, it returns an error code based on Godot’s error
constants. So, we can use that to wait for the arrival of our packet at the server’s end:
while packet.wait() == OK:
9. When we receive a response, we need to deserialize the response data from JSON format back into a dictionary object using the
JSON.parse_string() method. Let’s store that in a variable called response:
var response = JSON.parse_string
(packet.get_var())
10. Check the response dictionary for the presence of an authentication token using the in operator. If the "token" string is
present, store its value in AuthenticationCredentials.session_token:
if "token" in response:
AuthenticationCredentials.session_token =
response['token']
11. After that, we can also store the user present in the message we got from the server as our player’s username:
AuthenticationCredentials.user = message
['authenticate_credentials']['user']
12. Update the user interface to indicate a successful authentication, and switch to the AvatarScreen.tscn scene. If the token is
not present, display an error message to the player:

error_label.text = "logged!!"
13. Then, after all that, we can change the scene to the actual avatar screen using the
get_tree().change_scene_to_file("res://AvatarScreen.tscn") method and break the while loop:
get_tree().change_scene_to_file
("res://AvatarScreen.tscn")
break
14. In case we get a response from the server, and it doesn’t have the "token" key in it, we display an authentication failed message
using the error_label.text and also break the while loop:
else:
error_label.text = "login failed,
check your credentials"
break

At this point, the send_credentials() method should look like this:
func send_credentials():
var message = {'authenticate_credentials':
{'user': user_line_edit.text, 'password':
password_line_edit.text}}
var packet = PacketPeerUDP.new()
packet.connect_to_host(ADDRESS, PORT)
packet.put_var(JSON.stringify(message))
while packet.wait() == OK:
var data = JSON.parse_string(packet.get_var())
if "token" in data:
error_label.text = "logged!!"
AuthenticationCredentials.user = message
['authenticate_credentials']['user']
AuthenticationCredentials.session_token =
data['token']
get_tree().change_scene_to_file
("res://AvatarScreen.tscn")
break
else:
error_label.text = "login failed,
check your credentials"
break

Now that we’ve seen how the client side works and what it will do with players’ data, let’s
understand how the other side of this connection will receive this data and handle it. For that, open
the Server.tscn scene.

Listening to packets with UDPServer
Welcome to our Godot Engine server scene! This scene is where our game’s server logic is
implemented.
The server is the backbone of our game, responsible for authenticating players and providing them
with data about their avatars, such as their name and texture file. This node is called Server, and it

has a pre-written script that includes some essential variables. Among them are two vital variables:
database_file_path and logged_users.

The database_file_path variable is the path to the FakeDatabase JSON file, which represents a fake
database that holds the players’ data. The logged_users variable is a dictionary that stores players
who are currently logged in.
These variables are crucial to our server’s functionality, and we will use them to authenticate players
and provide them with the data they need.
Let’s implement the Server node’s most important feature, which is to listen to packets. Proceed as
follows:
1. Open the Server.gd file.
2. Declare a server variable and set it to UDPServer.new(). This creates a new instance of the UDPServer class that will
allow us to listen to incoming connections:
var server = UDPServer.new()
3. In the _ready() function, call the listen() method on the server variable, passing our default PORT constant as an
argument. This will start the server and make it listen for incoming connections:
func _ready():
server.listen(PORT)
4. In the _process(delta) function, call the poll() method on the server variable to check for any incoming messages.
This method will not block the game loop, so we can call it in the _process(delta) function safely:
func _process(delta):
server.poll()
5. Call the is_connection_available() method on the server variable to check whether a client sent a message. If it
returns true, call the take_connection() method to obtain a PacketPeerUDP instance that we can use to read the
incoming message:
if server.is_connection_available():
var peer = server.take_connection()
6. Use the get_var() method on the PacketPeerUDP instance we get to obtain the incoming message. Since we know that the
message is a string in JSON format, we can use the JSON.parse_string() method to convert it to a dictionary object that
we can work with:
var message = JSON.parse_string(peer.get_var())
7. Check whether the incoming message contains the "authenticate_credentials" key. If it does, call the
authenticate_player() function, passing peer and message as arguments:
if "authenticate_credentials" in message:
authenticate_player(peer, message)

We will create the authenticate_player() method in a moment, but for now, our script should
look like this:
extends Node
const PORT = 9999
@export var database_file_path =
"res://FakeDatabase.json"
var database = {}
var logged_users = {}
var server = UDPServer.new()
func _ready():
server.listen(PORT)
func _process(delta):
server.poll()
if server.is_connection_available():
var peer = server.take_connection()
var message = JSON.parse_string
(peer.get_var())
if "authenticate_credentials" in message:
authenticate_player(peer, message)

We just saw how we can open a communication channel between the client and the server and start to
listen to messages. With that, we can filter these messages so that the server knows what the client is
requesting—in our case, to authenticate the players’ credentials.
This is a low-level implementation of a network API. With that, we can create standard message
formats and contents that trigger events on the server side and expect standard responses from the
server. Let’s see how our server replies to this client request.

Authenticating the player
Authenticating player credentials is a crucial aspect of any multiplayer game. In our project, we are
building a login system for a game using Godot Engine. The login system allows players to log in
with their username and password and then displays their character’s avatar upon successful login.
We are going to use a fake database, stored as a JSON file, to represent the players’ credentials.
While this approach is simpler than using a full-fledged database management system, it has its own
security risks. So, be aware of the risks of this approach in a production-ready project.
To authenticate player credentials in our project, we will also use Godot’s FileAccess class to load
the fake database from the JSON file and parse the data. This will allow us to compare players’ login
credentials with the data in the database and authenticate the player if the credentials match.

Loading a fake database
Now, let’s load our database so that we can check whether the data we got from the player’s client
matches anything on our server. In a nutshell, a database is an organized collection of data. In our

case, we’ll use a JSON file format as our database.
The advantage of using JSON files as databases is that they are easy to manipulate, and you don’t
need to have prior knowledge of database structures and safety.
For instance, our fake database consists of the following:
{
"user1": {
"password":"test",
"avatar":"res://Avatars/adventurer_idle.png",
"name":"Sakaki"
},
"user2": {
"password":"test",
"avatar":"res://Avatars/player_idle.png",
"name":"Keyaki"
}
}

You can even open it in the very Godot Text Editor itself; just double-click the
res://FakeDatabase.json file provided in our base project.

The preceding JSON file represents a simple database that contains two user entries, "user1" and
"user2", each with a corresponding set of data. The data contained for each user includes a password,

an avatar, and a name.
The "password" field holds the plain-text password for each user. This is a very simple approach to
storing passwords, as it is not secure due to the possibility of it being compromised. However, it is
suitable for educational purposes.
The "avatar" field contains a reference to a file that represents the user’s avatar. In this case, it is
referencing two different image files from our game, one for each user.
Finally, the "name" field simply holds a string that represents the player’s avatar name.
Note that a database file shouldn’t by any means be available to the client. So, in your final project,
make sure to remove your database file from Godot’s project and into a safe database device.
While JSON files are a great choice for certain projects, they may not be suitable for others. Here are
some pros and cons to consider:
Pros:
They are easy to read and write, making them a great choice for small projects or when the speed of development is a
priority
JSON files can be parsed natively by most programming languages, including GDScript as we saw previously, which
means you don’t need to install any additional software or libraries to work with them
As we just saw, JSON files are human-readable and can be opened and edited using a simple text editor, which makes
them great for debugging

Cons:
They don’t scale well for large projects with many concurrent users, as there may be issues with data consistency and
performance
JSON files are not as flexible as other database formats when it comes to querying data and performing complex
operations

To load and read the data from our JSON fake database file, we’ll use Godot Engine’s FileAccess
class.
The FileAccess class is a built-in Godot class that provides an interface to load, read, write, and save
files to and from the user’s disk. It is a powerful tool that is essential for any game or application that
needs to access files from the user’s device.
Let’s dive into the specifics of how to use this class to load and parse our JSON fake database file
into our game, as follows:
1. Go to the load_database() function in the Server.gd script.
2. In the function, create a new instance of the FileAccess class by calling the open method and passing in the path to the JSON
file as the first argument and FileAccess.READ as the second argument. The READ constant tells the FileAccess class that
the file should be opened for reading:
func load_database(path_to_database_file):
var file = FileAccess.open(path_to_database_file,
FileAccess.READ)
3. Once the file is open, call the get_as_text() method to read the contents of the file as a text string:
var file_content = file.get_as_text()
4. Next, parse the contents of the file as a JSON string using the JSON.parse_string() method and store the resulting
dictionary in the fake_database variable:
fake_database = JSON.parse_string(file_content)

Before we move on to replying to the player’s authentication request, let’s see how this function
looks at the end of these steps:
func load_database(path_to_database_file):
var file = FileAccess.open(database_file_path,
FileAccess.READ)
var file_content = file.get_as_text()
database = JSON.parse_string(file_content)

With our database in place, we can look at our valid players and check whether the credentials we
receive in the message sent by the client match the credentials we have stored. Ideally, we would use
a safer format to avoid any data leaks or hack attacks, but this should do for our small application.
Now, let’s see how we can reply to the client with a valid response based on whether the player was
successfully authenticated or if the authentication failed. In the former case, we will provide an

authentication token to the player so that they can use it across their play session in order to keep
them logged in without further authentication procedures.

Replying to the authentication request
When a client sends their credentials to the server to be authenticated, the server will receive them
and start the authentication process. The server will use the credentials to search in our fake database,
which contains user data, for a matching record. If the credentials match, the server will generate a
session token and send it back to the client.
A session token is a unique string of characters that identifies the client on the server side, and the
client must present it on all subsequent requests to the server to prove their identity.
To validate credentials, we call the load_database function, which we can do in the _ready() function
to load the fake database into our server.
Then, we will use the username that the player provided through the LoginScreen node to look up
the record in the dictionary. If the record exists, we will compare the password provided by the client
with the one stored in the record. If they match, we will generate a session token and store it in the
logged_users dictionary, along with the username, to keep track of the authenticated users.

If a client tries to use an invalid or expired session token, the server will deny the request, and the
client will need to authenticate again. This way, we can ensure that only authenticated clients have
access to the server’s resources as they play.
Now, let’s move on to the authenticate_player() function and create our authentication logic.
Proceed as follows:
1. Access the authenticate_credentials key from the message dictionary and store it in the credentials variable,
like so:
func authenticate_player(peer, message):
var credentials = message
['authenticate_credentials']
2. Check whether the user and password keys are present in the credentials dictionary by running the following code:
if "user" in credentials and "password" in
credentials:
3. If the keys are present, extract the values of the user and password keys from the credentials dictionary and store them
in separate variables:
var user = credentials["user"]
var password = credentials["password"]
4. Check whether the user key we just stored is present in our fake_database dictionary keys:

if user in fake_database.keys():
5. If the user is key present, check whether the password key matches the one stored in the fake_database dictionary:
if fake_database[user]["password"] == password:
6. If the password key matches, generate a random integer token and store it in the logged_users dictionary with user as the
key so that we can always check them when necessary:
var token = randi()
logged_users[user] = token
7. Create a dictionary called response with a single key-value pair. The key is token and the value is the token variable:
var response = {"token":token}
8. Send the response dictionary back to the client in JSON format using the peer.put_var() method:
peer.put_var(JSON.stringify(response))
9. If the password does not match, send an empty string to the client to indicate that the authentication failed:
else:
peer.put_var("")

With that, we should have a method that properly handles and replies to the player’s
authentication request. Let’s see how it ended up:
func authenticate_player(peer, message):
var credentials = message['authenticate_
credentials']
if "user" in credentials and "password" in
credentials:
var user = credentials["user"]
var password = credentials["password"]
if user in database.keys():
if database[user]["password"] == password:
var token = randi()
var response = {"token":token}
logged_users[user] = token
peer.put_var(JSON.stringify(response))
else:
peer.put_var("")

Now, let’s move on to one important part of this whole process. The player will get a request with a
token that, as we saw in the Sending Player’s Credentials section, they will store in the
AuthenticationCredentials Autoload. So, after that, the player’s game will change the scene to

AvatarScreen and try to request their avatar.
Let’s see how players will be able to keep their session valid throughout this process. The following
section is fundamental even after the player actually starts playing the game. So, stay tuned to
understand how we can always ensure the player is still holding a valid token.

Maintaining the player ’s session
One of the most important aspects of any online game is keeping the player’s session alive
throughout their playtime. In our project, we are going to make sure that the player’s token is
available throughout the whole game session, even when changing between different scenes. This
way, we can maintain the player’s identity as they play the game.
To achieve this, we will store the token on the player’s machine using the
AuthenticationCredentials singleton. This way, the player’s token will be available to all the game’s

scripts, allowing us to check whether the player is still authenticated before proceeding to any other
scene.
By keeping the token on the player’s machine, we can avoid constant login requests to the server to
authenticate the player again, ensuring faster and smoother gameplay. To ensure that the player’s
credentials are still valid, we will use the get_authentication_token() method to allow the player’s
client to make a request to the server for their authentication token.
We call this method whenever the player is about to transition to a new scene or when a certain
amount of time has passed since their last request. This way, we can ensure that the player is still
authenticated and can proceed with their gameplay without any issues.
So, still in the Server.gd script, go to the get_authentication_token() method, and let’s start
providing players with what they need to play our game moving on! Proceed as follows:
1. Inside the get_authentication_token() method, let’s extract the user’s information from the message argument. For
that, we can create a new variable called credentials and assign it the value of the message argument:
func get_authentication_token(peer, message):
var credentials = message
2. Then, let’s check whether the credentials dictionary has a key called "user":
if "user" in credentials:
3. Check whether the token key provided by the client matches the stored token key for the user:
if credentials['token'] == logged_users
[credentials['user']]:
4. Create a variable called token to store the token key we found in the logged_users variable. Then, let’s return the user’s
authentication token key by calling the peer.put_var() method and passing the JSON-formatted token string so that the
client receives a response from the server:
var token = logged_users[credentials['user']]
peer.put_var(JSON.stringify(token))

Our function should look like this:

func get_authentication_token(peer, message):
var credentials = message
if "user" in credentials:
if credentials['token'] == logged_users
[credentials['user']]:
Var token = logged_users[credentials
['user']]
peer.put_var(JSON.stringify(token))

Now, whenever we need to make any procedure that requires confirmation from the server that the
player is still in a valid play session, we can call this function. But to actually do that, we need to add
two lines of code to our server so that it understands when the client makes such a request.
In the _process() function, we check whether the client is making a request for the
authenticate_credentials() method. Let’s check whether the client is making a request for the
get_session_token() method instead, and if so, we call it. The _process() function should look like

this:
func _process(delta):
server.poll()
if server.is_connection_available():
var peer = server.take_connection()
var message = JSON.parse_string(peer.get_var())
if "authenticate_credentials" in message:
authenticate_player(peer, message)
elif "get_authentication_token" in message:
get_authentication_token(peer, message)

Now, let’s move on to the final part of our little project, where we are going to provide and load the
player’s avatar data.

Loading the player ’s avatar
Welcome to AvatarScreen! This is where the player will be able to customize their avatar
appearance and select a unique name in the final version of our (fake) game. To display their current
available avatar, we need to load the player’s avatar data from the database and display it on the
screen.
For that, the AvatarScreen scene is made up of a Control node called AvatarScreen, which holds all
the other nodes in the scene, including a Control node called AvatarCard:

Figure 2.5 – The AvatarScreen scene’s node hierarchy

The AvatarCard node contains a TextureRect node to display the avatar’s image using a texture file
and a Label node to display the avatar’s name.
To load the player’s avatar, we first need to retrieve the path to the image file from our fake database,
which we previously populated with avatar information. So, before we dive into the action in the
AvatarScreen logic, let’s create the avatar retrieving logic in the Server.gd script, and let’s work on
the get_avatar() function this time. Proceed as follows:
1. Inside the get_avatar() function, create a local dictionary variable that contains the contents of the message:
func get_avatar(peer, message):
var dictionary = message
2. Check whether there’s a "user" key present in the dictionary variable:
if "user" in dictionary:
3. If we find the "user" key in this dictionary, let’s create a local user variable that is equal to the value of the user key in the
dictionary variable:
var user = dictionary['user']
4. Check whether the 'token' key in the dictionary variable matches the token stored in the logged_users dictionary for
the user specified by the user key:
if dictionary['token'] == logged_users[user]:
5. If this is the case, create a local avatar variable that is equal to the value of the 'avatar' key in the fake_database
dictionary for the user specified by the 'user' key:
var avatar = fake_database[dictionary
['user']]['avatar']
6. Create a local nick_name variable that is equal to the value of the name key in the fake_database dictionary for the user
specified by the user key:
var nick_name = fake_database[dictionary
['user']]['name']
7. Create a response dictionary with the avatar and name keys and values of avatar and nick_name respectively:

var response = {"avatar": avatar, "name":
nick_name}
8. Use the peer.put_var() method to send the response dictionary as a JSON string to the client:
peer.put_var(JSON.stringify(response))

With that, we wrapped up our server, so we are ready to move to the AvatarScreen node. But
before we do that, let’s see how the get_avatar() function looks after our work:
func get_avatar(peer, message):
var dictionary = message
if "user" in dictionary:
var user = dictionary['user']
if dictionary['token'] == logged_users[user]:
var avatar = database[dictionary
['user']]['avatar']
var nick_name = database[dictionary
['user']]['name']
var response = {"avatar": avatar, "name":
nick_name}
peer.put_var(JSON.stringify(response))

Now, let’s open the AvatarScreen.gd script so that we can finally display our player’s avatar! Go
ahead to the request_authentication() function because, as mentioned before, every time we
need to perform operations on the player’s data, we need to verify their credentials.
9. Inside the request_authentication() function, create a variable called request that holds a dictionary with the
'get_authentication_token', 'user', and 'token' keys. The value of 'get_authentication_token'
should be set to true just so that the server understands the request, while the values of "user" and "token" should be
retrieved from the AuthenticationCredentials singleton:
func request_authentication(packet):
var request = {'get_authentication_token': true,
"user": AuthenticationCredentials.user, "token
": AuthenticationCredentials.session_token}
10. Use packet to send this request to the server by encoding the request as a JSON string using JSON.stringify() and then
using the put_var() method to send it:
packet.put_var(JSON.stringify(request))
11. Use a while loop to wait for a response from the server. Inside the loop, create a variable called data to store the JSON
response from the server, decoded using JSON.parse_string():
while packet.wait() == OK:
var data = JSON.parse_string(packet.get_var())
12. Check whether the data variable is equal to the session_token variable stored in the AuthenticationCredentials
singleton. If it is, call the request_avatar function and break out of the loop:
if data == AuthenticationCredentials.
session_token:
request_avatar(packet)
break

At the end, our request_authentication() function should look like this:
func request_authentication(packet):
var request = {'get_authentication_token': true,
"user": AuthenticationCredentials.user,
"token": AuthenticationCredentials.
session_token}
packet.put_var(JSON.stringify(request))
while packet.wait() == OK:
var data = JSON.parse_string(packet.get_var())
if data == AuthenticationCredentials.
session_token:
request_avatar(packet)
break

It’s finally time to retrieve the player’s avatar data and display their avatar so that they can engage
in our game world! For that, let’s go to the request_avatar() function and create the avatar
request and creation displaying logic.
13. Inside the request_avatar() function, create a dictionary named request with the 'get_avatar', 'token', and
"user" keys and their respective values. We get the user and session tokens from the AuthenticationCredentials
Autoload:
func request_avatar(packet):
var request = {'get_avatar': true, 'token':
AuthenticationCredentials.session_token,
"user": AuthenticationCredentials.user}
14. Use the packet.put_var() method to send the request dictionary as a JSON-formatted string to the server:
packet.put_var(JSON.stringify(request))
15. Create a while loop to wait for the server to respond. Inside the loop, parse the response as a dictionary using the
JSON.parse_string method and store it in a variable named data:
while packet.wait() == OK:
var data = JSON.parse_string(packet.get_var())
16. Check whether the dictionary data contains the "avatar" key. If it does, load the texture of the avatar image from the path in
the "avatar" key value, and set it as the texture of the TextureRect node, called texture_rect. Also, set the value of the
Label node called label to the value of the "name" key in the data dictionary. Finally, exit the while loop with break:
if "avatar" in data:
var texture = load(data['avatar'])
texture_rect.texture = texture
label.text = data['name']
break

We have almost finished our login screen! Before we add the final touch, let’s see how the
request_avatar() method ended up:

func request_avatar(packet):
var request = {'get_avatar': true, 'token':
AuthenticationCredentials.session_token,
"user": AuthenticationCredentials.user}
packet.put_var(JSON.stringify(request))
while packet.wait() == OK:
var data = JSON.parse_string(packet.get_var())

if "avatar" in data:
var texture = load(data['avatar'])
texture_rect.texture = texture
label.text = data['name']
break
17. Now, the final touch is to add yet another check on the Server.gd script to handle when we receive an avatar request. So, the
_process() method should become something like this:
func _process(delta):
server.poll()
if server.is_connection_available():
var peer = server.take_connection()
var message = JSON.parse_string
(peer.get_var())
if "authenticate_credentials" in message:
authenticate_player(peer, message)
elif "get_authentication_token" in message:
get_authentication_token(peer, message)
elif "get_avatar" in message:
get_avatar(peer, message)

And if we test our game by hitting the Play button, or if we test the MainMenu scene, we can
verify that our game is working!
18. The first thing we need to do is to select the Server button in one of the debugging instances:

Figure 2.6 – Pressing the Server button in the MainMenu scene
19. Then, in another instance, choose Client, and it should immediately open the LoginScreen scene:

Figure 2.7 – Inserting the player’s username into the client’s LoginScreen UserLineEdit
20. Choose one of the users we have available in our fake database and insert their credentials:

Figure 2.8 – Inserting the player’s username into the client’s LoginScreen PasswordLineEdit
21. As soon as you press the Login button with the correct credentials, it should load the AvatarScreen scene with the respective
avatar:

Figure 2.9 – The AvatarScreen scene displaying the player’s avatar after a successful authentication

Congratulations! You’ve made your first login screen with authentication features, serializing and
deserializing players’ data all across the network. Be proud of yourself—this is a great feat!

Summary
In this chapter, we saw how we can establish a connection between server and client using the UDP
protocol implementation in Godot Engine’s network API. With that, the network peers can open a
communication channel and exchange data.
Since this implementation works on quite a low-level approach, we saw how we can create a simple
API for our peers to make, understand, and reply to each other’s requests. Depending on the request,
it might be necessary to follow a process known as serialization, which is how we take relevant
information from our game state and turn it into a format that we can store and pass around. In our
case, we saw that JSON format is one of the most common serialization formats.
Using the JSON format, we saw how we can parse our Godot Engine string as JSON and also how to
turn a JSON file into a dictionary that we can work with more efficiently using GDScript.

At the end of the chapter, we saw how we can authenticate players’ credentials, matching them
against a fake database. With successful authentication, we gathered players’ data to display their
respective avatars based on their data in our database.
In the next chapter, we are going to add a new complexity level by allowing multiple clients to log in
to the same server and finally have a shared experience. For that, we will create a Lobby node that
displays all logged players’ names and avatars!
OceanofPDF.com

3
Making a Lobby to Gather Players Together
In the previous chapter, we discussed how to use UDP packets to exchange data between multiple
players in a game. While this approach is highly efficient, it requires a lot of manual work to ensure
that data is sent and received correctly. In this chapter, we will explore the high-level network API of
the Godot Engine, which simplifies the networking process by providing a set of built-in tools and
functions that can handle common network tasks.
Specifically, we will focus on the ENetMultiplayerPeer API, which is the Godot Engine’s wrapper
class for its ENet library implementation, and Remote Procedure Call (RPC), a communication
protocol that allows us to make calls to functions and methods on remote computers as if we were
making them locally. We will use these tools to create a lobby, authenticate players, retrieve player
avatar data from a fake JSON database, and synchronize all players when a player enters the lobby.
We will explore the benefits of using RPCs instead of exchanging UDP packets, and how this
approach can simplify the process of synchronizing game states between multiple players.
We will cover the following topics in this chapter:
Calling functions remotely with RPCs
Understanding the multiplayer authority
Comparing UDP and ENet approaches
Remaking the login screen with RPCs
Adding the player’s avatar
Retrieving players’ avatars
Testing the lobby

By the end of this chapter, you will have a solid understanding of how to use the Godot Engine’s
high-level network API and RPCs to create a robust multiplayer lobby for your game.

Technical requirements
In this chapter, we will build yet another project using the Godot Engine. Remember, throughout this
book, we are using Godot Engine version 4.0, so this is also a requirement.
This time around, we are going to use the files provided in the res://03.making-lobby-to-gatherplayers folder. So, if you don’t have the project repository yet, download it through this link:

https://github.com/PacktPublishing/The-Essential-Guide-to-Creating-Multiplayer-Games-withGodot-4.0
Then, with the project added to your Godot Engine’s project manager, open the project and proceed
to the res://03.making-lobby-to-gather-players folder.

Calling functions remotely with RPCs
In a network context, RPC stands for remote procedure call, which is a protocol that allows one
program to call a function or procedure on another program running on a different machine or over a
network. In the context of the Godot Engine, RPCs allow objects to exchange data between each
other over the network, which is a key feature in creating multiplayer games.
To use RPCs in the Godot Engine, we need to use the ENetMultiplayerPeer API, which provides a
high-level network interface for handling network connections and sending and receiving data, as
well as managing RPCs. By using ENetMultiplayerPeer, we can easily send and receive RPCs and
handle network communication more straightforwardly.
When exchanging data with RPCs, objects can exchange data through functions, which makes the
process more straightforward compared to exchanging data using UDP packets. With UDP packets,
we need to send packets requesting procedures and wait for a response, and only then can we get the
data. This process can be complex and difficult to manage, as we saw in the previous chapter,
especially in large games with many objects exchanging data.
One limitation of RPCs is that they don’t allow the transmission of objects, such as nodes or
resources, through the network. This can be a challenge in games that require the exchange of
complex objects between different machines. However, there are workarounds to this limitation, such
as sending serialized data or using custom serialization methods. We learned how to do that in
Chapter 2, Sending and Receiving Data, so this won’t be a problem to us.
RPCs are a powerful tool for creating multiplayer games, and using the ENetMultiplayerPeer API in
the Godot Engine makes it easy to use them. Although there are limitations to RPCs, such as the
inability to transmit objects over the network, they are still a crucial part of creating a robust and
seamless multiplayer experience.

Introducing the @rpc annotation
Godot Engine 4.0 introduces a new feature called @rpc function annotation. An annotation is a
special marker that we can add to a function in our code that provides additional information to the

compiler or the Godot Engine. In the case of @rpc, this annotation is used to mark functions that can
be called remotely over the network in a multiplayer game.
There are several options that we can add to the @rpc annotation, which control how the function is
called and executed over the network.
Let’s take a closer look at each option:
We have the calling options, meaning what should happen when we make an RPC to this function:
call_remote: This option indicates that the function should only be called remotely on instances of the node in
other peers’ machines but not on the node’s local instance.
call_local: This option indicates that the function should also be called locally on the current peer’s instance of
the node as well. This is useful when we need to sync all peers in the network, including the caller.
Then, we have the caller option, meaning who can call this function remotely:
authority: This option indicates that the function should only be called by the multiplayer authority. We’ll see
more about that soon.
any_peer: This option indicates that the function can be called by any peer in the network. This is useful for
functions that can be executed by multiple peers in a multiplayer game and not only the multiplayer authority.

We also have options regarding the reliability of the remote data exchange when we make an RPC to this function:
reliable: This option indicates that the function should be executed reliably over the network, which means that
the function call will be guaranteed to arrive at its destination. This is useful for functions that need to be executed
without the risk of losing data.
unreliable: This option indicates that the function should be executed with low reliability, which means that there
is a chance that some data may be lost or delayed over the network. This is useful for functions that can tolerate some
loss of data.
unreliable_ordered: This option is similar to unreliable but ensures that function calls are executed in
order over the network. This is useful for functions that need to be executed in a specific order but can tolerate some
data loss.

We can also specify which connection channel the RPC should use to transmit its data. This is useful
to prevent bottlenecking or to dedicate some channels for specific functions. For instance, we can
pick a channel that uses reliable data, such as the transmission of a message between players. Then,
we can have another channel that uses unreliable_ordered data, such as updating peers about their
avatars’ current position.
In that sense, we just need the most recent position to arrive; every other call with previous positions
is irrelevant. So, while one channel waits for messages to arrive, the other is constantly receiving new
updates about avatars’ positions and neither of them blocks the other.

The order in which we pass these options doesn’t matter for the Godot Engine itself. The only
exception is the channel, which should always be the last option passed. Take the following example:
@rpc("any_peer", "unreliable_ordered")
func update_pos():
pass
@rpc("unreliable_order", "any_peer")
func update_pos():
pass

These two ways of establishing the RPC options are the same and both will work. Now, the following
annotation has an issue:
# This wouldn't work
@rpc(2, "any_peer", "unreliable_ordered")
func update_pos():
pass
# This would work
@rpc("any_peer", "unreliable_ordered", 2)
func update_pos():
pass

Only the second RPC annotation will work, because we are passing the channel as the last argument
of the annotation. In the first RPC annotation example, we are passing the channel as the first
argument, so it won’t work.
Now that we understand how we can mark a function as an rpc function and what options we can use
to fine-tune it and achieve what we need in our game, let’s see what we need to be able to call such
functions and propagate them across the network.

What’s necessary for an RPC?
To make RPCs in the Godot Engine, first, we must set up an ENetMultiplayerPeer connection, which
manages the network connection and handles the transmission of data between nodes. We did that in
the first chapter, but we will also go through the process here as well.
Once the ENetMultiplayerPeer connection is set up, we must ensure that the NodePath to the nodes
receiving the RPC is exact. This means that the NodePath to the target node must be identical on all
peers in the network. If the NodePath is not exact, the RPC may not be sent to the correct node or may
not be sent at all.
We can establish a default name for our root nodes to avoid issues. We chose the root node to
facilitate the logic afterward as it is the first node in the hierarchy.
For instance, in our upcoming Lobby project, all three scenes share a common root name, Main:

Figure 3.1 – The ServerLobby, LoginScreen, and ClientLobby scenes with their root node named Main

It’s also important to note that every node in the network should share all the methods marked with
@rpc, even if they are not called or used by anyone. This is because the Godot Engine requires all

nodes to have access to the same set of methods to function properly. This can be a minor
inconvenience for developers as it may bloat some classes with unnecessary methods, but it is
necessary for Godot’s networking system to work effectively.
For instance, these are the methods found in each of the scenes that compose our upcoming Lobby
project. Note that they all share the highlighted methods on top of their non-RPC methods:

Figure 3.2 – The Server.gd, LoginScreen.gd, and Client.gd scripts share functions marked with the @rpc annotation

Making RPCs in the Godot Engine requires setting up ENetMultiplayerPeer connections, ensuring
that the NodePath to the target node is exact, and ensuring that all nodes in the network share all the
methods marked as RPC. While this may require some additional setup and minor inconvenience, it
enables developers to create multiplayer games easily and efficiently.
With that, we understand the core of RPCs in the Godot Engine. We saw what we need to set our
game to support RPCs, how the @rpc annotation works, and how we can tweak it to match our design.
In one of those tweaking options, we saw that it’s possible to only allow the multiplayer authority to
call a given RPC function. Let’s see what the multiplayer authority is and what we can do with it.

Understanding the multiplayer authority
In Godot Engine’s high-level network API, the multiplayer authority is a concept that refers to the
node that has the authority to make decisions about a node state in a multiplayer game. When two or
more peers are connected in a multiplayer game, it is important to have a centralized peer that
decides what changes are valid and should be synchronized across all connected clients.
The multiplayer authority is assigned to a specific peer in the game, usually the server or host, and
this peer has the power to decide which changes from a given node should be accepted and
synchronized across all connected clients. This is important because in a multiplayer game, multiple
players may try to make changes to the game state at the same time, and it is the responsibility of the
multiplayer authority to manage, verify, and synchronize these changes correctly.
Each connected client in a multiplayer game is assigned a unique peer ID, which is a number that
identifies the client within the game’s network. Peer IDs are managed by the
Node.multiplayer.multiplayer_peer object, which is a reference to the ENetMultiplayerPeer object,

which handles the game’s network connection. The multiplayer_peer object can be used to send and
receive data between connected clients, as well as to manage the state of the game’s network
connection.
We can use the Node.get_multiplayer_authority() method to retrieve the node’s current multiplayer
authority, as well as set a different one using Node.set_multiplayer_authority(), passing the peer
ID as an argument. Changing a node’s multiplayer authority will allow the new peer to make and
sync changes to this node across the network, and this can be quite dangerous.
For instance, if a player is responsible for a node that contains its health, the player may somehow
hack it and be able to self-manage their health, ultimately becoming immortal.

Comparing UDP and ENet approaches

The UDPServer and PacketPeerUDP classes are lower-level networking tools that allow for the
exchange of data through UDP packets. This approach requires more work from us, as we must
manage the sending and receiving of packets ourselves. For example, to create a login system using
UDPServer and PacketPeerUDP, we would need to create a packet that contains the user’s login

information, send it to the server, and then wait for a response.
In Chapter 2, Sending and Receiving Data project, we saw how to use UDPServer and PacketPeerUDP
to pass data around. We saw that using these classes, we can serialize data and deserialize it on each
end of the system, both client and server. Using this approach, we need to poll packets and wait for
requests and responses to arrive. It does the trick, but you saw it can get a bit complicated.
One advantage of using the UDPServer and PacketPeerUDP classes is that they provide more control
over the networking process, which can be useful for more complex games that require fine-tuned
networking. However, this approach is also more error-prone, as we must handle the sending and
receiving of packets ourselves, which can lead to issues such as packet loss or out-of-order packets.
On the other hand, using ENetMultiplayerPeer and RPCs provides a higher-level networking solution
that simplifies the process of creating a login system. With this approach, developers can use the @rpc
function annotation to mark a method as an RPC, which allows it to be called from any node in the
network.
For example, to create a login system using ENetMultiplayerPeer and RPCs, we can mark the method
that handles the login process as an RPC, and then call it from the client nodes. We are going to see
that in a moment, and you will understand how powerful and simple the Godot Engine’s high-level
network API is.
Using ENetMultiplayerPeer and RPCs simplifies the networking process and makes it easier to create
multiplayer games. The built-in features of ENetMultiplayerPeer, such as automatic packet ordering
and error correction, make it easier to create a stable network connection. On top of that, the @rpc
annotation makes it easy to call methods from any node in the network, simplifying the development
process.
While the UDPServer and PacketPeerUDP classes provide more control over the networking process,
using ENetMultiplayerPeer and RPCs offers a simpler and more streamlined approach to creating
multiplayer games. The choice ultimately depends on the specific needs of the game you are making,
but in most cases, using the higher-level tools provided by the Godot Engine will lead to a faster and
more efficient development process.
Now that we understand how the Godot Engine’s high-level network API solves a lot of issues
through the ENetMultiplayerPeer class and how it compares to the UDP approach, with major

advantages, such as its ability to easily allow the RPC features we need to make our game easier, let’s
remake the login screen we made in Chapter 2, Sending and Receiving Data, using these new tools.
This will allow us to use the high-level API while understanding the low-level approach and the
advantages of using the high-level approach instead.

Remaking the login screen with RPCs
Welcome back to our studio, fellow network engineer! In Chapter 2, Sending and Receiving Data, we
learned how to create a basic login system using the Godot Engine’s UDPServer and PacketPeerUDP
classes. While this approach was perfect for our small-scale project, we need to level our game as we
move forward and create a lobby!
Fear not, for we have the perfect solution for you – the Godot Engine’s ENetMultiplayerPeer and
RPCs! These two powerful tools will help us build a robust and efficient system that can easily scale
up to support multiple connected clients – as far as we researched, up to 4,095 simultaneously
connected players!
With the Godot Engine’s ENetMultiplayerPeer, we can easily manage multiple connections and
synchronize game data across all connected clients. This means that our login system will be able to
handle more connections, and our game will run smoother than ever before!
With that, we will also be able to make RPCs! RPCs are an essential part of networking in the Godot
Engine. They allow us to call functions on other nodes in the network as if they were local functions.
With RPCs, we can easily share data and perform actions across all connected clients, making our
login system even more robust and efficient.
So, get ready to level up our game, network engineer! In the upcoming sections, we’ll dive into
implementing the new login system using ENetMultiplayerPeer and RPCs and synchronizing players’
avatars into a lobby.
We’ll also cover some best practices and tips for working with ENetMultiplayerPeer and RPCs to
ensure our multiplayer game runs smoothly and efficiently. With these powerful tools at our disposal,
we’ll be able to create a multiplayer game that will wow players and leave them wanting more.
Let’s start by establishing connections between our players and the server using the
ENetMultiplayerPeer API.

Establishing an ENetMultiplayerPeer connection

Let’s recap from the first chapter how to establish a connection using the high-level
ENetMultiplayerPeer class. We’ll start with the server.

This time, we will also add elements such as the fake database and the logged users from our project
from Chapter 2, Sending and Receiving Data. This will allow us to authenticate players and keep
track of who’s connected and their session tokens. Well, without further ado, let’s dive into it!
We’ll start by setting up an ENet multiplayer server on port 9999, loading our fake JSON database
file, and assigning the peer instance to the multiplayer_peer property of the node’s multiplayer
object so we can make RPCs. Remember, we can only carry out RPCs within an established ENet
connection:
1. Open the res://03.making-lobby-to-gather-players/LobbyServer.tscn scene, and then open the Main
node’s script.
2. Declare a constant variable, PORT, and assign our default value of 9999. This variable will be used later to specify the port
number on which the server will listen for incoming connections:
const PORT = 9999
3. Use the @export decorator to create a new variable, database_file_path, which can be edited from the Inspector panel.
This variable will store the path to the JSON file that contains our fake user database. We are using the same file from the
previous chapter:
@export var database_file_path = "res://02.sending-and-receivingdata/FakeDatabase.json"
4. Create a new ENetMultiplayerPeer instance and assign it to the peer variable. This will be our high-level network
interface for sending and receiving data between clients and the server and making RPCs:
var peer = ENetMultiplayerPeer.new()
5. Create an empty dictionary called database and an empty dictionary called logged_users. These variables will be used to
store our fake user data and keep track of which users are currently logged in, respectively:
var database = {}
var logged_users = {}
6. In the _ready() callback, call peer.create_server(PORT) to create a new multiplayer server that listens for incoming
connections on the port number specified by the PORT variable:
func _ready():
peer.create_server(PORT)
7. Still in the _ready() callback, assign the peer to multiplayer.multiplayer_peer. This variable makes our peer
object the default network interface for all nodes in the game:
func _ready():
peer.create_server(PORT)
multiplayer.multiplayer_peer = peer
8. Finally, still in the _ready() callback, make a call to the load_database() method. We are going to create this in a
moment. We do that to have the database in memory from the start, as soon as the server is ready:

func _ready():
peer.create_server(PORT)
multiplayer.multiplayer_peer = peer
load_database()
9. Now, define a new function, load_database(), that takes an optional argument, path_to_database_file. This
function will be used to load the user data from the JSON file into our database dictionary:
func load_database(path_to_database_file =
database_file_path):
10. Inside load_database(), open the file specified by path_to_database_file using FileAccess.open() and
assign it to the file variable:
func load_database(path_to_database_file =
database_file_path):
var file = FileAccess.open(path_to_database_file,
FileAccess.READ)
11. Get the contents of the file as text using file.get_as_text() and assign it to the file_content variable:
func load_database(path_to_database_file =
database_file_path):
var file = FileAccess.open(path_to_database_file,
FileAccess.READ)
var file_content = file.get_as_text()
12. Parse the contents of file_content as JSON using JSON.parse_string() and assign the resulting dictionary to
database:
func load_database(path_to_database_file =
database_file_path):
var file = FileAccess.open(path_to_database_file,
FileAccess.READ)
var file_content = file.get_as_text()
database = JSON.parse_string(file_content)

At this point, this is how our LobbyServer.gd should look like this:
extends Control
const PORT = 9999
@export var database_file_path = "res://
02.sending-and-receiving-data/FakeDatabase.json"
var peer = ENetMultiplayerPeer.new()
var database = {}
var logged_users = {}
func _ready():
peer.create_server(PORT)
multiplayer.multiplayer_peer = peer
load_database()
func load_database(path_to_database_file =
database_file_path):
var file = FileAccess.open(path_to_database_file,
FileAccess.READ)
var file_content = file.get_as_text()
database = JSON.parse_string(file_content)

With that, it’s time to get our hands dirty with the fun part and the core of this chapter. Up next, we
are going to finally create the @rpc methods that we’ll use across our upcoming classes.

Creating the RPC functions template
With that, we can start to define our @rpc methods so when we move on to LobbyLogin, we already
know what we’ll call and how it works. So, still in LobbyServer, let’s create some RPC methods.
These methods are going to be used on LobbyLogin and LobbyClient as well. Remember, all classes
that make RPCs should share the same RPC methods even if they don’t use them.
So, let’s create this interface:
1. The @rpc annotation on this line is an RPC annotation that tells Godot that this function is called remotely only by the
multiplayer authority, which is the server itself. A remote call means that when LobbyServer makes an RPC to this function, it
won’t execute it on itself locally. We will use the add_avatar() method to add a new avatar to the game’s lobby, and we will
implement it on LobbyClient:
@rpc
func add_avatar(avatar_name, texture_path):
pass
2. The clear_avatars() function will remove all avatars from the lobby. We use this function to clear all avatars from the game
so we can sync with newer players. This is also a method that we’ll implement on LobbyClient:
@rpc
func clear_avatars():
pass
3. This @rpc("any_peer", "call_remote") annotation tells Godot any peer can remotely call this function. We’ll use the
retrieve_avatar() method to retrieve the texture path for a specific player’s avatar. We’ll implement this method in
LobbyServer soon, and the LobbyClient is the one that’s going to remotely call it:
@rpc("any_peer", "call_remote")
func retrieve_avatar(user, session_token):
pass
4. The authenticate_player() method will authenticate a player using a username and password. We use this function to
authenticate players’ credentials and pair them with a session token on the logged_users dictionary. This is also a method
from LobbyServer, but now it’s LobbyLogin that’s going to remotely call it:
@rpc("any_peer", "call_remote")
func authenticate_player(user, password):
pass
5. Then, we use the authentication_failed() method to notify a player that their authentication failed. We will call this
from LobbyServer on LobbyClient when the server can’t authenticate the credentials the player sent.

Note that while every function marked with an @rpc annotation should be on all other classes it
interacts with, those classes don’t need to have the same options for their @rpc. You will
understand this better when we jump into LobbyLogin and LobbyClient:
@rpc
func authentication_failed(error_message):
pass

6. We also have authentication_succeed(). We call this function from LobbsyServer on the player’s LobbyClient
to tell them that their authentication succeeded, providing them with their session token:
@rpc
func authentication_succeed(user, session_token):
pass

With that, we have all the RPC functions we are going to use in our lobby system. LobbyServer’s
RPCs section should look like this:
@rpc
func add_avatar(avatar_name, texture_path):
pass
@rpc
func clear_avatars():
pass
@rpc("any_peer", "call_remote")
func retrieve_avatar(user, session_token):
pass
@rpc("any_peer", "call_remote")
func authenticate_player(user, password):
pass
@rpc
func authentication_failed(error_message):
pass
@rpc
func authentication_succeed(user, session_token):
pass

Our template is ready. It has the @rpc methods that the classes that comprise our lobby need to share
to communicate in our network. Remember, this is a necessary step; even if some of the classes don’t
implement the method, they should at least share this interface. For instance, coming next, we are
going to implement the authentication logic in the lobby server, but other classes only need the
method signature for that to work. Let’s see how this goes.

Authenticating the player
In this section, we will focus on authenticating the player in the lobby server. We will use the
authenticate_player() RPC method that we previously defined in our server script to verify the

player’s identity and grant access to the lobby.
The authenticate_player() method will take a username and a password as arguments and will
return either an error message or a session token. If the credentials are invalid, the method will make
a remote call to the authentication_failed() method with an error message explaining the reason
for the failure.
If the credentials are valid, the method will make a remote call to the authentication_succeed()
method, passing a session token and returning it to the player’s LobbyClient. The session token is a

unique integer number that identifies the player and is used to authenticate the player in subsequent
RPCs.
Let’s see how we can implement this logic using the tools we have at our disposal in the Godot
Engine:
1. Inside LobbyServer’s authenticate_player() method, get the peer_id of the player who sent the authentication
request using the multiplayer.get_remote_sender_id() method. This is how we identify who sent the request so we
can properly respond to the request:
func authenticate_player(user, password):
var peer_id = multiplayer.get_remote_sender_id()
2. Check whether the user exists in the database dictionary. If they don’t exist, call the authentication_failed RPC
method on the peer_id with the message "User doesn't exist". For that, we can use the rpc_id() method, which
makes an RPC directly to the peer with the given ID:
if not user in database:
rpc_id(peer_id, "authentication_failed",
"User doesn't exist")
3. If the user exists in the database, check whether the password matches the password associated with the user. If it does, generate a
random token using the randi() built-in method:
elif database[user]['password'] == password:
var token = randi()
4. Then, add the authenticated user to the logged_users dictionary and call the authentication_succeed RPC method on
the peer_id passing the token as an argument:
logged_users[user] = token
rpc_id(peer_id, "authentication_succeed",
token)

This is what this method should look like:
func authenticate_player(user, password):
var peer_id = multiplayer.get_remote_sender_id()
if not user in database:
rpc_id(peer_id, "authentication_failed",
"User doesn't exist")
elif database[user]['password'] == password:
var token = randi()
logged_users[user] = token
rpc_id(peer_id, "authentication_succeed", token)

Note how useful making RPCs is. We don’t need to poll or wait for packets to arrive at the
destination or be concerned with serializing function arguments. We don’t even have to create a
request API to detect what the requester is trying to achieve as we did previously. It’s very
straightforward, almost like making a local application where you have direct access to the objects.
Now, let’s see how we call this function on LobbyLogin. I’ll assume that you already understand how
it connects to the server using the ENetMultiplayerPeer.create_client() method. If you have any

doubts about that, refer to the first chapter; the procedure is the same.
LobbyLogin resembles the login from the previous chapter, so let’s skip directly to the
send_credentials() method, where it communicates with LobbyServer. You’ll notice it also has the

RPC methods we saw in LobbyServer. In this case, they all have the default options since the server is
the only one that should call these methods on it:
1. In the send_credentials() method, retrieve the text String property from the user_line_edit node and store it in
the user variable:
func send_credentials():
var user = user_line_edit.text
2. Then, do the same but with password_line_edit and store it in the password variable:
var password = password_line_edit.text
3. Finally, make an RPC to the multiplayer authority calling the authenticate_player() method with the user and
password arguments. This will make this call only on LobbyServer:
rpc_id(get_multiplayer_authority(),
"authenticate_player", user, password)

This is what the LobbyLogin.send_credentials() method will look like in the end:
func send_credentials():
var user = user_line_edit.text
var password = password_line_edit.text
rpc_id(get_multiplayer_authority(),
"authenticate_player", user, password)

Let’s take a look at the authentication_failed() and authentication_succeed() methods just so we
understand how they work and how we keep the players’ authenticated credentials across the scenes.
authentication_succeed() takes one argument called session_token, which is passed by the server

when it authenticates the player’s credentials, as we saw previously.
Then, we update the AuthenticationCredentials.user and
AuthenticationCredentials.session_token values using user_line_edit.text and the
session_token argument. Just like in the previous chapter, AuthenticationCredentials is a singleton

autoload that stores the player’s username and session token so we can use it in further scenes.
Talking about further scenes, after updating the AuthenticationCredentials singleton, we change the
scene to lobby_screen_scene using get_tree().change_scene_to_file(lobby_screen_scene). That
means the player has successfully logged in and we can take them to the game lobby:
@rpc
func authentication_succeed(session_token):
AuthenticationCredentials.user = user_line_edit.text
AuthenticationCredentials.session_token = session_token
get_tree().change_scene_to_file(lobby_screen_scene)

As for authentication_failed(), we set error_label.text to the error message received from
LobbyServer. This will display the error to the player:

@rpc
func authentication_failed(error_message):
error_label.text = error_message

Now that we understand how both sides of this relationship communicate and what they do with the
data they pass around and get from each other, it’s time to move on and see how the game resolves
this data and displays the players’ avatars to each other, synchronizing new players across the
network every time they join the session.
In the upcoming section, we will see what the lobby screen looks like on the player’s end and how we
load, display, and sync players’ avatars across the network.

Adding the player ’s avatar
In any online game, the player’s avatar is a crucial element that represents them in the virtual world.
In the previous section, we successfully authenticated the player and saved their session token and
username in our AuthenticationCredentials autoload. Now, it’s time to use that information to
display the player’s avatar in the lobby.
To achieve this, we will retrieve the player’s avatar information from our fake database and create a
new AvatarCard, a custom scene with a TextureRect node to display the avatar’s image and a label to
show its name. This way, players will be able to easily identify each other and feel more connected to
the game world.
For that, let’s open the LobbyClient.gd script. Here, we are going to do three major things:
1. Retrieve the avatar information from the server by making an RPC to the retrieve_avatar() method.
2. Implement the add_avatar() method that LobbyServer calls after retrieving the avatar data.
3. Implement the clear_avatars() method that LobbyServer calls before adding a new avatar to the lobby.

We are going to start with the latter two, then we can move on to the LobbyServer.gd file again to
implement the retrieve_avatar() method:
1. In the add_avatar() method, create a new instance of avatar_card_scene:
@rpc
func add_avatar(avatar_name, texture_path):
var avatar_card = avatar_card_scene.instantiate()
2. Add the newly created instance of avatar_card to avatar_card_container. This is an HBoxContainer node inside
a ScrollContainer node:
avatar_card_container.add_child(avatar_card)

3. Wait for the next frame to process before continuing the execution of the code. We do that because AvatarCard needs to be
ready before we update its data:
await(get_tree().process_frame)
4. Call the update_data() method on the avatar_card instance to update its data using the arguments passed to the
add_avatar() method. With that, the lobby will use avatar_name to display the player’s avatar name and will load the
image stored in the texture_path to display their avatar’s image:
avatar_card.update_data(avatar_name, texture_path)

The whole add_avatar() method should look like this:
@rpc
func add_avatar(avatar_name, texture_path):
var avatar_card = avatar_card_scene.instantiate()
avatar_card_container.add_child(avatar_card)
await(get_tree().process_frame)
avatar_card.update_data(avatar_name, texture_path)

Using the @rpc annotation, we created a method that the game’s server can call on clients to add a
new player avatar to all players’ lobby screens, but this causes a small issue. As it is, this method may
add the avatars that were already in the lobby before the newer player joined it.
So, we need to first clear all previous avatars and then add all currently logged players’ avatars again.
This ensures the lobby has only the correct avatars.
In the coming section, we are going to create a method that will run through all current avatars and
remove them to have an empty HBoxContainerthat we can use to add new avatars.

Cleaning AvatarCards
As mentioned before, whenever the server adds a new avatar to the lobby, it first cleans the lobby and
recreates all avatars from scratch. We are going to see that in detail when we implement the
retrieve_avatar() method.

The clear_avatars() method frees all existing avatars from the avatar_card_container node. It
iterates over all children of avatar_card_container and calls queue_free() on each of them. After
this function is executed, all avatars previously displayed in the lobby are removed from the
container.
In the clear_avatars() method, iterate over each child node in avatar_card_container using a for
loop and call the queue_free() method on each child node to remove it from SceneTree and free its
resources:
@rpc
func clear_avatars():

for child in avatar_card_container.get_children():
child.queue_free()

That’s it; pretty simple, right?
Now, before we move back to LobbyServer.gd, let’s make an RPC to the multiplayer authority so it
retrieves the current player’s avatar. We do that in the _ready() method:
func _ready():
rpc_id(get_multiplayer_authority(), "retrieve_avatar",
AuthenticationCredentials.user,
AuthenticationCredentials.session_token)

We use the rpc_id() method to call the retrieve_avatar() RPC method on the multiplayer authority,
which is LobbyServer in this case. We pass the player’s username and session_token, which are stored
in the AuthenticationCredentials singleton autoload, as arguments to the retrieve_avatar()
method. Now, it’s time to move back to LobbyServer.gd.

Retrieving players’ avatars
In this section, we will implement the retrieve_avatar() method on the LobbyServer.gd script,
which will allow players to request their avatar data from the server. The avatar data is stored in the
fake database. The server will respond with some RPCs to update all players with the appropriate
data, displaying their avatars in the shared lobby.
With this method in place, we will complete the functionality of our Lobby project. Players will be
able to authenticate themselves and display their avatars in the lobby. This will provide a solid
foundation for building more complex multiplayer games in the upcoming chapter, as the basics of
networking have been covered.
Let’s do it!
1. In the retrieve_avatar() method, check whether the user is logged in by verifying that the user exists in the
logged_users dictionary. If the user is not logged in, exit the function:
func retrieve_avatar(user, session_token):
if not user in logged_users:
return
2. Then, check whether the session token provided by the remote peer matches the session token stored in the logged_users
dictionary for the user:
if session_token == logged_users[user]:
3. If the tokens match, call the clear_avatars() function on all connected peers to clear any existing avatars from their lobby
screen:
rpc("clear_avatars")

4. Loop through all the logged-in users stored in the logged_users dictionary:
for logged_user in logged_users:
5. Retrieve the avatar name and texture path for the current logged_user from the database dictionary:
Var avatar_name = database[logged_user]
['name']
var avatar_texture_path = database
[logged_user]['avatar']
6. Call the add_avatar() method on all connected peers and pass in avatar_name and avatar_texture_path as
arguments to display the avatar in the lobby:
rpc("add_avatar", avatar_name,
avatar_texture_path)

This is how the retrieve_avatar() method should look after all these steps:
@rpc("any_peer", "call_remote")
func retrieve_avatar(user, session_token):
if not user in logged_users:
return
if session_token == logged_users[user]:
rpc("clear_avatars")
for logged_user in logged_users:
var avatar_name = database
[logged_user]['name']
Var avatar_texture_path = database
[logged_user]['avatar']
rpc("add_avatar", avatar_name,
avatar_texture_path)

Pay attention to its @rpc annotation options. Notice that any peer can call it remotely. This is how we
make an RPC API for our online multiplayer games in the Godot Engine.
Some methods should be called remotely only by the multiplayer authority, some should be called
locally as well, and some can be called by any peer on the network. It is up to us to decide and
manage how peers interact with each other.
With all that in place, it’s time to test out our game using multiple instances to simulate a server and
multiple players connected to our network. Let’s do this in the next section!

Testing the lobby
To test this out, we are going to run three instances of the game:
1. Go to Debug | Run Multiple Instances and select Run 3 Instances.

Figure 3.3 – Choosing to run three instances in the Run Multiple Instances menu
2. Then, open the res://03.making-lobby-to-gather-players/MainMenu.tscn scene and hit the Play button.
3. Pick one of the instances to be the game’s server. To do that, just click on the Server button.

Figure 3.4 – Pressing the Server button on the MainMenu screen

4. Now, pick another instance and click on the Client button. It will take you to the LobbyLogin screen, where you can enter the
first fake player’s credentials.
5. Insert user1 in the username field and test in the password field. These are the credentials we added to
FakeDatabase.json for our first user. Then, press the Login button. It will take you to the LobbyClient screen with a
single avatar.

Figure 3.5 – The LobbyLogin screen with the player’s credentials

With that, the server will authenticate the player’s credentials and will allow the player to move on to
the next screen, displaying the player’s character’s avatar and name based on the data it matched in
the database file. In the following screenshot, we can see the next screen after a successful login.

Figure 3.6 – LobbyClient displaying the player’s avatar after login
6. Then, select the last instance and click on the Client button as well. On the LobbyLogin screen, use the second player’s
credentials. In the first field, insert user2, and then, in the second field, test. It will take you to the LobbyClient screen,
where there should be two avatars now. You can check the other client instance and they will both have the same avatars in order.

Figure 3.7 – The game displaying both players’ avatars after the second player is logged in

We can see that everything is working as we want! The players can insert their credentials and the
server authenticates them and provides a session token to keep them logged in after their validation.
When logged in, they can see their avatar. Not only that, but our game also syncs players’ avatars
when a new player joins the session.
We did all that using the powerful @rpc annotation, which is possible to use when peers connect using
the ENetMultiplayerPeer API.

Summary
In this chapter, we learned about RPCs and their importance in multiplayer game architectures. We
saw how RPCs can be used to exchange data between nodes in the Godot Engine. We also saw what
a multiplayer authority node is and how to set one up that manages all the game states between
network peers. On top of that, we saw that by using the multiplayer API and ENetMultiplayerPeer,
we can easily handle the communication between nodes.
Throughout the chapter, we created a lobby, which is a multiplayer game that features a lobby where
players can join together. We saw how to create a client-server architecture, authenticate users, and

exchange data between the server and the clients using RPCs. We also learned how to use the
multiplayer API and ENetMultiplayerPeer to create a connection between the client and the server.
One of the essential concepts we learned is how ENetMultiplayerPeer simplifies the whole process of
creating a multiplayer game compared to the low-level UDP approach. It abstracts away the
complexity of low-level network programming, such as sending and receiving data packets,
managing connections, and handling errors. This makes it easier for us to focus on implementing the
gameplay mechanics of the game rather than worrying about the low-level details of the network
communication.
Overall, this chapter has provided a solid foundation for developing multiplayer games in the Godot
Engine. By following the steps outlined in this chapter, developers can create a simple lobby-based
multiplayer game that utilizes RPCs, authentication, and the multiplayer API.
In the upcoming chapter, we are going to test the ENetMultiplayerPeer capabilities to exchange,
update, and sync players. For that, we will create a chat room where players can communicate with
each other and finally create a shared experience and a sense of community.
OceanofPDF.com

4
Creating an Online Chat
Welcome to the next chapter of our book on making online multiplayer games using Godot Engine
4.0!
In the previous chapter, we saw how to make a lobby for players and its importance to gathering
before entering a game. Now, we will take a step further and explore the development of an online
chat using Godot’s Network API.
As we saw, Godot’s Network API provides us with a robust set of tools for building real-time
multiplayer games. In this chapter, we will use the ENetMultiplayerPeer class to establish a reliable
connection between players, and some remote procedure call (RPC) methods to handle the chat
system’s logic.
As you may already know, a chat system is essential in any online multiplayer game, as it enables
players to communicate with each other during gameplay. A well-designed chat system can greatly
enhance the player experience, allowing for smoother coordination between team members and
encouraging socialization among players.
In this chapter, we’ll also explore the importance of using multiple communication channels in our
network. We introduced this concept in the previous chapter, but now we are going to see how to
actually use this feature in RPC methods so that our network is able to smoothly pass data around
peers. By the end of the following step-by-step instructions, we will end up with the following:

Figure 4.1 – The Chat screen with players exchanging messages

We will cover the following topics in this chapter:
Understanding data exchange and channels
Sending chat messages
Updating peer’s data remotely

Technical requirements
Through this chapter, we are going to use the fourth folder of our Godot Engine project repository,
available through the following link:
https://github.com/PacktPublishing/The-Essential-Guide-to-Creating-Multiplayer-Games-withGodot-4.0
After importing the project into your Godot Engine project manager, open it and navigate to the
res://04.creating-an-online-chat folder. Then, open the ChatControl.tscn and ChatControl.gd

files. They are going to be the focus of this chapter.
Coming next in this chapter, we are going to learn the basic concepts of reliable and unreliable data
exchange and how channels work so we have the ground set for our chat system.

Understanding data exchange and channels

A chat system is essentially a chronological stack of messages that we order based on what players
send to each other. Since this system needs a coherent chronological order, we need to understand
how to prevent data from getting mixed and disorganized as it gets transmitted throughout the
network. We also need to prevent this ordering from impacting other systems and components. To do
that, we are going to learn how we can send packets reliably and how we can use multiple channels
for data exchange.

Reliable and unreliable packets
Godot Engine’s Network API allows for reliable and unreliable data exchange between peers. The
@rpc annotation provides a way to transmit data securely between clients and the server using

different transport protocols such as UDP and TCP. Reliable data exchange ensures that data is
delivered in order and is not lost in transit, making it ideal for crucial data such as chat messages.
Unreliable data exchange is faster and more efficient but offers no guarantee of order or delivery,
making it ideal for non-critical data such as player position or real-time updates. In our chat system,
we use the reliable @rpc option for chat messages to ensure that they are delivered in a timely manner
without loss or duplication. Reliable data exchange ensures that players are able to follow the
conversation and respond appropriately. Channels provide another layer of control over data
exchange, allowing for better network optimization by prioritizing or separating data sent through
different channels.
In the upcoming section, let’s learn how channels work and what we can do with them.

Understanding channels
When developing multiplayer games in Godot Engine, understanding how communication channels
work within the Network API is crucial for optimizing network performance and minimizing latency.
In the context of Godot Engine’s Network API, communication channels are used to separate
different types of data being exchanged between peers. For example, you may want to use one
channel for game state updates, another channel for chat messages, and another channel for player
movement data.
The @rpc annotation in Godot Engine’s Network API provides an option to specify the channel that
an RPC method should use for sending and receiving data. By default, all RPC methods use channel
0. However, we can specify a different channel by passing an integer number as the last option in the
@rpc annotation. For example, if you want to use a channel for game state updates, you can assign

game state updates to channel 1 and chat messages to channel 2.

Using multiple channels in your Godot Engine multiplayer game can help improve network
performance and minimize latency. By separating different types of data into separate channels, you
can prioritize more important data and prevent congestion on a single channel.
It’s worth noting that using multiple channels can also help prevent data loss and corruption in the
event of packet loss or network congestion. By separating data into different channels, you can
ensure that data loss or corruption on one channel doesn’t affect the other channels. This can help
prevent issues such as desynchronization between peers or corrupted game data. We are going to talk
about that in the next section.
Remember, we are going to use reliable data exchange for our messages, so we can’t prevent players
from updating other crucial information, such as their and others’ avatars’ positions, just because the
data exchange channel is still waiting for a chat message to arrive. It’s wise to use another channel for
that. Let’s see how this works.
Open the res://04.creating-an-online-chat/ChatControl.tscn scene and you will notice it’s
already structured with all the necessary nodes we need to make our chat system. So, we are going to
focus on the script here. The following figure shows the ChatControl scene node hierarchy:

Figure 4.2 – The ChatControl scene node hierarchy

From there, open the res://04.creating-an-online-chat/ChatControl.gd file, and make the method
responsible for adding messages to the chat:
1. Create an @rpc annotation on top of the add_message() method. This RPC method should be available to any peer; it should
also call itself locally. On top of that, it’ll be a reliable method. Finally, here, we are going to use a separate channel to exchange
data, so let’s use channel 2:
@rpc("any_peer", "call_local", "reliable", 2)
func add_message(_avatar_name, message):
pass
2. Inside the add_message() method, create a new variable called message_text that’s going to use the _avatar_name
String and the message arguments to create a text that uses two placeholders separated by a colon, like this:

var message_text = "%s: %s" % [_avatar_name,
message]
3. Then, concatenate the label.textString, skip a line, and then add the message_text String. This will add the latest
message to the players’ visible chat:
label.text = label.text + "\n" + message_text
4. Finally, to ensure the players’ chat is always showing the latest message, we update container.scroll_vertical to
match the label.size.y float. This way, it will scroll to the bottom of the chat label, displaying the latest message:
container.scroll_vertical = label.size.y

The complete add_message() method should look like this at this point:
@rpc("any_peer", "call_local", "reliable", 2)
func add_message(_avatar_name, message):
var message_text = "%s: %s" % [_avatar_name,
message]
label.text = label.text + "\n" + message_text
container.scroll_vertical = label.size.y

With that, we can use a dedicated channel to transmit our players’ messages from one to another and
display them in each player’s chat interface. Using an independent data transmission channel is as
simple as adding an integer number as the last option of a function’s @rpc annotation.
In the next section, let’s learn how we can gather the player’s message and actually process it,
sending it to other players throughout our peers’ network.

Sending chat messages
Godot Engine’s RPCs allow for efficient data transmission between clients and the server in
multiplayer games. We can create an RPC method for this specific purpose, with message data as
arguments. The transmission can be either reliable or unreliable, depending on the needs of the
application. Once the message is sent, it’s received by the appropriate recipients (including clients
and the server) who handle it appropriately, such as by displaying it to the user or logging it. We did
that in the Understanding data exchange and channels section when we made the add_message()
method.
Sending messages using Godot’s RPCs is a straightforward process that involves defining the
message format. In our case, we use the player’s avatar name and the message content, as seen
previously, calling an RPC method to transmit the message and handling the message appropriately
on the receiving end.
We are going to implement a method to read the message that players input using the LineEdit node
and send it to all peers on the network. For that, we are going to use the LineEdit.text_submitted

signal connected to the _on_line_edit_text_submitted() callback method, as shown in the following
image:

Figure 4.3 – The LineEdit text_submitted signal connection

With the signal connected, open the script and let’s work on the _on_line_edit_text_submitted()
method:
1. The first thing we need to do is to prevent the processing of empty messages. For this, let’s return from the function if the
new_text argument is an empty string:
func _on_line_edit_text_submitted(new_text):
if new_text == "":
return
2. Then, we can make an RPC to the add_message() method. This will call this method on all connected peers. We are going to
pass the ChatControl.avatar_name String and the new_text String as arguments so the peers have the proper data to
create their chat messages:
rpc("add_message", avatar_name, new_text)

3. Finally, we clear the line_edit.text String to visually communicate that the game received the player’s message and is
processing it:
line_edit.clear()

The complete _on_line_edit_text_submitted() method should look like the following:
func _on_line_edit_text_submitted(new_text):
if new_text == "":
return
rpc("add_message", avatar_name, new_text)
line_edit.clear()

With this method, any player in the game will be able to input a message and ask all peers, including
themselves, to add a new message to their chat based on the add_message() logic we saw previously.
Now, we need to understand how we are going to update each player about other players’ messages.
In the next section, we will learn how to use RPCs on nodes other than the root node of a scene. With
that, we will be able to make more concise scripts since we won’t bloat our classes with methods they
won’t implement.

Updating peer ’s data remotely
Something really cool about Godot Engine’s Network API is that we can abuse RPCs to pass data
around. For instance, we’ve seen that we use the player’s avatar name in our messages. But have you
asked yourself how we retrieve this data in any of these steps?
You probably saw that there’s an RPC method called set_avatar_name(), right? Since its @rpc
annotation doesn’t have any options, you can assume that it uses the default options. This is
important to know because, as we saw previously, this means that it should be called remotely only
by the Multiplayer Authority – in this case, the server.
Let’s open ChatServer.gd to understand what’s happening behind the scenes. In essence, most of it is
pretty much the same as in the Lobby project, but you will notice something slightly different in the
retrieve_avatar() RPC method. In line 39, we have the following instruction:

var peer_id = multiplayer.get_remote_sender_id()

We saw that this is a way to keep the sender of the latest RPC in memory so that we can refer back to
it if necessary, and in this case, it will be necessary.
In line 45, we make a rpc_id() call to the set_avatar_name() method on the peer that just requested
its avatar’s data:
chat.rpc_id(peer_id, "set_avatar_name", database[user]
['name'])

Note that there’s something else on top of that. We are calling this rpc_id() method from the
ChatControl node, which is a child node of the Main root node.

This is the server’s own ChatControl node. Since the server and client’s scene tree have the same
NodePath to their ChatControl node, we can make this rpc_id() call on the server’s ChatControlnode

instead of making it from the Main node, and it will remotely call it on the player who requested their
avatar’s data:

Figure 4.4– The ChatServer and ChatClient’s scene node hierarchies

This is a good and simple way to prevent bloating a single class with many RPC methods because,
remember, if a caller has an RPC method, all peers should have this method on their equivalent nodes
at the same NodePath.
It’s also a very effective way to remotely update nodes with new data. RPCs are really impressive and
useful tools to have at our disposal when making online multiplayer games with Godot Engine.

Summary
Throughout this chapter, we saw how we can use RPC methods to pass data around and perform
actions on multiple peers of our network. We also understood the core difference between reliable
and unreliable data exchange and saw some examples of situations of when to use each one. Due to
this core difference in the way we can exchange data between the peers of our network, we also
understood that one way may block the other, so we can use channels to prevent that one type of data
from getting in the way of another type of data unrelated to that exchange.
By creating an online lobby where players can chat, we saw how to use the @rpc annotation with
some of its available options, including the option to allow other peers to make remote calls instead

of only the Multiplayer Authority.
In the next chapter, we will use the knowledge we’ve just acquired to build an actual real-time
multiplayer experience. We’ll create a multiplayer online quiz where players will compete to see who
can pick the correct answer the quickest. See you there!
OceanofPDF.com

Part 2:Creating Online Multiplayer Mechanics
After understanding the tools we have available to create online multiplayer games, we put them into
context by creating actual game prototypes. In this part, we learn how to turn single-player games
into online multiplayer games, starting with a quiz game and ending with a prototype of an
MMORPG game.
This part contains the following chapters:
Chapter 5, Making an Online Quiz Game
Chapter 6, Building an Online Checkers Game
Chapter 7, Developing an Online Pong Game
Chapter 8, Designing an Online Co-Op Platformer
Chapter 9, Creating an Online Adventure Prototype

OceanofPDF.com

5
Making an Online Quiz Game
In this chapter, we will dive into the fascinating realm of creating an online quiz game using the
powerful Network API offered by Godot Engine 4.0. We will explore how to leverage Godot
Engine’s Network API to create an engaging and interactive quiz game that can be played with
friends or strangers online. We will cover the fundamental concepts of online multiplayer game
development, including client-server architecture, game synchronization, and player interactions.
Here, we won’t go through the game design aspects of this type of game: scoring, managing
incentives, balancing, and so on; instead, we are going to focus on the engineering side of the
equation: how to sync answers, prevent players from answering when another player has already
answered, update question data for both players, and so on.
We will start by setting up the server side of the quiz game, including creating a dedicated server that
can handle incoming connections and answers from multiple clients. We will then move on to
designing the gameplay’s core functionalities, including handling player input, and managing
answers and quiz questions, while also handling communication between the clients and the server.
Throughout this chapter, we will learn how to use Godot Engine’s RPCs to manage connections,
handle data synchronization, and implement real-time multiplayer gameplay mechanics. We will also
cover topics such as managing the game state.
We will cover the following topics in the chapter:
Introducing the online quiz game
Setting up a lobby for the quiz game
Implementing online turns
Turning local mechanics into remote gameplay

By the end of this chapter, you will have a solid understanding of how to create an online quiz game
using Godot Engine 4.0’s Network API. You will have learned the key concepts and techniques to
make online asynchronous games, including server-side setup, client-side implementation, and
network communication. The following screenshot showcases the end result of our online quiz game:

Figure 5.1 – The online quiz gameplay screen displaying a question and its options

In the next section, we are going to discuss the components of the quiz game so that we can pinpoint
where we, as network engineers, have to implement the necessary features to turn the local
multiplayer version of the game into an online multiplayer one.

Introducing the online quiz game
Welcome, network engineer! Our studio needs you to turn our quiz game into an online multiplayer
experience! We have already gone through various challenges to create a captivating quiz game.
Now, it’s time to take it to the next level by adding online multiplayer functionality.

Imagine players from around the world competing against each other in real time, testing their
knowledge and skills. In this chapter, you’ll dive into the world of networking in game development
and learn how to implement multiplayer features using GDScript. So, let’s get started and make our
quiz game an unforgettable multiplayer experience!
One of the key features of our online multiplayer quiz game is the dynamic loading of questions from
a JSON database. Each question in the database contains all the necessary data, such as the question
itself and four alternatives for players to choose from. Only one of the alternatives is the correct
answer, and this information is stored in the database as well, ensuring fair and consistent gameplay.
To provide a simple and intuitive user interface, our game features four buttons, each representing an
answer to the question displayed on the screen. A panel with a label displays game messages,
including the current question that players must answer to score in the round. The game’s interface is
designed to provide a seamless experience for players as they navigate through the questions and
answers.

Figure 5.2 – The quiz screen displaying the round’s question and available answers

As players correctly answer questions, they progress through the rounds. When a player wins a
round, the game updates the question and answer options, ensuring that players are constantly

challenged with new questions. The game continues until there are no more questions left to answer,
making for an engaging and competitive multiplayer experience.

Figure 5.3 – The quiz screen displaying the round winner

In the next section, we will delve into the lobby of our quiz game. We will explore how to create a
seamless multiplayer lobby system, allowing players to join games and compete in a fun and
engaging multiplayer environment.

Setting up a lobby for the quiz game

In the upcoming section, we will be delving into the process of setting up a lobby for our quiz game.
The QuizLobby scene serves as the hub for players to interact and prepare for the game.

Figure 5.4 – The login screen displaying the username and password fields and the players in the match

The process of authenticating players is similar to what we have done in previous chapters, utilizing
data submitted by players and matching it against FakeDatabase. This ensures that only registered
players with valid credentials are allowed to access the lobby.
Once a player successfully logs in, their name will appear for other players, providing visibility of the
players currently present in the lobby. You can optionally add the previous chat to this scene as well
to allow players to interact before the match starts. This will create a sense of community and allow
players to connect and interact with each other while waiting for the game to start.
The QuizLobby scene is similar to our previous lobbies. So, in this section, we are going to focus on
the core features it adds on top of the lobby we created in chapter 3, Making a Lobby to Gather
Players Together.
In the following section, we will create and understand the additional features in this new lobby
iteration. For that, open the script at res://05.quiz-online/QuizLobby.gd and move on to the
add_logged_player() method.

Displaying new players
One of the new features we will have in this updated lobby is the ability to see all the players who
joined the current match. To implement that, let’s take the following steps:
1. Inside the add_logged_player() method, set the logged_players_label.text property to player_name; this
function receives an argument. The resulting text should append the player_name below the current content. For that, we
concatenate the string with a placeholder string that skips a line and formats the placeholder as player_name:
@rpc
func add_logged_player(player_name):
logged_players_label.text = logged_players_
label.text + "\n%s" % player_name
2. After that, move on to the start_game() method and add the "authority" and "call_local" options to the @rpc
annotation:
@rpc("authority", "call_local")
func start_game():
pass
3. Then, inside the function, let’s tell the SceneTree to change the current scene to quiz_screen_scene, which is a variable that
points to QuizScreenClient.tscn:
@rpc("authority", "call_local")
func start_game():
get_tree().change_scene_to_file(quiz_screen_scene)
4. Finally, on the _on_StartButton_pressed() callback, we will make a direct RPC to the multiplayer authority’s
start_game() method without calling it locally:
func _on_StartButton_pressed():
rpc_id(get_multiplayer_authority(), "start_game")

In game development, ensuring fair gameplay and providing an enjoyable experience for players are
critical aspects of creating a successful game. This involves implementing various features and
functionalities that make the game engaging and dynamic. One such feature is adding a player to the
match when they join the game. This can be achieved by creating a panel that displays the names of
all the players currently participating in the game.
In a multiplayer game, communication between the server and clients is crucial. It’s essential to
ensure that only authorized entities can perform specific actions. This ensures that the game’s
mechanics and flow are consistent and reliable for all players.
Finally, once all the players are in the game, and the match is about to begin, the next step is to move
them and the server to the next game screen. This screen will display all the necessary information
about the game, such as the objective, rules, and game mechanics.

This ensures that all the players are on the same page and know what to expect from the game.
Overall, implementing these features ensures that the game runs smoothly and that the players have a
positive gaming experience.
With that, every time a player joins the match, their name will be added to the Players in Match
panel. Note that regarding the start_game() method, only the multiplayer authority can make a
remote call to it, right? We are about to see something new in a moment.
On the server side, we will have a different implementation of this method. In the upcoming section,
we will see how the match actually starts and why we move all players and the server to the next
game screen.

Starting the match
This implementation works that way to prevent one player from calling the start_game() method on
the other players, or on itself, without other players also starting the game. The idea is that the player
who presses the Start button will ask the multiplayer authority to start the game.
In turn, the multiplayer authority, which is the server in this case, will tell every player to also start
the match. It does that by calling the start_game() method on each player. Let’s see how this is done:
1. Open the script at res://05.online-quiz/QuizServer.gd and find the start_game() method.
2. In the @rpc annotation line, add the "any_peer" and the "call_remote" options. This will allow any peer on the network
to make a remote call to this method:
@rpc("any_peer", "call_remote")
func start_game():
3. Then, tell the SceneTree to change to quiz_screen_scene_path using the get_tree().change_scene_to_file()
method. This will tell the server to also update its context to the one in the QuizScreenServer scene. This will be necessary
for the actual game to run:
@rpc("any_peer", "call_remote")
func start_game():
get_tree().change_scene_to_file(quiz_screen_scene_path)
4. Finally, and most importantly, make an RPC call to other peers’ start_game method, so everyone in the network moves on to
their respective QuizScreenClient scene:
@rpc("any_peer", "call_remote")
func start_game():
get_tree().change_scene_to_file
(quiz_screen_scene_path)
rpc("start_game")

The lobby system is a vital component of any online multiplayer game, as it serves as the gateway for
players to connect and prepare for the match. In our quiz game, we have successfully implemented

the lobby system using Godot’s built-in Remote Procedure Call (RPC) functionality. This feature
allows us to establish a reliable two-way communication channel between the client and server,
ensuring that all players are in sync.
With the lobby system in place, players can join the match and their names will be added to the
Players in Match panel. It is important to note that the start_game() method can only be called by
the multiplayer authority, preventing unauthorized calls and ensuring the integrity of the game. The
server-side implementation of this method will be different, and we will explore this in the upcoming
section.
If you want to add more features to the lobby system, you can create a countdown timer similar to the
ones found in games such as Warcraft III: Reign of Chaos. This feature adds excitement and
anticipation to the match and can help players prepare mentally for the upcoming game. However, for
our quiz game, we are ready to move on to the next step.
With that, we have the lobby part of our quiz game ready to gather some players together and set
them up, ready to start the match. We saw how to use the options that Godot provides for the @rpc
annotation to create a two-sided communication that we can use to sync players and move them all
together to the actual game.
The lobby system is a crucial part of any online multiplayer game, and we have successfully
implemented it in our quiz game using Godot’s built-in RPC functionality. The system allows players
to join the match and sync their data with the server, ensuring that the game is fair and consistent.
While we can add more features to the lobby system, such as a countdown timer, we are now ready to
move on to the next stage of development.
In the next section, we are going to create a mechanism to disable players’ actions when another
player has already selected the correct answer. With that, you can even create a turn-based
mechanism if you want, which is what we are going to do in Chapter 6, Building an Online Checkers
Game.

Implementing online turns
When designing a quiz game, it’s important to ensure that players can only provide one answer to a
given question. This can be especially challenging when creating a multiplayer game, as multiple
players may attempt to answer the question at the same time.
To prevent this, it’s necessary to implement a system that disables players’ ability to answer the
question once a valid answer has been provided by another player.

One common approach to implementing this system is to disable the buttons representing the
potential answers once a player has provided a response. This can be accomplished using code that
identifies which button was pressed and compares it to the correct answer stored in the game’s
database. Once an answer has been identified, the code can disable the buttons and prevent other
players from answering the question.
To further improve the player experience, it’s also common to include a brief pause after an answer
has been provided. During this time, players can review the questions and answers, and the game can
display feedback on whether the answer was correct or not. This can help to build tension and
excitement in the game, while also giving players a chance to reflect on their performance and
improve their skills.
We need to prevent players’ from answering the same question after another player already answered
it. To do that, we can disable the buttons that represent answers once a valid response is provided.
And for a better experience, we can add a brief pause before changing to the next question.
In this section, we are going to understand how we can prevent players’ actions, ultimately creating a
pseudo-turn-based mechanism.
Let’s understand how to achieve that pseudo-turn-based mechanism:
1. Open the res://05.online-quiz/QuizScreenServer.gd script and let’s implement its main methods.
2. First of all, let’s add "any_peer" to the answered() method’s @rpc annotation. This will allow any player to trigger the
behavior we are about to describe when they answer a question correctly.
3. Inside the answered() method, we will tell quiz_panel to update the round’s winner, making an RPC to the
"update_winner" method and passing the player’s name, which is stored in the database. This will update every peer’s
QuizPanel about the round’s winner:
@rpc("any_peer")
func answered(user):
quiz_panel.rpc("update_winner", database[user]
["name"])
4. Then, we start a local timer that should wait for enough time to allow players to digest the round’s winner. We also make an RPC
on wait_label so everyone’s WaitLabel displays the correct waiting time as well:
@rpc("any_peer")
func answered(user):
quiz_panel.rpc("update_winner", database[user]
["name"])
timer.start(turn_delay_in_seconds)
wait_label.rpc("wait", turn_delay_in_seconds)
5. Now let’s do the same thing on the missed() method. But we will make an RPC to "player_missed" instead:
@rpc("any_peer")
func missed(user):
quiz_panel.rpc("player_missed", database[user]
["name"])

timer.start(turn_delay_in_seconds)
wait_label.rpc("wait", turn_delay_in_seconds)

With that, QuizScreenServer handles both game states when a player wins or loses the round. Using
RPCs, we can update all peers about what’s happening in the game and set them ready for the next
round. But we haven’t seen how this actually works yet. Coming next, let’s see what happens in
QuizPanel when we call the update_winner() and player_missed() methods.

Updating players about the round
In a multiplayer quiz game, it’s crucial to keep all players in sync with the game state, especially
when someone has already answered a question correctly. The QuizScreenServer Main node is
responsible for updating the game state and informing all the connected players about what just
happened in the current round. To achieve this, the QuizScreenServer Main node makes an RPC to all
the peers’ QuizPanels. The QuizPanel node on each player’s side will update the game state locally
and prevent any further interaction until the next round begins.
The implementation of these methods ensures that all players are on the same page, and there are no
discrepancies in the game state between players. With this approach, we can provide a fair and
consistent gaming experience for all the players in the game.
Open the res://05.online-quiz/QuizPanel.gd file and let’s implement the update_winner() and
player_missed() methods, together with their auxiliary methods as well, such as lock_answers() and
unlock_answers():

1. Find the update_winner() method and add the "call_local" option to its @rpc annotation. We do that because when
we make this RPC on the server, it should also update its own QuizPanel node as well:
@rpc("call_local")
func update_winner(winner_name):
2. Then, inside the update_winner() method, update the question_label.text property to display a message with
winner_name:
@rpc("call_local")
func update_winner(winner_name):
question_label.text = "%s won the round!!" %
winner_name
3. Finally, we will make a call to the lock_answers() method. This will make players wait for the next round, as we’ll see soon:
@rpc("call_local")
func update_winner(winner_name):
question_label.text = "%s won the round!!" %
winner_name
lock_answers()

4. We can do the exact same thing in the player_missed() method. But here, we’ll display a different message, communicating
that the player missed the answer:
@rpc("call_local")
func player_missed(loser_name):
question_label.text = "%s missed the question!!" %
loser_name
lock_answers()

With that, we have our user interface updating the players about their peers’ actions. If a player
answered right, they will know it, if a player answered wrong, they will know it. Now is the time
to get them ready for the next round. Let’s look at the lock_answers() and unlock_answers()
methods.
5. In the lock_answers() method, we are going to run through all AnswerButtons, which are children of the Answers
node, and disable them. This way, players won’t be able to interact with these buttons anymore, preventing them from answering
the question:
func lock_answers():
for answer in answer_container.get_children():
answer.disabled = true
6. We do the opposite in the unlock_answers() method, toggling off the disabled property on each AnswerButton node:
func unlock_answers():
for answer in answer_container.get_children():
answer.disabled = false

This will prevent and allow player interactions with the available answers to the current question. We
can use this same approach to create an actual turn-based system where players take turns trying to
answer one question at a time. Here’s a challenge for you, our network engineer. As an exercise,
implement a turn-based system using the knowledge you just acquired. You have everything
necessary at your disposal.
A turn-based system is a way of structuring gameplay where each player takes a turn to make their
move, before passing control to the next player. This is in contrast to real-time gameplay, where all
players are acting at the same time. Turn-based systems are often used in strategy games, where
players need to carefully plan their moves.
To implement a turn-based system in your quiz game, you will need to modify the existing code to
add a new layer of logic. One approach would be to create a queue of players, with each player taking
their turn in order. When it’s a player’s turn, they are allowed to answer the question, while the other
players are locked out. Once they have answered, their turn is over, and the next player in the queue
takes their turn.
To create this system, you could turn lock_answer() and unlock_answer() into RPC methods and use
the rpc_id() method to directly lock or unlock the players’ answer options based on whether they are

the current active player.
In the next section, we’ll understand how we can take the fundamental mechanics of a quiz game and
make them work in an online context. It’s going to be the core of this chapter as we will see how we
evaluate whether the player answered the question correctly and how we load new questions,
ensuring that all peers are looking at the same question.

Turning local mechanics into remote gameplay
Now that we can manage players’ interactions and communicate the game state to players, it’s time to
implement the core features of a quiz. Coming up, we are going to implement the questions and
answers. For that, we are going to use a questions database where we store them with their possible
answers and the correct answer index.
Here, we will see how we load and deserialize these questions into QuizPanel. On top of that, we’ll
also understand how we make use of RPCs to keep everyone in sync. And of course, we will also
implement the logic behind both when players choose the correct and the incorrect answer.
When a player chooses an answer, we need to compare it with the correct answer index, and if it’s
correct, we should notify QuizScreenServer about the correct answer. We’ll also need to make use of
RPCs to keep everyone in sync regarding the current question and answer status.
Moreover, we need to implement the logic behind what happens when a player chooses the incorrect
answer. We can use the same locking mechanism that we used previously to prevent players from
answering if someone has already provided a valid answer. Once we handle the incorrect answer, we
need to notify QuizScreenServer about the incorrect answer and move on to the next round.
By implementing all of these features, we can create a robust and engaging quiz game that can be
played by multiple players simultaneously. By using the database to load questions, we can make the
game dynamic and varied. And by using RPCs and locking mechanisms, we can ensure that the game
runs smoothly and that everyone is on the same page.

Understanding the questions database
First of all, let’s start by taking a look at our questions database. Open the file at res://05.onlinequiz/QuizQuestions.json. It looks like this:

{
"question_01":
{
"text": "Which of the following is not a
Node?",

"alternatives": ["Sprite2D", "Line2D",
"Area3D", "PackedScene"],
"correct_answer_index" : 3
},
"question_02":
{
"text": "Which of the following is an image
file?",
"alternatives": ["Bot.png", "Landscape.txt",
"BeautifulTown.json", "UglyDuck.md"],
"correct_answer_index" : 0
},
"question_03":
{
"text": "Which of the following is a sound
file?",
"alternatives": ["Scream.txt", "Blabla.ogg",
"Laser.gd", "Music.svg"],
"correct_answer_index": 1
}
}

Notice that we represent each question as a key that is also a dictionary. Each question has three keys
as well: "text", "alternatives", and "correct_answer_index". The "text" key is the actual question
statement, "alternatives" is an array of possible answers that we will turn into AnswerButtons, and
"correct_answer_index" is the index in the "alternatives" array of the correct answer.

Knowing that, you can go ahead and create some questions on your own. Keep in mind that, by
default, we have four AnswerButtons, so try to provide four values in the "alternatives" key.
Otherwise, you’d need to implement an AnswerButtons factory to dynamically create them based on
how many answers we load from the question.

Loading and updating questions
Now, let’s understand how this process works under the hood of QuizPanel. Open the script at
res://05.online-quiz/QuizPanel.gd and find the update_question() method. The first thing you’ll

notice is that it has an @rpc annotation.
This is because we design it in such a way that it’s the server who calls it and tells it which question
to load. We will see that in a moment, but for now, let’s implement this method’s logic:
1. Create a variable called question and set it equal to the result of calling the pop_at() method on
available_questions with the new_question_index argument passed in. With that, we’ll remove the current question
from the list of available questions and store it so we can use it moving on:
func update_question(new_question_index):
var question = available_questions.pop_at
(new_question_index)
2. Check whether the question is not equal to null. Since the pop_at() method returns null when it can’t find a value in the
index provided, we check that to know if there are still questions that we didn’t use yet, in other words, if

available_questions is empty:
if not question == null:
3. If the question we got is not null, set the question_label.text property to the 'text' property of the question dictionary
stored in the questions array. This is how we display the question’s statement:
question_label.text = questions[question]['text']
4. Create a variable called correct_answer and set its value to the 'correct_answer_index' property of the question
dictionary stored in the questions array. Doing that, we keep the correct answer stored so we can compare it when players answer:
correct_answer = questions[question]
['correct_answer_index']
5. Loop through the numbers 0 through 3, inclusive, using the range() function and the for loop. For each iteration, create a
variable called alternative and set it equal to i, which is the current element of the 'alternatives' array stored in the
question dictionary. Set the text of the current child node of the answer_container node to alternative. With that, we
display the alternative’s text on its respective AnswerButton:
for i in range(0, 4):
var alternative = questions[question]
['alternatives'][i]
answer_container.get_child(i).text =
alternative
6. After loading the question and its answers, let’s call the unlock_answers() function. This basically starts the current round,
allowing players to interact with QuizPanel again:
unlock_answers()
7. If question is null, meaning we don’t have any questions left to play the quiz, we need to loop through each child node of the
answer_container node using the for loop. For each iteration, we’ll set the text of the question_label node to 'No
more questions':
else:
for answer in answer_container.get_children():
question_label.text = "No more questions"
8. Since we reached the end of our quiz match, we can call the lock_answers() function to prevent any further interactions:
lock_answers()

After these steps, the update_question() method should look like this:
@rpc
func update_question(new_question_index):
var question = available_questions.pop_at
(new_question_index)
if not question == null:
question_label.text = questions[question]['text']
correct_answer = questions[question]
['correct_answer_index']
for i in range(0, 4):
var alternative = questions[question]
['alternatives'][i]
answer_container.get_child(i).text =

alternative
unlock_answers()
else:
for answer in answer_container.get_children():
question_label.text = "No more questions"
lock_answers()

With that, we have our main quiz mechanism set up. We can pick one of the questions we have in our
database and display it to our players. You can check the _ready() callback to understand how we
load the questions in memory and assign them to the available_questions variable.
As mentioned before, we are going to focus on the essentials here. Talking about the essentials, we
are still missing one mechanic, which is how we validate the answers, right? Find the
evaluate_answer() method and let’s implement that:

1. Inside the evaluate_answer() method, create a variable called is_answer_correct and set it equal to the comparison
between the answer_index and correct_answer variables. This will check whether the given answer index matches the
index of the correct answer:
var is_answer_correct = answer_index == correct_answer
2. Emit a signal called answered with the is_answer_correct variable as an argument. This signal will be used by other
parts of the quiz to tell whether the player’s answer was correct or not:
answered.emit(is_answer_correct)

In the end, our evaluate_answer() method is quite simple and does just what we need to know
whether the player answered the current question correctly:
func evaluate_answer(answer_index):
var is_answer_correct = answer_index == correct_answer
answered.emit(is_answer_correct)

You may have noticed that the evaluate_answer() method isn’t an RPC function, right? It essentially
emits a signal that tells us whether the player’s answer was correct or not. So how does the server
manage that?
In the upcoming section, we will understand how this information is passed around between the
client and the server implementations of our quiz.

Sending players’ answers to the server
Now, let’s understand the final piece of our mechanics and how it behaves in a multiplayer network.
In the previous section, we ended up with an evaluation of the player’s answer that led to the
emission of the answered signal.
The answered signal needs to be handled in a specific way to ensure that all players are kept in sync
and that the game state is consistent across all peers. When a player submits their answer, the

answered signal is emitted, and the server updates all peers about it through an RPC call.

The answered signal and its associated methods are crucial for maintaining the integrity of the game
state across all players in a multiplayer network. Without them, players might see different game
states and have different experiences, which would make the game less enjoyable and potentially
unfair.
In this section, we will understand how this signal propagates through the network and updates all
peers about the players’ answers.
Open the res://05.online-quiz/QuizScreenClient.gd script and you will notice that, right at the
beginning, we have a callback to the QuizPanel.answered signal.
Let’s implement this callback:
1. Inside the method’s body, use an if statement to check whether is_answer_correct is true:
func _on_quiz_panel_answered(is_answer_correct):
if is_answer_correct:
2. If is_answer_correct is true, make an RPC call to the answered method on the server using the rpc_id() method. With
that, the server will update all peers about the round winner:
func _on_quiz_panel_answered(is_answer_correct):
if is_answer_correct:
rpc_id(
get_multiplayer_authority(),
"answered",
AuthenticationCredentials.user
)
3. If is_answer_correct is false, make an RPC call to the missed method on the server using the rpc_id() method.
Finally, if the player chose the wrong answer, the server updates all peers about it:
else:
rpc_id(
get_multiplayer_authority(),
"missed",
AuthenticationCredentials.user
)

The whole _on_quiz_panel_answered() implementation should look like this:
func _on_quiz_panel_answered(is_answer_correct):
if is_answer_correct:
rpc_id(
get_multiplayer_authority(),
"answered",
AuthenticationCredentials.user
)
else:
rpc_id(
get_multiplayer_authority(),
"missed",

AuthenticationCredentials.user
)

With that, the client implementation will notify the server about the players’ interactions. In turn, the
server will update the game state and tell all peers to also update their game states to match the
server’s. After that, we have the missing network pieces in place and our online quiz game is ready.
Feel free to test it out and experiment with more questions!

Summary
In this chapter, we saw how to create an online quiz game using the Godot Engine 4.0 Network API.
We covered the fundamental concepts of online multiplayer game development, including clientserver architecture, game synchronization, and player interactions. Using the quiz game, we saw how
to feature dynamic loading of questions from a JSON database, and how to display the current
players in a quiz match. We created a mechanism to prevent players from answering questions when
another player has already provided one, creating a pseudo-turn-based mechanism. Finally, we saw
how to manage players’ interactions and communicate the game state to players and how to
implement the logic behind both correct and incorrect answers, loading new questions one round
after another until there are no more questions to display.
In the next chapter’s projects, we will dive deeper into implementing a turn-based mechanism for our
online quiz game. As we saw in this chapter, we can use a similar approach to what we did with the
pseudo-turn-based mechanism, but with some modifications to make it a true turn-based system.
Additionally, we will explore how to pass information about players’ turns, such as who is currently
taking their turn, what happened during the opponent’s turn, and more. We will also learn how to set
up win and lose conditions and update peers about them, which will be essential for creating a sense
of accomplishment and challenge in our game.
By the end of the next chapter, you will have a deeper understanding of the game development
process, including how to create engaging online multiplayer game mechanics and implement them
using the Godot Engine 4.0 Network API. See you there!
OceanofPDF.com

6
Building an Online Checkers Game
In this chapter, we will delve into the captivating realm of creating an online multiplayer checkers
game. We will apply the knowledge and skills we have acquired throughout this book to develop an
engaging and interactive gaming experience.
Checkers, a classic board game enjoyed by players of all ages, provides the perfect canvas to explore
the complexity of online multiplayer game development. We will learn how to leverage the power of
the Godot Engine and its versatile features to create a seamless multiplayer experience that will have
players strategizing, competing, and enjoying the game together.
To facilitate the synchronization of the game state across multiple players, we will introduce a
powerful tool called the MultiplayerSynchronizer node. This node will play a crucial role in
updating the positions of the checkers pieces across the boards of all connected players. By using this
node, we can ensure that each player’s game view remains consistent and up to date, enhancing the
overall multiplayer experience.
Throughout this chapter, we will cover essential concepts, such as client-server architecture, game
synchronization, and player interactions, which are fundamental to the development of any
multiplayer game. By understanding these concepts and applying them to our checkers game, we will
create a robust and engaging multiplayer experience that will captivate players from around the
world. The following diagram showcases the final project, where players are playing against each
other online!

Figure 6.1 – Player 1’s game instance view and Player 2’s game instance view during the Black Team’s turn

In addition to the technical aspects, we will also focus on creating an intuitive user experience that
allows players to seamlessly navigate the game and interact with the checkers pieces. A welldesigned interface is crucial in enhancing the player experience and ensuring a smooth and enjoyable
gameplay session. Using some visual cues, we will ensure that players know the current game state
intuitively.
As we progress, we will explore strategies to manage player interactions, such as handling player
turns and validating moves. These features are vital in maintaining fairness and ensuring that the
game follows the established rules of checkers. By incorporating these elements, we will create an
authentic and immersive checkers experience that will engage players for hours on end.
By the end of this chapter, you will have gained valuable insights into the intricacies of online
multiplayer game development. You will have the knowledge and skills necessary to create your own
multiplayer games, with the ability to synchronize game states, handle player interactions, and
deliver an immersive multiplayer experience.
So, get ready to embark on this exciting journey as we delve into the world of online multiplayer
checkers game development. To do so, we will learn about the MultiplayerSynchronizer node and
RPC functions, as they will be our key allies in synchronizing the players’ boards. Let’s begin this
chapter and unlock the immense potential of multiplayer game development together.
We will cover the following topics in this chapter:
Introducing the Checkers project
Serializing players’ turns
Deserializing the opponent’s turn
Managing win and lose conditions

Technical requirements
In this chapter, we’ll be working with the fourth folder of our Godot Engine project repository, which
you can access through the following link: https://github.com/PacktPublishing/The-Essential-Guideto-Creating-Multiplayer-Games-with-Godot-4.0.
Another requirement you will need to accomplish before following with our project import is to
download Godot Engine version 4.0, as this is the version we will use throughout the whole book.
After opening your Godot Engine 4.0, open the project using the project manager. Then, navigate to
the 06.building-online-checkers folder. Here, you’ll find all the files we used to build this chapter’s

project. You can test the game opening and playing the res://06.building-onlinecheckers/CheckersGame.tscn scene.

This scene showcases most of the features of our game. In this chapter, we are also going to
implement the lobby system we have worked with throughout the book. On top of that, we will turn
some local features into online multiplayer features as well.
So, stay tuned.

Introducing the Checkers project
Welcome, respected network engineer of our esteemed fictional indie development studio! As we
embark on this chapter, let us take a moment to familiarize ourselves with the existing Checkers
project. Currently, the project is designed for local multiplayers, allowing players to engage in
thrilling matches offline. This understanding will serve as a solid foundation as we explore the path
toward transforming our Checkers game into a captivating online multiplayer experience.
In this endeavor, our goal is to seamlessly transition the existing local multiplayer functionality into
an online environment, without encountering significant obstacles along the way. By leveraging our
existing knowledge and skills, we can effectively adapt the game to support online multiplayer, thus
expanding its reach and providing players with the opportunity to compete with opponents from
around the globe.
Throughout this section, we will unravel our Checkers project’s inner workings, gaining valuable
insights into its structure and mechanics. Armed with this understanding, we will be better equipped
to navigate the porting process with confidence and efficiency.
As the designated network engineer, you play a pivotal role in this endeavor. Your expertise and
problem-solving abilities will be put to the test. With careful consideration and strategic
implementation, we can minimize any potential challenges and ensure a seamless transition to the
online multiplayer realm.
Together, we will examine the project’s architecture, dissect its components, and identify the
necessary modifications required to facilitate online multiplayer functionality. By applying our
knowledge of networking concepts and programming techniques, we will construct a robust
foundation upon which the online multiplayer features will thrive.
Remember, you are an integral part of this process; as a network engineer, it is your job to implement
all online multiplayer code, so you play a fundamental role here. Your skills will contribute to the
realization of our vision – a thrilling online multiplayer Checkers game that captivates players across

the digital landscape. So, let us embark on this journey. In the upcoming sections, we will understand
the ins and outs of our local Checkers game.

Understanding the Checkers Piece scene
The Piece implements the functionality of a checkers game piece in our checkers’ game. It allows
players to interact with the Piece by selecting or deselecting it, keeping track of its selected state. In
the following screenshot, we can see the SceneTree structure’s Piece.

Figure 6.2 – The Piece scene node hierarchy

To enhance the player experience and decision-making during their turns, we utilize visual cues
provided by the EnabledColorRect and SelectedColorRect nodes. EnabledColorRect becomes visible
when the Piece is capable of making a valid move within a player’s turn. Conversely,
SelectedColorRect becomes visible when a player chooses this specific Piece over others, allowing

for clear differentiation between them.
The Sprite2D node is responsible for displaying the current texture of the Piece. Depending on the
player’s team and whether the Piece has been promoted to a king piece, the texture can represent
either a white piece, a black piece, or their respective king versions.
The SelectionArea2D node plays a crucial role in detecting player input. By using the input_event
signal, we establish communication between the player’s clicks and the Piece. This enables us to
toggle the Piece’s selection state, determining whether it is currently selected or deselected.
Let’s take a look at its code to understand how each of these nodes plays a role in this whole logic.
Overall, this code forms a crucial component of the online multiplayer checkers game, providing the
necessary functionality to interact with and manage the behavior of individual checkers pieces within
the game:

extends Node2D
signal selected
signal deselected
enum Teams{BLACK, WHITE}
@export var team: Teams = Teams.BLACK
@export var is_king = false: set = _set_is_king
@export var king_texture = preload("res://
06.building-online-checkers/WhiteKing.svg")
@onready var area = $SelectionArea2D
@onready var selected_color_rect = $SelectedColorRect
@onready var enabled_color_rect = $EnabledColorRect
@onready var sprite = $Sprite2D
var is_selected = false

We start by defining some variables to store information about the Piece’s team – whether it’s a king,
and its texture. It also has references to some child nodes in the scene and a variable to track whether
the Piece is currently selected. Signals are defined to indicate when the Piece is selected or
deselected. Next, we will declare the setter function we stated in the _is_king variable:
func _set_is_king(new_value):
is_king = new_value
if not is_inside_tree():
await(ready)
if is_king:
sprite.texture = king_texture

When this variable is set to a new value, the code checks whether the node is part of the scene tree. If
not, it waits until the node is ready, this prevents any errors when changing the variable’s value
through the inspector. If the variable is set to true, it updates the visual appearance of the game piece
to represent a king, using a specific texture. This allows for dynamic visual changes in the game
piece when it becomes a king. After that, we have a signal callback from the Area2D node’s
input_event signal:

func _on_area_2d_input_event(viewport, event, shape_idx):
if event is InputEventMouseButton:
if event.button_index == 1 and event.pressed:
select()

It listens for left mouse button clicks and, when detected, calls the select() method, which, as we
will see next, performs the procedures related to selecting the Piece. This code enables interaction
within the game when the player clicks the left mouse button while hovering over the Piece’s Area2D.
Here, we have the code for the select() method:
func select():
get_tree().call_group("selected", "deselect")
add_to_group("selected")
selected_color_rect.show()
is_selected = true
selected.emit()

In this function, we define what happens when the Piece is selected. It ensures that any previously
selected objects are deselected, marks the current object as selected, shows a visual indicator, updates
a variable to reflect the selection status, and emits the selected signal to notify other parts of the
game about the selection event. This code is fundamental for managing and conveying the selected
state of Pieces in the game. Then, we also have the opposite function, deselect():
func deselect():
remove_from_group("selected")
selected_color_rect.hide()
is_selected = false
deselected.emit()

Here, we define what happens when an object is deselected. The code removes the object from the
"selected" group, hides the visual indicator of selection, updates the is_selected variable to reflect

the deselection status, and emits the deselected signal to notify other parts of the game about the
deselection event. Now, it’s time to enable the change in selection states; without that, the Piece
shouldn’t be selectable. This helps to prevent players from selecting Pieces from the opponent’s
team:
func enable():
area.input_pickable = true
enabled_color_rect.visible = true

In this part, we make the Area2D responsive to input events, and we also make a visual indicator
visible on the screen. This is important to allow players to interact with and manipulate Pieces in the
game when they are in an enabled state. Now, let’s see its counterpart, the disable() method:
func disable():
area.input_pickable = false
enabled_color_rect.visible = false

It’s essentially the opposite of the previous method. We make the Area2D non-responsive to input
events, effectively making it non-interactive. On top of that, we hide the visual indicator on the
screen that represents the Piece’s availability, visually representing the Piece’s disabled state. This is
useful for controlling when and how players can interact with Pieces in the game.
In the upcoming section, we are going to see how the FreeCell scene works. It’s a scene we use to
highlight the available free cells that a selected Piece can move to.

Comprehending the FreeCell scene
In our game project, we have a concept called FreeCell, which represents a valid cell that a Piece can
move to. Think of it as a designated area where the Piece is allowed to go. Each time the player
selects a Piece with valid movement, we visually indicate the available cells by showing them in

green. These cells are actually instances of the FreeCell scene, which we dynamically create and
display on the game board.
To provide a clear example, imagine a scenario where a king Piece is selected. In the following
diagram, you can see that all the cells where this king Piece can move to are highlighted in green.
Each of these highlighted cells is an instance of the FreeCell scene, which allows the player to
quickly identify the possible movement options for the selected Piece.

Figure 6.3 – Free cells available to the selected king piece

By using the FreeCell concept, we enhance the player’s experience by visually communicating the
valid movement possibilities. This empowers them to make informed decisions and strategize their
next move effectively. It’s a powerful tool that adds clarity and depth to the gameplay mechanics.
The FreeCell scene is an essential component of our game, composed of three distinct nodes. The
main node is an Area2D, which serves as the foundation for the FreeCell. It encompasses two child

nodes – a CollisionShape2D and a ColorRect.
The CollisionShape2D node is responsible for defining the shape and boundaries of the FreeCell. It
ensures that the cell can properly interact with other game objects, such as Pieces or other elements
within the game world. As we are about to see, CollisionShape2D also defines the boundaries in
which the Area2D detects mouse inputs, which is fundamental for the FreeCell’s behavior.
The ColorRect node, conversely, controls the visual representation of the FreeCell. It determines the
color and appearance of the cell, providing a visual indicator to distinguish it from other elements on
the game board.

Figure 6.4 – The FreeCell scene node hierarchy

To better understand the functionality and behavior of the FreeCell, let’s explore its accompanying
script. By examining the script code, we will gain insights into how the FreeCell operates and
interacts with other game elements, ultimately contributing to the overall game logic and mechanics:
extends Area2D
signal selected(cell_position)
func _input_event(viewport, event, shape_idx):
if event is InputEventMouseButton:
if event.button_index == 1 and event.pressed:
select()
func select():
selected.emit(self.position)

This code allows the cell, represented by Area2D, to respond to right mouse button events within its
area. When a cell is selected, it emits a signal with the position of the cell. This signal can be used to
inform other objects or scripts about the selection and provide them with the cell’s position for
further processing. We’ll use this in the CheckerBoard script to map the FreeCell’s position into the
board’s cell.
In the upcoming section, we will introduce the game board, an essential component of our game. We
will then shift our focus to the core of this chapter, which involves implementing methods that we
will turn into RPCs. These RPCs will enable the game to work seamlessly in an online environment,
allowing players to interact with each other and synchronize their actions over the network.

By leveraging the power of RPCs, we will create a dynamic and engaging multiplayer experience for
our players. Let’s dive into the details and explore how these methods will bring our game to life in
an online setting.

Introducing the CheckerBoard scene
In this section, let’s delve into the primary role of the game board, as this will serve as a foundation
for our upcoming sections. By understanding the key responsibilities of the board, we can naturally
identify the specific areas we will be focusing on in the subsequent sections. This understanding will
pave the way for a clear and structured approach as we continue exploring our checker’s
development process.
The primary role of our game board is to manage the relationship between the black and white pieces
in the game. To achieve this, the board utilizes the built-in TileMap functions to map the pieces onto
cartesian coordinates. Additionally, it employs a hash map to associate the content of each cell on the
board.
This means that we can access the content of a specific cell by providing its corresponding Vector2i
coordinate. For example, by using the meta_board[Vector2i(0,3)] expression, we can retrieve the
contents of the cell located in the first column and fourth row of the board. The result of this access
will either be null, indicating that the cell is free, or it will return the Piece that is currently mapped
to that particular cell. This mechanism allows for efficient retrieval and manipulation of the contents
on the board, enabling seamless gameplay and interaction with the pieces.
The CheckerBoard plays a vital role in our game by overseeing various aspects of gameplay. Firstly,
it manages the available movements for each cell on the board, taking into account the current team
in play and whether a Piece has been promoted to a king. This ensures that players can only make
valid moves based on the rules of the game.
The CheckerBoard is also responsible for controlling the turns in the game. It enables and disables
the Pieces according to the active team, allowing only the team in play to make moves during their
turn. This mechanism ensures fair gameplay and maintains the flow of the game.
Furthermore, the CheckerBoard keeps track of the number of Pieces each team possesses at the end
of each turn. This count is crucial, as it determines the win-lose condition of the game. If a team has
no remaining Pieces on the board, the CheckerBoard triggers the appropriate win condition, declaring
the opposing team as the winner.
By managing the cell movements, regulating turns, and monitoring the Piece count, the
CheckerBoard maintains the game’s rules and progression. Its role is fundamental to providing clear

conditions for victory or defeat. Let’s take a look at the CheckerBoard scene structure:

Figure 6.5 – The CheckerBoard scene node hierarchy

It’s important to note that the CheckerBoard is implemented as TileMap, a useful class in our game.
We use specific methods provided by the TileMap class, such as map_to_local(), local_to_map(), and
get_used_cells(), to establish our cell-mapping functionality. The map_to_local() method will help

us map the game to cell positions in TileMap, while local_to_map() will help us convert the Pieces’
positions to cells in the map. This will help us abstract the game in terms of rows and columns
instead of floating-point numbers. As for the get_used_cells() method, it will help us access only
the cells that have a tile set to them and avoid dealing with blank cells in TileMap. This will be useful
when we create a matrix of the cells’ contents.
In the CheckerBoard class, we’ll focus on understanding the significance of the meta_board
Dictionary, which serves as a fundamental component in subsequent sections. The core features we
need to understand in order to turn this project into an online multiplayer checkers game are the
create_meta_board() and map_pieces() methods within the CheckerBoard class:

func create_meta_board():
for cell in get_used_cells(0):
meta_board[cell] = null
func map_pieces(team):
for piece in team.get_children():
var piece_position = local_to_map(piece.position)
meta_board[piece_position] = piece
piece.selected.connect(_on_piece_selected.bind
(piece))

The create_meta_board() method is responsible for setting up the meta_board Dictionary. This
Dictionary acts as a data structure that maps cell coordinates to their corresponding contents. By
leveraging the TileMap methods mentioned earlier, the create_meta_board() method populates
meta_board with the appropriate cell coordinates and initializes them with null values, indicating

empty cells.

Conversely, the map_pieces() method performs an essential role in updating the meta_board to reflect
the current state of the game. This method iterates over all the Pieces on the provided team, which is
passed as a reference to either the BlackTeam node or the WhiteTeam node. Then, it converts the Pieces’
positions using the TileMap.local_to_map() method and maps each Piece to its respective cell
coordinate in meta_board. This ensures that meta_board accurately represents the placement of Pieces
on the visual board.
Lastly, the code establishes a connection between the Piece.selected signal and the
_on_piece_selected() callback function. By connecting this signal, we bind the current Piece to the

callback function as its argument. This enables us to conveniently access the Piece node whenever
the player selects it.
This connection ensures that when the Piece emits the selected signal, the associated callback
function, _on_piece_selected(), will be invoked and provided with the Piece node as its argument.
This mechanism allows us to perform specific actions or access properties of the Piece node, in
response to the player’s selection.
By establishing this connection, we create a seamless interaction between the Piece node and the
corresponding callback function, enhancing the flexibility and responsiveness of our game.
There are some auxiliary functions that help us calculate available cells and coordinate the Piece’s
movement; feel free to check them out and understand how we check for available cells, how we
capture cells, and other gameplay features. In the next section, we will explore a different aspect of
our checkers development journey.
We will focus on how we can package and transmit all the pertinent information about a player’s turn
across the network, ensuring that other players are promptly updated with the current state of the
game board.
By understanding this process, we will be able to establish efficient communication between players,
facilitating a seamless multiplayer experience. This functionality is essential for maintaining
synchronization and enabling real-time gameplay in our online multiplayer game. Stay tuned as we
dive into the intricacies of transmitting and updating the game state across the network.

Serializing players’ turns
In Chapter 2, Sending and Receiving Data, we explored an essential technique to recreate the game
state across multiple players in a network. By serializing the relevant data and transmitting it in small
portions, we ensure efficient utilization of network bandwidth while maintaining synchronization
among peers.

Developing an understanding of what information is crucial to replicate the game state among players
involves mastering the concept of abstraction in game development. In our case, this primarily
revolves around meta_board, which is an abstraction of the relevant metadata of our game, such as the
positional data and king state of the Pieces and the empty cells in the board.
Additionally, we need to consider the availability of Pieces, depending on the players’ turn.
Fortunately, most other elements of the game can be managed locally without requiring network
synchronization.
To simplify the process of synchronizing node properties across networked peers, I would like to
introduce you to MultiplayerSynchronizer. This powerful node takes on the responsibility of
automatically synchronizing properties across peers, relieving us from the tedious task of manual
synchronization.
With MultiplayerSynchronizer in place, we can focus on developing the game’s logic and let the
node handle the efficient transmission of data among players.

Working with MultiplayerSynchronizer
MultiplayerSynchronizer plays a vital role by allowing us to effortlessly sync and share the state of

nodes across multiple players, without writing any additional code. To begin utilizing this
functionality, we will add a MultiplayerSynchronizer node to the Piece’s scene. This will ensure
consistency in the game state of each player. Let’s dive into the process of integrating the
MultiplayerSynchronizer and harnessing its capabilities.

Setting up MultiplayerSynchronizer in the Piece scene
Open the res://06.building-online-checkers/Piece.tscn scene and add a
MultiplayerSynchronizer as a child of the Piece node. Then, we’ll set up the properties we want to

synchronize:
1. With the MultiplayerSychronizer node selected, in the bottom panel on the Replication tab, click the Add property to
sync button.

Figure 6.6 – The Replication menu from the MultiplayerSynchronizer node

2. From the pop-up menu, select the Piece node.

Figure 6.7 – Selecting the Piece node from the Pick a node to synchronize pop-up menu
3. After selecting the Piece node, another pop-up menu will appear, asking you to select the property you want to sync. From there,
select the position property.

Figure 6.8 – Choosing the position property from the Select Property pop-up menu

And that’s it. With that, as soon as the players are connected to the same network, they will
automatically sync their Pieces’ positions on the board. However, we still have an issue as this only
updates the visual representation of the Piece, and we still need to update its data in meta_board. Now
comes the fun part.
In the next section, we will start to understand the methods in the CheckerBoard that we need to turn
into RPCs, keeping players on the same page.

Updating and syncing the CheckerBoard
A core issue when developing any application is that we have limited resources. In the case of
transmitting data over a network, we are talking about bandwidth. Games are a special case because
everything should happen in real time, so we can’t risk heavy data transmission that hurts network
performance.
To turn this in our favor, we need to pass data in the most abstract and lightweight way we can. In our
case, we have our meta_board as a means to represent the game’s current state. By using Vector2i
coordinates, we can access and change the game states. And that’s how we are going to keep players
updated. In the next section, we are going to work with the CheckerBoard.update_cells() method,
which is the core of our update system.

Using coordinates to update the board
Since meta_board is a Dictionary, we can access and set the values of its keys using Godot Engine’s
built-in types. For instance, if we want to change the content of the cell in the third row second
column to null, we can write meta_board[Vectori(1, 2)] = null.
When Pieces perform a move, we just need to know the content of the previous and new cell of this
movement, so that we can update it. And that’s exactly what the update_cells() method does. Let’s
take a look at it:
func update_cells(previous_cell, target_cell):
meta_board[target_cell] = meta_board[previous_cell]
meta_board[previous_cell] = null

Since this is the very core of our update system, we need to turn it into an RPC function and call it as
such.
For that, let’s make the appropriate changes in our script:
1. Add the @rpc annotation to this method, using the any_peer and call_local options. We use these because we want every
player to update others about changes in their board, and we also want their own board to update itself, hence the call_local
option:
@rpc("any_peer", "call_local")
func update_cells(previous_cell, target_cell):
2. In the move_selected_piece() method, change the update_cells(current_cell, target_cell) line to an
RPC call instead. This will make the call of this method both local and remote on other peers as well:
func move_selected_piece(target_cell):
var current_cell = local_to_map
(selected_piece.position)
Selected_piece.position = map_to_local
(target_cell)
rpc("update_cells", current_cell, target_cell)

if not is_free_cell(target_cell):
crown(target_cell)

With that, every time the CheckerBoard moves a Piece, it updates its meta_board data on all peers on
the network.
Note that there’s another method that we can turn into an RPC as well. Every player should update
Piece.is_king of a Piece that reached their opponent’s king row. For that, we have the
crown()method that move_selected_piece() calls at the bottom of its logic.

Let’s do the same thing we did with update_cells() with the crown() method:
1. First, we add the @rpc annotation to it with the any_peer and call_local options:
@rpc("any_peer", "call_local")
func crown(cell):
2. Then, we change the crown(target_cell) call to its rpc() version:
func move_selected_piece(target_cell):
var current_cell = local_to_map
(selected_piece.position)
selected_piece.position = map_to_local
(target_cell)
rpc("update_cells", current_cell, target_cell)
if not is_free_cell(target_cell):
rpc("crown", target_cell)

With that, when a Piece reaches the king row, all players’ CheckerBoards update their king state, be it
an opponent Piece or an ally Piece.
Our work isn’t done yet. In the next section, we will see how we update the meta_board content when
players perform a capturing movement, meaning we need to remove a Piece from the board.

Removing a Piece from the board
When a player makes a move that ends up capturing an opponent Piece, we should update the game
board accordingly. This means that on top of updating the cells involved in the movement, we should
also update the cell where the captured Piece was, setting its content to null – in other words, turning
it into a free cell. That’s what the remove_piece() method does.
Let’s take a look at its code:
func remove_piece(piece_cell):
if not is_on_board(piece_cell):
return
if is_free_cell(piece_cell):
return
var piece = meta_board[piece_cell]
piece.get_parent().remove_child(piece)
piece.free()
meta_board[piece_cell] = null

Since this behavior impacts both players, we need to turn this method into an RPC as well so that
every time a player captures a Piece, they update their opponent with this sad fact.
Let’s make the appropriate changes so that this feature is compliant with our online multiplayer
demands:
1. Add the @rpc annotation to the remove_piece() method with the any_peer and call_local options:
@rpc("any_peer", "call_local")
func remove_piece(piece_cell):
2. In the capture_piece() method, update the remove_piece(cell) line to its rpc() version:
func capture_pieces(target_cell):
var origin_cell = local_to_map(selected_piece.
position)
var direction = Vector2(target_cell -origin_cell)
.normalized()
direction = Vector2i(direction.round())
var cell = target_cell - direction
if not is_on_board(cell):
return
if not is_free_cell(cell):
rpc("remove_piece", cell)
move_selected_piece(target_cell)

Now, every time a player captures a cell, it calls the remove_piece() method both locally and
remotely on all connected peers!
With that, we have our players turn properly serialized and ready to be passed through the network to
other peers, with good performance and little data usage, leaving a good bandwidth for us if we so
desire. For instance, we can add a chat feature using a new RPC channel if we want to in the future.
In this section, we learned about the importance of abstracting relevant data for our network
communication and how to turn local functionalities into remote functionalities, while maintaining all
their logic and overall structure. Here, we saw the relevance of the call_local RPC option as well as
the simplicity of turning a method call into an RPC call with the rpc() method.
In the next section, we will see how we manage the turn logic. This is an important feature to handle
because there we will need to actively add a layer of network verification to properly handle the
turns. The logic of a local turn shift and a remote turn shift is very distinct.

Handling remote turn shifts
One of the most important aspects of playing a game online is to maintain players’ autonomy and
authority over their resources – in this case, their team’s Pieces. Godot Engine offers an interesting
system where a SceneTree can structure its nodes’ hierarchies with distinct Multiplayer Authorities.

To set up a node and its children’s Multiplayer Authority, recursively, we can use
set_multiplayer_authority() and pass the respective peer’s ID as an argument. In our case, we are

going to change the BlackTeam and WhiteTeam nodes’ Multiplayer Authority to match their respective
players’ peer IDs.
This will be done by the server, so to keep the application simple, we are going to allow clients and
server to share the same script, and we will check which one is running the server instance by using
is_multiplayer_authority() on the CheckerBoard. We should only run this logic if the game is

running in a network and there are peers connected. For that, we can check whether
multiplayer.get_peers().size() is greater than 0, meaning there are peers connected. Let’s see this

in practice, shall we?

Setting up players’ teams
The first thing we need to understand to handle players’ turn shifts is that each one of the nodes that
represent the team – in other words, the BlackTeam and the WhiteTeam nodes – should have its
respective players’ peer IDs set as their Multiplayer Authorities.
In that sense, we need to create a method in the CheckerBoard class that receives the team and the
peer ID as arguments. Remember, we can’t pass objects as arguments in this method because it needs
to work in the network. So, we need to abstract teams as an enum that we can pass around through
RPCs, and then all peers will be able to understand the message and access the correct team node at
their end. Let’s dive into the action and create a method called setup_team():
1. Add the @rpc("authority", "call_local") decorator before the setup_team() function definition. The
authority option indicates that this RPC can only be called by the Multiplayer Authority; remember that the authority of the
CheckerBoard will still be the server. The call_local argument specifies that the function should also be executed locally on
the calling peers:
@rpc("authority", "call_local")
func setup_team(team, peer_id):
2. Inside the function, check whether the value of team is equal to Teams.BLACK; if this is the case, call the
set_multiplayer_authority() method on the black_team object and pass peer_id as an argument. This
effectively designates the specified peer as the authority for BlackTeam and all its children – in other words, the black Pieces:
@rpc("authority", "call_local")
func setup_team(team, peer_id):
if team == Teams.BLACK:
black_team.set_multiplayer_authority
(peer_id)
3. Otherwise, call the set_multiplayer_authority() method on the white_team object and pass peer_id as an
argument:

@rpc("authority", "call_local")
func setup_team(team, peer_id):
if team == Teams.BLACK:
black_team.set_multiplayer_authority
(peer_id)
else:
white_team.set_multiplayer_authority
(peer_id)

This method sets up the Multiplayer Authority of a team node based on the received team,
black_team or white_team, using the provided peer_id. This ensures that the Multiplayer Authority

for each team is correctly established, allowing the game logic to be synchronized across networked
peers. Since the server calls this method on all peers, both players and the server will sync their team
nodes accordingly.
Now, to ensure that this mechanism will be established among all peers, we are going to add the
following lines of code right inside the _ready() callback:
1. Inside the _ready() callback, check whether there are peers connected in the multiplayer session by checking whether the size
of multiplayer.get_peers() array is greater than 0:
func _ready():
if multiplayer.get_peers().size() > 0:
2. If this is the case, check whether the current node is the Multiplayer Authority by using the is_multiplayer_authority()
function. This ensures that we will only call the following logic in the server peer:
func _ready():
if multiplayer.get_peers().size() > 0:
if is_multiplayer_authority():
3. Then, make an RPC using the rpc() method, with the "setup_team " , Teams.BLACK, and
multiplayer.get_peers()[0] arguments. This will call the setup_team() method on all connected peers, telling
them to set the BlackTeam’s Multiplayer Authority using the first peer ID in the list of connected peers. So, the first player
connected in the session will be responsible for the black Pieces:
func _ready():
if multiplayer.get_peers().size() > 0:
if is_multiplayer_authority():
rpc("setup_team", Teams.BLACK,
multiplayer.get_peers()[0])
4. Right below the previous line, we are going to do the same thing but use Teams.WHITE and the connected peers’ list second
index, meaning the second player that connected to the session:
func _ready():
if multiplayer.get_peers().size() > 0:
if is_multiplayer_authority():
rpc("setup_team", Teams.BLACK,
multiplayer.get_peers()[0])
rpc("setup_team", Teams.WHITE,
multiplayer.get_peers()[1])

With that, we have our team setup in place. Note that, since the server has both team nodes’
Multiplayer Authorities assigned to each of the players in the match, the server itself can’t perform
any movement in the board’s Pieces.
Talking about that prevention mechanism, how does it work? How does the CheckerBoard prevent
players from interacting with Pieces, especially with their opponent Pieces? In the next section, we
are going to see how we can detect which player is assigned to which team and only re-enable their
appropriate team Pieces.

Enabling and disabling team pieces
In our game, when players end a turn, we disable all their pieces using the disable_pieces() method.
In turn shifts, we make sure to disable both teams’ Pieces, and we also check whether there’s a
winner from the past turn; if not, we start the procedure to re-enable players’ Pieces based on the
turn’s team.
All of that happens in the toggle_turn() method, but as it is, it won’t work in an online multiplayer
scenario because, currently, the method performs only local logic. So, let’s turn it into a method that
will work for our improved online multiplayer checkers game.
However, before that, let’s see how the code is right now so we can already pick where we will need
to make adjustments:
func toggle_turn():
clear_free_cells()
disable_pieces(white_team)
disable_pieces(black_team)
var winner = get_winner()
if winner:
player_won.emit(winner)
return
if current_turn == Teams.BLACK:
current_turn = Teams.WHITE
enable_pieces(white_team)
else:
current_turn = Teams.BLACK
enable_pieces(black_team)

This function is responsible for managing the turn-based logic of a game. It first clears the available
cells for movements and then disables the pieces of both teams. Then, it checks whether there is a
winner and, if so, emits a signal to the CheckersGame script’s _on_checker_board_player_won()
method, indicating the winning team. If there is no winner, it switches the turn to the other team and
enables the pieces of the corresponding team.

Can you point out where we need to make the necessary changes in order to make it work in our
online version of the game? Remember that the game should work both locally and remotely, so we
need to maintain the overall outcome of this method. Let’s begin the process:
1. Decorate the toggle_turn() method with the @rpc annotation, using the any_peer and the call_local options. This
indicates that any peer can call this method remotely in the multiplayer session, but they should also call it locally. This ensures
that even if we are playing the game without joining a multiplayer session, we can call this method locally, using the rpc()
method, and everything will still work:
@rpc("any_peer", "call_local")
func toggle_turn():
2. Inside that, check whether the current_turn is Teams.BLACK; we are going to move enable_pieces(white_team)
inside yet another check. This time, we are going to check whether we don’t have any peers connected, meaning we are playing
the game alone or locally:
if current_turn == Teams.BLACK:
current_turn = Teams.WHITE
if not multiplayer.get_peers().size() > 0:
enable_pieces(white_team)
3. If we are not playing the game locally, we need to check whether the current player is the WhiteTeam’s Multiplayer Authority,
using the multiplayer.get_unique_id() method; if so, we can enable the WhiteTeam Pieces. And that’s how we ensure
that only the correct player will have their Pieces re-enabled:
if current_turn == Teams.BLACK:
current_turn = Teams.WHITE
if not multiplayer.get_peers().size() > 0:
enable_pieces(white_team)
elif white_team.get_multiplayer_authority()
== multiplayer.get_unique_id():
enable_pieces(white_team)
4. We are going to do the same thing, but inside the else statement, which handles whether the current_turn was from
Teams.WHITE:
else:
current_turn = Teams.BLACK
if not multiplayer.get_peers().size() > 0:
enable_pieces(black_team)
elif black_team.get_multiplayer_authority()
== multiplayer.get_unique_id():
enable_pieces(black_team)

With that, every time we call the toggle_turn() method, we are going to check whether the peer has
authority over the current Pieces in play, and we only allow them to select the Pieces from their team.
Now, we still need to make a small change in order for this to be compliant with our network
requirements. In the _free_cell_selected() callback, let’s change the line that makes a direct call to
the toggle_turn() method, making it a remote call using the rpc() method:
func _on_free_cell_selected(free_cell_position):
var free_cell = local_to_map(free_cell_position)
if can_capture(selected_piece):

capture_pieces(free_cell)
else:
move_selected_piece(free_cell)
rpc("toggle_turn")
selected_piece.deselect()

Note that the can_capture() method is responsible for checking whether there’s any enemy Piece
around selected_piece, which can lead to a capture move. If this is the case, we call the
capture_pieces() method, which will perform the capture movement on all possible enemy Pieces in

the selected direction. Otherwise, if there’s no capture movement available, we perform a simple
movement calling the move_selected_piece() method, passing around free_cell as an argument.
Now, every time a player selectes an available free cell to perform a move with a Piece, they will
make a remote procedure call to toggle_turn(), telling all the connected peers to properly disable
and re-enable their respective Pieces. Awesome, isn’t it?
At this point, we have all the core mechanisms of our game in place, and we can play an online
match with other players connected to our network. There’s only one thing missing. We still need to
communicate over the network when a player wins a match and allow players to play again.
In the next section, we are going to create a simple mechanism to allow players to rematch after one
of them won the match for good.

Managing win and lose conditions
Excellent! We have successfully completed the development of the CheckerBoard scene, and our
game’s core functionalities are now in place. The next step is to transition the logic of the
CheckersGame scene from local to remote gameplay.
To begin, let’s open the res://06.building-online-checkers/CheckersGame.tscn file and familiarize
ourselves with its structure.

Figure 6.9 – The CheckersGame’s scene node hierarchy

Take note that the CheckerBoard’s player_won signal is connected to the
CheckersGame._on_checker_board_player_won() callback. This callback is responsible for handling

situations when a player’s team has no remaining pieces on the board. Now, let’s proceed by opening
the script for CheckersGame.
We will be working on all the methods within the script, ensuring they are properly adjusted for
online multiplayer functionality:
1. First of all, let’s add the @rpc annotation to the update_winner() method with the any_peer and call_local options.
@rpc("any_peer", "call_local")
func update_winner(winner):
2. Then, we are going to do the same thing with the rematch() method. This one is called by RematchButton’s pressed
method:
@rpc("any_peer", "call_local")
func rematch():
3. Now, we need to call these methods remotely, using the rpc() method instead of directly calling them in CheckersGame.
Let’s do that in _on_checker_board_player_won(), turning the update_winner(winner) into
rpc("update_winner", winner) instead. This is the method that the CheckerBoard’s player_won signals is
connected to:
func _on_checker_board_player_won(winner):
rpc("update_winner", winner)
4. Lastly, we do the same thing with _on_rematch_button_pressed(), turning the rematch() call into
rpc("rematch"). This is the method that the pressed signal of RematchButton connects to, so when players press the
button, this is what should happen:
func _on_rematch_button_pressed():
rpc("rematch")

With the adjustments we’ve made, our game is now fully equipped to run smoothly, whether it’s
played locally or remotely. When a player successfully captures their opponent’s pieces, the game
will transition all peers into a rematch state, where any peer can initiate a new match and start a fresh
game. This ensures that players have the option to engage in continuous gameplay sessions without
the need to exit and restart the game manually.

Figure 6.10 – The CheckersGame rematch screen

Our game is finally working! We have a fully functional checkers game that players can play online
and challenge each other playing multiple matches.

Summary
To recap, in this chapter, we introduced the MultiplayerSynchronizer node to synchronize properties
across a network, established the concept of abstraction for effective data transmission, utilized the
@rpc annotations to enable multiplayer functionality, and learned how to assign and manage

Multiplayer Authority to ensure player autonomy and resource protection.
In the upcoming chapter, we will see how to develop an online Pong game. There, we will cover the
modifications necessary to turn the local game into an online multiplayer one, setting up online

multiplayer paddles, syncing remote objects in real time, and coordinating the paddle’s position. For
that, will use the MultiplayerSynchronizer node with a bit more depth than we did in this chapter.
Also, we will talk about the importance of maintaining a shared game world for players in actionbased games, which is very different from turn-based games.
OceanofPDF.com

7
Developing an Online Pong Game
It’s time to slowly get into some more complex aspects of making online multiplayer games. In
Chapter 6, Building an Online Checkers Game, we saw how two players can share the same game
world and see their actions have repercussions in the other players’ game states. This happened with
players taking turns, so we didn’t have one of the most troublesome aspects of online multiplayer
games involved: time.
In this chapter, we are going to start working with action games, which have hand-eye coordination
and response time as their core features. We’ll start with making a replica of one of the simplest
physics-based games out there: Pong. Using the base project as a starting point, we will then turn it
into an online multiplayer Pong game where each player controls one paddle and the Godot Engine
high-level networking features will be responsible for keeping players in sync within the same game
world.
We will cover the following topics in this chapter:
Introducing the Pong project
Setting up online multiplayer paddles
Syncing remote objects

Technical requirements
For this chapter, we are going to use our repository of online projects, which can be found through
the following link:
https://github.com/PacktPublishing/The-Essential-Guide-to-Creating-Multiplayer-Games-withGodot-4.0
With the project opened in Godot Engine, open the res://07.developing-online-pong folder;
everything we need for this chapter is there. That said, let’s start by understanding how our Pong
project works and what we need to do to turn it into an online multiplayer game. As stated throughout
the previous chapter, we will also use Godot Engine version 4.0, so if you have other versions of the
engine, please make sure you are using the correct one.

Introducing the Pong project

Welcome to yet another project for our fake indie game development studio, network engineer! This
time, we need to make the onboarding of our next project.
We have a Pong game that we think we can turn into a competitive online multiplayer game with
some leaderboards and all this cool stuff. Your core task here is to make its core features playable by
two players through a network. Let’s understand what we have currently so we can point out what
you going to modify.

How the player paddles work
The players’ paddles are the most important thing in our project. They are the only thing players
actually control and, as such, they are the main way players interact with the game. By moving them,
the players can bounce the ball off to the other player.
Let’s take a brief look at the Paddle scene. For that, open the res://07.developing-onlinepong/Paddle.tscn scene. Its scene tree structure looks like this:

Figure 7.1 – The Paddle scene’s node hierarchy

Note that the paddle itself is a Node2D node, whereas the actual physical body is its child. This is a
good way to abstract game entities. They have a physical body, but they aren’t a physical body. This
allows us to make more sense of them in more levels of abstraction. Now, let’s take a look at its
script:
extends Node2D
@export var speed = 500.0
@export var up_action = "move_up"
@export var down_action = "move_down"
@onready var body = $CharacterBody2D
func _physics_process(delta):
body.move_and_slide()
func _unhandled_input(event):
if event.is_action_pressed(up_action):
body.velocity.y = -speed
elif event.is_action_released(up_action):

if Input.is_action_pressed(down_action):
body.velocity.y = speed
else:
body.velocity.y = 0.0
if event.is_action_pressed(down_action):
body.velocity.y = speed
elif event.is_action_released(down_action):
if Input.is_action_pressed(up_action):
body.velocity.y = -speed
else:
body.velocity.y = 0.0

This code allows the paddle to move up and down based on user input. The speed variable determines
the movement speed, and the up_action and down_action variables represent the input actions for
moving the paddle. The script handles input events and adjusts the character’s velocity accordingly.
The paddle moves at a constant speed or it stops if no key is pressed.
In the next section, let’s see how the ball works. It’s another core object in our game that we will
need to do some work on in order to turn it into an online multiplayer game.

Understanding the Ball scene
The ball is the passive element of the game and it essentially bounces around when it hits another
physical body – either the paddles, the ceiling, or the floor. The latter two are StaticBody2D, which
use WorldBoundaryShape2D in their CollisionShape2D.
Let’s take a look at the Ball scene. Open the res://07.developing-online-pong/Ball.tscn scene.
The scene structure follows:

Figure 7.2 – The Ball scene’s node hierarchy

Before we open the Ball script, notice that the CollisionShape2D Resource has a built-in tool script
attached to it. It’s a very simple script that draws the CircleShape2D Resource using the
CanvasItem.draw_circle() method. This is the logic behind it:

@tool
extends CollisionShape2D
@export var color = Color.WHITE

func _draw():
draw_circle(Vector2.ZERO, shape.radius, color)

That said, let’s open the Ball script and see how it works, pay attention especially to the bouncing
logic because it uses some interesting Vector2 methods:
extends Node2D
@export var speed = 600.0
@onready var body = $CharacterBody2D
func move():
body.velocity.x = [-speed, speed][randi()%2]
body.velocity.y = [-speed, speed][randi()%2]
func reset():
body.global_position = global_position
move()
func _physics_process(delta):
var collision = body.move_and_collide
(body.velocity delta)
if collision:
body.velocity = body.velocity.bounce
(collision.get_normal())

This code moves the ball’s CharacterBody2D node at a specified speed, randomizes its motion
direction, detects collisions with other objects, and makes the character bounce off surfaces upon
collision. By using this script, the ball performs a dynamic and responsive movement with collision
detection.
In the next section, we will understand how we detect when a player scores against the other.

Managing players’ scores
When the ball reaches the left or right of the screen, the player on the opposite side should score. To
detect this condition, we make use of a ScoreArea node, which, in essence, is an Area2D node.
Open the res://07.developing-online-pong/ScoreArea.tscn scene and we’ll take a look at its scene
tree structure:

Figure 7.3 – The ScoreArea scene’s node hierarchy

As mentioned previously, it’s just an Area2D node; it doesn’t even have a CollisionShape2D Resource
because, in this case, it’s more friendly to add it in the final scene so we can choose a specific
Shape2D Resource for each ScoreArea node. Now, let’s take a look at its code:

extends Area2D
signal scored(score)
@export var score = 0
func _on_body_entered(body):
score += 1
scored.emit(score)

This code provides a simple way to keep track of a score in a game using an Area2D node. It emits a
scored signal whenever another physical body (in this case, the ball) enters the area, incrementing the
score by one. By connecting to this signal, other game objects can respond to score updates and
perform related actions. We use this signal later on in the PongGame class.
To ensure the ScoreArea node only detects the ball, we make use of Collision Layers and Collision
Masks. On the ball, here’s how these properties look:

Figure 7.4 – The Ball Collision Layer and Collision Mask properties

The ball is in the second physics layer, but it masks the first one. This is so it detects collisions with
the paddle, the floor, and the ceiling. It needs to be only on the second physics layer because the
ScoreArea node only masks the second layer. We do that to prevent the ScoreArea node from

detecting any other physics body, for instance, the floor or ceiling:

Figure 7.5 – The ScoreArea Collision Layer and Collision Mask properties

And that’s how we ensure that the ScoreArea node will only interact with the ball. In the next section,
we are going to see how we use this signal emitted by the ScoreArea node to actually update the
displayed score, along with the overall logic behind the PongGame class.

Tying everything together
You may have noticed that these classes operate independently without any coupling, which means
that they cannot form a cohesive system on their own. The responsibility of integrating everything
into a coherent system falls on the PongGame class.
Let’s first take a look at its scene tree structure so we can understand how everything will interact.
Open the res://07.developing-online-pong/PongGame.tscn scene and pay attention to the Scene
dock:

Figure 7.6 – The PongGame scene’s node hierarchy

At this point, you already have a sense of most of these nodes. Let’s just take a moment to understand
what ScoreLabel nodes does. It’s essentially just a text on the screen that displays each player’s score.
For that, it uses a method that changes its text property based on the casting of the score received by
the ScoreArea.scored signal (which is an integer) into a string. The whole ScoreLabel node’s code is
as follows:
extends Label
func update_score(new_score):
text = "%s" % new_score

With that in mind, let’s jump into the PongGame code:
extends Node2D
@export var speed = 600.0

@onready var body = $CharacterBody2D
func move():
body.velocity.x = [-speed, speed][randi()%2]
body.velocity.y = [-speed, speed][randi()%2]
func reset():
body.global_position = global_position
move()
func _physics_process(delta):
var collision = body.move_and_collide
(body.velocity delta)
if collision:
body.velocity = body.velocity.bounce
(collision.get_normal())

This code keeps track of scores, displays a winner when a player reaches the target score, and allows
the game to be restarted when one of the players presses the Rematch button, part of the
WinnerDisplay Node interface. For visual reference, this is how WinnerDisplay node looks when

toggled on:

Figure 7.7 – The WinnerDisplay overlay showing the match’s winner

It also initializes the game by randomizing the ball’s movement and starting its initial motion. Also,
when a player scores, it resets the ball by recentering it and starting its movement again.
In this section, we went through all the core classes in our Pong game. They are currently meant for
local multiplayer, so we need to modify them to support online multiplayer.
In the next section, we are going to do the necessary work to turn our game into a remotely playable
Pong game where two players interact with each other, each with one paddle so they can compete
together!

Setting up online multiplayer paddles
It’s time to start your actual work. After understanding the whole project, let’s do the necessary work
to allow players to play it online!
In Chapter 6, Building an Online Checkers Game, we saw that changing the multiplayer authority of
a SceneTree branch allows the new peer to take over control of the changes made to that branch of

nodes. This was how we made it so that the player playing on the white team couldn’t move the black
team’s pieces, and vice versa.
Being able to dynamically change the multiplayer authority is a core skill that we need to develop to
maintain a coherent shared world for our players. In the situation we mentioned, players took turns in
which each of them performed a single move and then the opposite player took control of their
pieces. In this chapter, on the other hand, players must move simultaneously as this is an action
game.
In the upcoming sections, we are going to implement a simple approach to give each player a paddle
to play with.

Changing the paddle’s owner
In our paddle implementation, we have a small issue to address. Both paddles call
CharacterBody2D.move_and_slide() inside the _physics_process() callback, on top of checking for
InputEvent in the _unhandled_input() callback. This makes it so that if the other player moves their

paddle, the movement may be overwritten in the opponent’s game. So, on top of re-assigning the
paddles’ multiplayer authority, we also need to disable the opponent’s paddle callbacks. Open
res://07.developing-online-pong/Paddle.gd and let’s do it! Follow these steps:

1. Create a method called setup_multiplayer() and include the player_id argument, which represents the network
identifier of the player:
func setup_multiplayer(player_id):
2. Decorate the setup_multiplayer() function with the @rpc annotation and use the call_local option. This will ensure
that only the server can call this method, and it will also call it locally on the server’s endpoint:
@rpc("call_local")
func setup_multiplayer(player_id):
3. Inside the function, call the set_multiplayer_authority() method and pass it the player_id argument. With that, we
have set up the paddle’s new multiplayer authority. Now, we need to prevent its movement if the player_id argument doesn’t
match its multiplayer authority ID. We do that because this RPC function will be called on all peers, so the opponent’s paddle is
supposed to run the following code block:
@rpc("call_local")
func setup_multiplayer(player_id):
set_multiplayer_authority(player_id)
4. Use the is_multiplayer_authority() method to check that the current paddle’s peer ID doesn’t match the multiplayer
authority’s peer ID:
if not is_multiplayer_authority():
5. If this is the case, call the set_physics_process() function and pass it the false argument to disable physics processing:

if not is_multiplayer_authority():
set_physics_process(false)
6. Likewise, call the set_process_unhandled_input() function and pass false to disable handling unhandled input
events on this paddle:
if not is_multiplayer_authority():
set_physics_process(false)
set_process_unhandled_input(false)
7. At the end, the whole setup_multiplayer() method should look like this:
@rpc("call_local")
func setup_multiplayer(player_id):
set_multiplayer_authority(player_id)
if not is_multiplayer_authority():
set_physics_process(false)
set_process_unhandled_input(false)

This code sets up multiplayer functionality by assigning the paddle’s multiplayer authority to a
specified player. It then adjusts the behavior of the script based on whether the current instance is the
authoritative peer. If the instance is not the authoritative peer, it disables physics and unhandled input
processing to ensure that only the authoritative player performs those actions in this instance.
In the next section, let’s understand how we gather and assign the player’s ID to each respective
paddle.

Assigning the players’ paddles
Now that each paddle can have its own multiplayer authority and have independent physics and input
handling processes for each player, it’s time to understand how we are going to assign each player to
their respective paddle. To do that, let’s open the res://07.developing-online-pong/PongGame.gd
script and, right in its _ready() function, let’s create the necessary logic:
1. First of all, include the await keyword followed by the get_tree().create_timer(0.1).timeout expression. This
creates a delay of 0.1 seconds and waits for its timeout signal to emit. This is important because we are going to use RPCs to
call functions on remote nodes, and these nodes may not be ready by the time the game executes this code, so instead it waits a
brief moment before executing its behavior:
func _ready():
randomize()
await(get_tree().create_timer(0.1).timeout)
ball.move()
2. Then, check whether the size of the connected peers is greater than 0 by using the multiplayer.get_peers().size()
method. This will ensure the following behavior only happens if there are peers connected; otherwise, the game runs as it should
locally:
await(get_tree().create_timer(0.1).timeout)
if multiplayer.get_peers().size() > 0:

3. If this is the case, check whether the current instance is the current multiplayer authority by using
is_multiplayer_authority(). This ensures that only the server will perform the player assignment:
await(get_tree().create_timer(0.1).timeout)
if multiplayer.get_peers().size() > 0:
if is_multiplayer_authority():
4. Inside this condition, assign the first connected peer to the player_1 variable. This will store the first player’s ID in this
variable:
await(get_tree().create_timer(0.1).timeout)
if multiplayer.get_peers().size() > 0:
if is_multiplayer_authority():
var player_1 = multiplayer.get_peers
()[0]
5. Then, assign the second connected peer to the player_2 variable. This will store the second player’s ID in this variable:
await(get_tree().create_timer(0.1).timeout)
if multiplayer.get_peers().size() > 0:
if is_multiplayer_authority():
var player_1 = multiplayer.get_peers
()[0]
var player_2 = multiplayer.get_peers()
[1]
6. Then, let’s use the rpc() method to call the setup_multiplayer method remotely on the player_1_paddle and
player_2_paddle nodes, passing their respective player variables:
if multiplayer.get_peers().size() > 0:
if is_multiplayer_authority():
var player_1 = multiplayer.get_peers()
[0]
var player_2 = multiplayer.get_peers()
[1]
player_1_paddle.rpc
("setup_multiplayer", player_1)
player_2_paddle.rpc
("setup_multiplayer", player_2)
7. The whole PongGame._ready() callback should look like this after these changes:
func _ready():
randomize()
await(get_tree().create_timer(0.1).timeout)
if multiplayer.get_peers().size() > 0:
if is_multiplayer_authority():
var player_1 = multiplayer.get_peers()
[0]
var player_2 = multiplayer.get_peers()
[1]
player_1_paddle.rpc
("setup_multiplayer", player_1)
player_2_paddle.rpc
("setup_multiplayer", player_2)
ball.move()

This code demonstrates asynchronous programming and multiplayer setup. It starts by randomizing
the random number generator and then introduces a delay of 0.1 seconds. It checks whether there are

connected peers and whether the current instance is the multiplayer authority – in other words, the
server. If these conditions are met, it assigns the connected peers to variables and uses RPCs to call
the Paddle.setup_multiplayer() method with the respective peer information. Finally, it moves the
ball object.

In order to properly set up who controls it, we provide Paddle.setup_multiplayer() with the required
data – specifically, the player ID. However, a small problem arises when each player can only control
their own paddle. How will players update their opponent’s paddle position? Moreover, who should
control the ball and how will its position be updated in both players’ game instances? These questions
will be addressed in the next section.

Syncing remote objects
With each player controlling their respective paddle in their own game instance, we have a small
problem. The opponent’s paddle will not update its movement because we ensured that both its
physics and input processes were disabled after we assigned a new multiplayer authority. Due to that,
the ball may also bounce on the opponent’s paddle and create a different movement trajectory in each
player’s game instance. We need to ensure that players are sharing the same game world and, for that,
we are going to sync the objects across the network using MultiplayerSynchronizer. In the next
section, we are going to start the syncing of the ball.

Updating the ball’s position
The first thing we are going to do is ensure the ball’s position is synced across all peers. This is
because we want to prevent players from dealing with different balls in their game instances, since
this may lead them to make decisions based on wrong information. For instance, a player may move
toward a ball that, in their game instance, is moving toward the ceiling, while in the server’s game
instance, the ball is actually moving toward the floor. Let’s open res://07.developing-onlinepong/Ball.tscn and start the simple process:

1. Add MultiplayerSynchronizer as the Ball node’s child. We are going to use this node’s features to keep all peers up to
date with the ball’s CharacterBody2D position:

Figure 7.8 – The Ball scene’s node hierarchy with a newly added MultiplayerSynchronizer node
2. Then, using the Replication menu, let’s choose the CharacterBody2D:position property to replicate across the connected
peers:

Figure 7.9 – The ball’s CharacterBody2D position property in the MultiplayerSynchronizer Replication menu
3. Finally, since we are working with physics bodies here, we need to ensure that the Visibility Update property is set to update
during the Physics process. This will sync the MultiplayerSynchronizer updates to the local Physics update, ensuring
that the game will take into account any collisions and other physics simulations when it updates the Paddle instances:

Figure 7.10 – The ball’s MultiplayerSynchronizer’s Visibility Update property set to Physics
4. To prevent any overwriting of the ball’s position in any player’s instance of the game, let’s open the ball’s script and add a code
snippet at its _ready() callback stating that if this peer isn’t the multiplayer authority, it will disable the ball’s
_physics_process()callback. This will make it so that only the server has the authority to actually calculate the ball’s
movement and, ultimately, its position, while players only replicate this in their game instances:
func _ready():
if not is_multiplayer_authority():
set_physics_process(false)

With that, the ball’s movement should be the same across all connected peers, preventing them from
making decisions based on an object that the other peers are seeing differently. This would break the
game experience because, ultimately, the players would be playing in a different game world making
movements that don’t make sense to their peers. In the next section, let’s do the same process for the
Paddle object; of course, in this one, we won’t need to disable _physics_process() because we do

that when we set up its multiplayer authority.

Coordinating the paddle’s position
Finally, it’s time to sync the players’ paddle positions to each other so they see their opponent’s
moves and can be on the same page. Let’s open the res://07.developing-online-pong/Paddle.tscn
scene and start the work:
1. Add a new MultiplayerSynchronizer as a Paddle child:

Figure 7.11 – The Paddle scene’s node hierarchy with a newly added MultiplayerSynchronizer node
2. In the Replication menu, select the CharacterBody2D:position property to replicate across the connected peers:

Figure 7.12 – The Paddle CharacterBody2D position property in the MultiplayerSynchronizer Replication menu
3. Just like in the Ball scene case, we are also working with a physics body here, so change the Visibility Update property to update
during the Physics process:

Figure 7.13 – The Paddle MultiplayerSynchronizer Visibility Update property set to Physics

With this implementation, each opponent’s paddle will have its CharacterBody2D position
synchronized across all peers in the game. This results in a shared game world that players can enjoy
together while competing in a fair environment.

Summary
In this chapter, we learned how the Godot Engine High-Level Network API provides quick and easy
solutions to assign the correct “owner” of a game object and sync its state across the network. This
ensures that players are playing in a shared environment with an actual human opponent on the other
side.
We learned how to check whether the current game instance is the multiplayer authority and make it
perform the proper behavior accordingly. We also learned how to change the multiplayer authority of
a node hierarchy on the SceneTree, ensuring that only a given player can make and sync changes
regarding this node and its children. To sync the changes, we used MultiplayerSynchronizer with the
Physics mode of Visibility Update to ensure that the physics interactions of the game objects are
synced across all network peers.
In the upcoming chapter, we will strengthen our knowledge of online multiplayer games by creating a
platformer game that two or more players can play together and explore the game world as they
please. We are confident that this will be an exciting addition to our game development skills.

OceanofPDF.com

8
Creating an Online Co-Op Platformer Prototype
In this chapter, we will delve deeper into the work of creating action multiplayer online games. Our
goal is to turn a local multiplayer puzzle platformer game prototype into an online version.
Here’s what the final puzzle platformer prototype will look like:

Figure 8.1 – A preview of the Puzzle Platformer prototype

By the end of this chapter, you’ll know how to use the features of the MultiplayerSpawner node to
create and assign playable characters to each player in the game, using the features offered by
MultiplayerSynchronizer to sync relevant properties. With these features, we can go beyond

updating the position of nodes; they will allow us to synchronize other properties, particularly
animations. You will also learn how to leverage Remote Procedure Calls (RPCs) to manipulate the
multiplayer authority of nodes. This will enable us to implement an exciting object-grabbing
mechanic that will be a key element in our prototype.

Technical requirements

To access the resources for this chapter, you can find our repository of online projects by following
the link provided here: https://github.com/PacktPublishing/The-Essential-Guide-to-CreatingMultiplayer-Games-with-Godot-4.0.
Once you have the repository, open the res://08.designing-online-platformer folder in the Godot
Engine editor. All the necessary files for this chapter are located there.
Now, let’s begin the onboarding process. In the upcoming section, we will familiarize ourselves with
the project, explore its main classes, and identify where we need to implement networking features.

Introducing the platformer project
Our project presents a captivating puzzle platformer that will test players’ strategic thinking and
collaboration skills as they overcome challenging obstacles together. At the heart of this game lies a
core mechanic centered around the manipulation of objects, utilizing them to construct platforms for
the other player to traverse.
Now, let’s dive into the essential classes that serve as the pillars of our project’s foundation. Our first
encounter will be with the Player class, which embodies the avatars controlled by each individual
player. As the main protagonist, the Player class handles essential functionalities such as movement
and interaction with various environmental elements. Notably, the Player class incorporates
InteractionArea2D that detects contact with InteractiveArea2D, enabling players to perform specific

actions upon them.
Moving forward, we encounter the InteractiveArea2D class. This class extends the functionality of
the Area2D node and assumes the crucial role of a trigger area for detecting interactions. When
InteractionArea2D overlaps with InteractiveArea2D, it becomes responsive to input events.

Triggering the designated interact input action emits a signal, allowing us to create further engaging
gameplay interactions.
In our game, the Crate class represents an interactive object that players can skillfully manipulate.
Each Crate instance has an InteractiveArea2D node and a CharacterBody2D node, offering players
the opportunity to collide with and leap onto them, which allows players to use them as viable
platforms for navigating the level. These crates stand as major elements for puzzle-solving and
advancing through the game’s levels.
Lastly, we encounter the versatile PlayerSpawner class, responsible for the dynamic spawning and
management of players within the game. This class adeptly adapts to the number of participating
players, seamlessly instantiating a Player instance for each individual. Additionally, in the realm of

local multiplayer, the PlayerSpawner class ensures a smooth and immersive gaming experience by
establishing distinct controls for each player and optimizing gameplay customization.
In the upcoming section, we will dive into the Player object, which is composed of a script and a
scene. We are going to understand how the script works with the available nodes on the scene and
structures the desired behavior for our local Player node.

Understanding the Player class
The Player class and scene represent the player’s avatar in the game. It is through this scene and
script that players interact with the game world. The scene is a CharacterBody2D node with a
CollisionShape2D Resource, a Node2D node called Sprites, which we use to group and pivot an
AnimatedSprite2D node, and an InteractionArea2D node, which we are going to talk about in the

How the InteractiveArea2D class works section. The InteractionArea2D node also has a
CollisionShape2D Resource and a RemoteTransformer2D node, which we call
GrabberRemoteTransformer2D. A RemoteTransformer2D node allows us to remotely sync the position,

rotation, and scale of a node that is outside the hierarchy of the RemoteTransformer2D’s parent as if it
were a sibling of the RemoteTransformer2D, which is very useful. In this case, we use the
GrabberRemoteTransformer2D node to remotely transform the objects the player can grab, such as the

crate, which we will talk about in the Unveiling the Crate class section. Finally, the Player class also
has a Label node that we use to visually communicate the player controlling the avatar.

Figure 8.2 – The Player’s scene node hierarchy

Now, let’s look at the script itself. There are some aspects that we won’t delve into in this section
because they are more related to the basic platformer game player movement, and our focus here is
on the online multiplayer aspect, so we would go beyond our scope. But the important part for your
job is to know that when two players are playing locally, the Player node can set up its controllers
dynamically so each player controls only one avatar. And this is something you’ll have to make work
in the online version of the prototype: how each player will control only their own avatar. For
reference, the following code snippet does this locally:
func setup_controller(index):
for action in InputMap.get_actions():
var new_action = action + "%s" % index
InputMap.add_action(new_action)
for event in InputMap.action_get_events(action):
var new_event = event.duplicate()
new_event.device = index
InputMap.action_add_event(new_action, event)
for property in get_property_list():
if not typeof(get(property.name)) ==
TYPE_STRING:
continue
if get(property.name) == action:
set(property.name, new_action)

The preceding code iterates over actions in InputMap singleton and creates new actions specific to a
given controller device, using an index. It also updates the events and properties associated with the
actions to be specific to the given device. The purpose of this code is to set up controller mappings
for different players or devices in a game, allowing customization and differentiation of input
controls.
In the next section, let’s see how the Crate scene works, it’s a pretty simple scene that essentially
works as a passive object that players can use as a platform to move around the level.

Unveiling the Crate class
The Crate scene plays a crucial role in our game prototype. It represents interactive objects that
players can skillfully manipulate to overcome obstacles and progress through the levels. Each
instance of the Crate scene is a Node2D equipped with two important components: InteractiveArea2D
node and CharacterBody2D node.

Figure 8.3 – The Crate’s scene node hierarchy

The CharacterBody2D node represents the physical body of the Crate node within the game’s physics
simulation. It ensures that the crates collide with the player’s avatar or other objects. The
CharacterBody2D node handles the collision detection and response, allowing the player to seamlessly

jump on and stand on the crate as if it were a solid platform.
As for InteractiveArea2D node, it is a special Area2D node that detects when InteractiveArea2D
nodes overlap with it. In the context of the Crate class, the InteractiveArea2D node allows players to
grab and lift the Crate nodes if they press the interact action while their InteractionArea2D node
overlaps with the Crate’s InteractionArea2D node. This interaction enables players to use the Crate
nodes as sturdy platforms to navigate the level since they will be able to move them around and jump
on them even when another player is grabbing them. InteractiveArea2D node acts as a trigger,
detecting when the player’s avatar comes into contact with the Crate node and assigning the Crate
node to the player’s avatar GrabbingRemoteTransform2D node, synchronizing its position with the
player even when they are moving.
The Crate script is fairly simple and structures how the Crate node responds and updates to
interactions with the Player node:
extends Node2D
@onready var body = $CharacterBody2D
@onready var shape = $CharacterBody2D/CollisionShape2D
@onready var interactive_area = $CharacterBody2D/
InteractiveArea2D
var lift_transformer = null
func _on_interactive_area_2d_area_entered(area):
lift_transformer = area.get_node
("GrabbingRemoteTransform2D")
func _on_interactive_area_2d_interacted():
lift_transformer.remote_path =
lift_transformer.get_path_to(body)

The preceding code sets up references to nodes in the Crate’s scene hierarchy. It also defines two
callback functions that handle signals from the Crate node’s InteractiveArea2D node. When an
InteractionArea2D node enters the Crate node’s InteractiveArea2D node, we presume it is the
Player node interacting and we retrieve the Player node’s "GrabbingRemoteTransform2D" node,

assigning it to the lift_transformer variable.
When an interaction happens, the code assigns the lift_transformer.remote_path node to the path
from lift_transformer variable to the Crate node’s body. Remember, lift_transformer variable is a
RemoteTransform2D node. This is how we allow the Player node’s GrabbingRemoteTransform2D node

to remotely transform the Crate node’s CharacterBody2D Node position.
In the next section, we will understand how InteractiveArea2D node detects players’ interactions
with the Crate node and its role in our game.

How the InteractiveArea2D class works
In this section, we’ll understand the role of a major scene that lies at the heart of our game’s
mechanics. Called InteractiveArea2D node, this scene plays a fundamental role in detecting and
enabling player interactions with various objects in the game environment. InteractiveArea2D node
enables us to turn any object into an object the player can interact with. For example, in our
prototype, we use InteractiveArea2D node to allow the player to grab a Crate node and move it
around.
The InteractiveArea2D scene, built upon the foundation of the Area2D node, serves as a fundamental
component in our game. Its primary function is to detect and ease player interactions with objects,
particularly within the player-crate interaction mechanic. Through the use of signals and input
handling, the InteractiveArea2D scene ensures smooth gameplay interactions.

Figure 8.4 – The InteractiveArea2D’s scene node hierarchy

One of the standout features of our game is the player-Crate node interaction mechanism, offering
players the ability to manipulate interactive objects. The InteractiveArea2D scene serves as the

catalyst for this interaction, acting as the gateway through which players can engage with the objects
that populate the game world.
Using signals, the InteractiveArea2D scene establishes communication channels with other game
objects and systems. Whenever a player successfully interacts with an object, InteractiveArea2D
node emits the interacted signal. On top of that, the scene emits signals to indicate the availability or
unavailability of interactions, allowing us to provide visual and auditory feedback to players.
To detect player input, the InteractiveArea2D scene uses an _unhandled_input callback. When
players press the designated interact input action, it triggers the interacted signal, signaling that an
interaction has occurred. This control scheme allows the players to interact with the game world.
Understanding the role of the InteractiveArea2D scene and its seamless integration with the playerCrate node interaction system is key. Now, it’s time to dive into the code and unleash the full

potential of this vital scene in our game:
class_name InteractiveArea2D
extends Area2D
signal interacted
signal interaction_available
signal interaction_unavailable
@export var interact_input_action = "interact"
func _ready():
set_process_unhandled_input(false)
func _unhandled_input(event):
if event.is_action_pressed(interact_input_action):
interacted.emit()
get_viewport().set_input_as_handled()
func _on_area_entered(_area):
set_process_unhandled_input(true)
interaction_available.emit()
func _on_area_exited(_area):
set_process_unhandled_input(false)
interaction_unavailable.emit()

The InteractiveArea2D script extends Area2D node and provides interaction functionality. It emits
signals when an interaction occurs, when an interaction becomes available, and when an interaction
becomes unavailable. It also handles unhandled input events to trigger interactions.
In the upcoming section and the final part of the onboarding, we will see how we create and insert
Player instances in the game world dynamically based on how many players are playing.

Understanding the PlayerSpawner class
PlayerSpawner scene is another vital component in our game that handles the creation and positioning

of Player instances. The PlayerSpawner class, based on the Marker2D node, follows the Spawner
pattern, enabling us to dynamically generate Player instances in the game world.

Figure 8.5 – The PlayerSpawner’s scene node hierarchy

One of the key features of the PlayerSpawner class is its ability to position the spawned Player
instances. As a Marker2D node, PlayerSpawner node provides a convenient way to specify the location
and orientation of the players within the game world. This ensures that each player starts in the
appropriate position, ready to embark on their adventure.
Let’s see its code to understand what this class does under the hood:
extends Marker2D
@export var players_scene = preload("res://08.designingonline-platformer/Actors/Player/Player2D.tscn")
func _ready():
if Input.get_connected_joypads().size() < 1:
var player = players_scene.instantiate()
add_child(player)
return
for i in Input.get_connected_joypads():
var player = players_scene.instantiate()
add_child(player)
player.setup_controller(i)

The preceding script showcases the implementation of a Spawner class, based on the Marker2D node. It
checks for connected joypads and creates instances of the Player scene accordingly. If no joypads are
connected, it creates a single instance. If there are connected joypads, it creates one Player instance
per joypad and sets up their respective controls. The preceding code snippet allows for the dynamic
creation of Player instances in a multiplayer game, easing our work developing a multiplayer
experience.
We are finally done with our onboarding; in the next section, we’ll start to implement our online
multiplayer features, turning our local prototype into something we can securely work with and
polish knowing it’s ready to launch with remote multiplayer features.

Spawning players in the match
In this section, we will understand how to improve the PlayerSpawner class to introduce online
multiplayer features to our game. Leveraging the foundation laid by the Understanding the
PlayerSpawner class, Unveiling the Crate class, and the Understanding the Player class sections,

these enhancements enable multiple players to connect and interact seamlessly within a synchronized
game environment.
PlayerSpawner node plays a fundamental role in our game’s multiplayer architecture, acting as the

core mechanism responsible for dynamically creating instances of the Player class for each
connected player. These instances represent the avatars through which players engage with the game
world.
With the integration of multiplayer functionalities, we will add features designed for an online
multiplayer experience. This includes mechanisms to handle multiplayer authority, enabling proper
gameplay across all connected peers. On top of that, the code will establish unique player names
using the peers’ IDs, allowing us to easily identify players on the network. To ensure synchronized
actions, we will use RPCs, which will allow us to share events and actions among all connected
players, especially the instantiation of other players.
One fundamental concept we are going to introduce here is the MultiplayerSpawner node. In the
Godot Engine 4 High-Level Network API, the MultiplayerSpawner node is an invaluable asset for
creating synced scenes in a networked multiplayer setting. In our context, it is a core component in
synchronizing the creation of players, ensuring that every player can see and interact with the avatars
of other players in real time.
With the MultiplayerSpawner node, we can effortlessly instantiate and position player avatars across
all connected game instances. So to start with, let’s open the PlayerSpawner scene at
res://08.designing-online-platformer/Levels/PlayerSpawner.tscn and add a MultiplayerSpawner

node as its child.

Figure 8.6 – A MultiplayerSpawner node as a child of the PlayerSpawner node

After that, we need to configure the MultiplayerSpawner node’s Spawn Path and Auto Spawn List
properties. The first property should point to PlayerSpawner. This tells MultiplayerSpawner who
should be the spawned scenes’ parent. Then, the second property should point to the same
PackedScene Resource our PlayerSpawner node spawns. This will ensure that, when a new instance is

created locally, MultiplayerSpawner node will replicate it on connected peers.

Figure 8.7 – The MultiplayerSpawner’s Spawn Path and Auto Spawn List properties set up

With that, our MultiplayerSpawner node is ready to sync new players on everyone’s game instances.
But we still need to configure these new instances, otherwise, only the server will be able to control
them. So, let’s see how we can empower players with the ability to control their own avatars. Open
the PlayerSpawner script at res://08.designing-online-platformer/Levels/PlayerSpawner.gd. In
the next section, we will make some changes to this script.

Giving players control in PlayerSpawner
The new PlayerSpawner code introduces changes that enhance the multiplayer functionality of the
game. Specifically, this code includes mechanisms to handle multiplayer synchronization and sets up
Player instances correctly when multiple peers are connected. The changes involve checking for

multiplayer authority, setting player names, and using RPCs to set up multiplayer functionality for
each connected player. Let’s implement these features:
1. Add await(get_tree().create_timer(0.1).timeout) at the beginning of the _ready() callback. This line
introduces a delay of 0.1 seconds using a timer, allowing time for the multiplayer networking initialization to complete:
func _ready():
await(get_tree().create_timer(0.1).timeout)
2. Then, let’s check whether there are connected peers by checking for the size of the multiplayer.get_peers() array. With
that, we can check whether there are any connected peers in the multiplayer session. This condition verifies whether this is a local
game session:
func _ready():

await(get_tree().create_timer(0.1).timeout)
if multiplayer.get_peers().size() < 1:
3. If this is the case, we use the original logic we saw in the Understanding the Player class section to set up the local players’
avatars’ controllers. With a small twist, we use the return keyword at the end to prevent _ready() from reaching the next
steps, which are only necessary if this is an online game session:
func _ready():
await(get_tree().create_timer(0.1).timeout)
if multiplayer.get_peers().size() < 1:
if Input.get_connected_joypads().size() < 1:
var player = players_scene.instantiate()
add_child(player)
return
for i in Input.get_connected_joypads():
var player = players_scene.instantiate()
add_child(player)
player.setup_controller(i)
return
4. Then, if this is an online game session, we check whether this game instance is the multiplayer authority (in other words, the
server), and if so, we enter a loop that iterates over the connected peers:
if is_multiplayer_authority():
for i in range(0, multiplayer.get_peers().
size()):
5. Similar to the local session logic, we create a Player instance for each connected player:
if is_multiplayer_authority():
for i in range(0, multiplayer.get_peers().
size()):
var player = players_scene.
instantiate()
6. Here’s the catch: after creating the Player instance, we set its name to the player’s peer ID. Only then do we add it as a child of
the PlayerSpawner node. This ensures each Player instance has a unique name and will prevent the RPCs and
MultiplayerSpawner node from returning errors:
if is_multiplayer_authority():
for i in range(0, multiplayer.get_peers().
size()):
var player = players_scene.instantiate()
var player_id = multiplayer.get_peers()[i]
player.name = str(player_id)
add_child(player)
7. Then, we add another timer delay of 0.1 seconds. This delay gives time for peers’ game instances to synchronize their
multiplayer setup:
if is_multiplayer_authority():
for i in range(0, multiplayer.get_peers().
size()):
var player = players_scene.instantiate()
var player_id = multiplayer.get_peers()[i]
player.name = str(player_id)
add_child(player)
await(get_tree().create_timer(0.1).
timeout)

8. Finally, we make an RPC to the Player.setup_multiplayer() method passing player_id as an argument.
Player.setup_multiplayer() is responsible for configuring the player’s multiplayer authority based on the player ID,
ultimately allowing this player, and only this player, to control this instance. We will implement this method in the Setting up the
Player multiplayer controls section:
if is_multiplayer_authority():
for i in range(0, multiplayer.get_peers().
size()):
var player = players_scene.instantiate()
var player_id = multiplayer.get_peers()[i]
player.name = str(player_id)
add_child(player)
await(get_tree().create_timer(0.1).
timeout)
player.rpc("setup_multiplayer", player_id)

We aren’t done yet. We still need to set up the multiplayer features on other players’ avatar instances
when MultiplayerSpawner node creates them. For that, let’s connect the MultiplayerSpawner node’
spawned signal to the PlayerSpawner node using a method called _on_multiplayer_spawner_spawned.

Figure 8.8 – The MultiplayerSpawner spawned signal connecting to the PlayerSpawner
_on_multiplayer_spawner_spawned callback

Then, we make an RPC on the spawned node’s setup_multiplayer method using the node’s name as
an argument. Since the name is a StringName variable, we need to convert it to a string and then to an

integer in order for the Player class to handle it. The complete PlayerSpawner script should look like
this after these changes:
extends Marker2D
@export var players_scene = preload("res://08.designingonline-platformer/Actors/Player/Player2D.tscn")
func _ready():
await(get_tree().create_timer(0.1).timeout)
if multiplayer.get_peers().size() < 1:
if Input.get_connected_joypads().size() < 1:
var player = players_scene.instantiate()
add_child(player)
return
for i in Input.get_connected_joypads():
var player = players_scene.instantiate()
add_child(player)
player.setup_controller(i)
return
if is_multiplayer_authority():
for i in range(0, multiplayer.get_peers().size()):
var player = players_scene.instantiate()
var player_id = multiplayer.get_peers()[i]
player.name = str(player_id)
add_child(player)
await(get_tree().create_timer(0.1).timeout)
player.rpc("setup_multiplayer", player_id)
func _on_multiplayer_spawner_spawned(node):
node.rpc("setup_multiplayer", int(str(node.name)))

The updated script incorporates multiplayer functionality by creating Player instances for each player
in the network. It checks for the presence of connected joypads and multiplayer peers to determine
the appropriate number of Player instances to create. The code also sets up the Player instances’
controls and synchronizes their multiplayer settings. With these changes, PlayerSpawner node now
enables multiplayer gameplay, allowing multiple players to control their avatars and interact within
the game world simultaneously with no control conflicts.
In the upcoming section, we will explore the implementation of the Player.setup_multiplayer()
method, which is responsible for configuring online multiplayer settings in the Player class. Within
the setup_multiplayer() method, we set the multiplayer authority, disable the physics and input
processing based on the local player’s authority over the instance, and set a visual player index label
updated with which player is controlling the instance.

Setting up the Player multiplayer controls
In this section, let’s see how to implement the Player.setup_multiplayer() method, which plays a
core role in setting up the online multiplayer controls for the Player class.
Within the setup_multiplayer() method, we need to take some key steps to achieve our online
multiplayer controls. Firstly, we need to establish the new multiplayer authority, verifying the

player’s control and decision-making capabilities within the multiplayer environment. Then, we will
adjust the physics and input processing based on whether the player ID matches the player ID we
designated using the node’s name. This ensures that each player controls the right Player instance.
On top of that, the method updates a visual player index label, allowing players to see their assigned
avatar. This visual feedback enhances the multiplayer experience by providing a clear indication of
each player’s identity and presence in the game.
By implementing the setup_multiplayer() method, the game achieves synchronized multiplayer
functionality, creating a cohesive and immersive multiplayer experience. Players can interact and
collaborate with one another, encouraging a sense of shared adventure and enjoyment within the
game world.
That said, let’s dive into the code and unlock the potential of our multiplayer gameplay on our
prototype! Open the Player script at res://08.designing-onlineplatformer/Actors/Player/Player2D.gd and let’s implement the setup_multiplayer() method to

finally allow players to control their avatars:
1. In the Player script, create a new method called setup_multiplayer(). It should receive an argument to get the player’s
ID; here, we’ll call it player_id:
func setup_multiplayer(player_id):
2. Then, decorate the method with the @rpc annotation, using the "any_peer" and "call_local" options. This specifies that
the method can be called by any peer and executed locally. So, when players spawn their avatars, they tell the other peers to set up
their avatars, setting up the avatar instance locally as well:
@rpc("any_peer", "call_local")
func setup_multiplayer(player_id):
3. Inside the setup_multiplayer() method, let’s call set_multiplayer_authority() passing player_id as an
argument to set the new multiplayer authority of this Player instance. Remember, the multiplayer authority determines the
peer’s control and decision-making capabilities over a given node:
@rpc("any_peer", "call_local")
func setup_multiplayer(player_id):
set_multiplayer_authority(player_id)
4. Then, let’s create a variable to store whether player_id is equal to the Player instance name. With that, we check whether
the current avatar is supposed to be controlled by the local player:
@rpc("any_peer", "call_local")
func setup_multiplayer(player_id):
set_multiplayer_authority(player_id)
var is_player = str(player_id) == str(name)
5. After that, we set the physics and unhandled input processes based on the value of the is_player variable. With that, we
disable the physics processing and the input handling on the Player instances that don’t belong to the local player:
@rpc("any_peer", "call_local")

func setup_multiplayer(player_id):
set_multiplayer_authority(player_id)
var is_player = str(player_id) == str(name)
set_physics_process(is_player)
set_process_unhandled_input(is_player)
6. Finally, we update the text of the label node to display the player index. Here, %s is a placeholder that is replaced with the
value returned by get_index(), representing the player’s index in the PlayerSpawner children hierarchy (remember the
first node is MultiplayerSpawner) so the player indexing starts at 1:
@rpc("any_peer", "call_local")
func setup_multiplayer(player_id):
set_multiplayer_authority(player_id)
var is_player = str(player_id) == str(name)
set_physics_process(is_player)
set_process_unhandled_input(is_player)
label.text = "P%s" % get_index()

With that, we have our Player instance ready to behave in an online multiplayer environment. The
setup_multiplayer() method configures the multiplayer features in the Player instances. It sets the

multiplayer authority, adjusts physics processing and input handling based on the local player ID, and
updates a label with the player’s index.
But notice, since we are disabling physics and input processing, technically the other players’ avatars
will remain static during the whole gameplay session, right? Each player will only control and see
their own character moving around and we don’t want that. We want players to interact with each
other and see how other players are behaving within this shared experience.
In the next section, we are going to use MultiplayerSynchronizer node to keep all other players on
the same page regarding each other’s avatar, including going beyond just the avatar’s position, but
also its animation and more. We will also see how we handle the Crate node: since players can grab
and carry it around, who should have control over it? Who should be the Crate node’s Multiplayer
Authority?

Syncing physical objects
In this section, we will understand how to use the MultiplayerSynchronizer node for more than
position updates. This node plays an important role in ensuring that players are synchronized with the
avatars of other players in the game. As we have seen in the Giving players control in PlayerSpawner
section, it is essential to maintain consistency among players to create a seamless multiplayer
experience.
The MultiplayerSynchronizer class serves as a bridge between players, enabling real-time updates
and synchronization of various properties. One key aspect that we will explore is how the Crate
object’s position is updated based on the player who is carrying it. This functionality allows for

interactive and collaborative gameplay, where players can work together to solve puzzles or
accomplish tasks.
On top of that, we will see how the MultiplayerSynchronizer node handles properties related to
avatar animations. By leveraging the MultiplayerSynchronizer class, we can ensure that all players
observe the same animation state of other players’ avatars, enabling a visually consistent experience.
Through the usage of the MultiplayerSynchronizer node, we can establish a robust framework for
synchronizing player actions, avatar positions, and animations. This synchronization ensures that all
players perceive a cohesive and immersive multiplayer environment, fostering collaboration and
enhancing the overall gameplay experience.
Let’s explore the implementation details of MultiplayerSynchronizer!

Synchronizing the player ’s position and animations
Our Player scene has some nodes responsible for playing animations based on the player’s actions
and the current state of the avatar, namely the Sprites and AnimatedSprite2D nodes. It is important to
synchronize the Sprites nodes’ scale and the AnimatedSprite animation and frame since players’
avatars would look rather weird if they jump, run, and stay idle and there’s no visual feedback
updating the performance of such actions in the game world other than the avatar’s position
changing. So, in this section, let’s ensure that on top of the position, other relevant properties are also
synced among players. For that, let’s open the Player scene at res://08.designing-onlineplatformer/Actors/Player/Player2D.tscn and, of course, add MultiplayerSynchronizer as its child.

With that, we will perform the following steps:
1. First of all, we need to change the MultiplayerSynchronizer’s Visibility Update Mode to Physics so it syncs the physics
simulations on remote peers’ game instances.

Figure 8.9 – The player’s MultiplayerSynchronizer properties
2. After that, in the Replication dock, we are going to add the PlayerCharacter2D node’s Position properties, the
AnimatedSprite2D node’s Animation and Frame properties, and the Sprite nodes’ Scale properties. This will ensure that
MultiplayerSynchronizer node also synchronizes the animation-related properties, allowing the players to see what their
peers’ avatars are doing.

Figure 8.10 – The MultiplayerSynchronizer’s Replication properties

And that’s it! With that, our players are ready to interact within a shared game world. The
MultiplayerSynchronizer node is an incredible ally to have in our toolbelt when developing online

multiplayer games. As we can see in this section, those node allows for the synchronization of a
range of different properties that can help us make our online gameplay experience enjoyable.
There’s a small, though very important observation to make in this regard. As we’ve seen throughout
this book, especially in Part 1, we can’t pass objects around, and we should avoid heavy data

transmission through the network. So, keep that in mind when adding properties to the
MultiplayerSynchronizer node’s Replication menu. For instance, if you try to sync a Texture

property, you are likely to fail the replication.
That said, in the next section, we are going to use MultiplayerSynchronizer node to sync the Crate
node’s position property, but there’s a twist. Since any player can grab a Crate node and move it
around, who should be its Multiplayer Authority? Well, that’s what we are about to see!

Updating the crate’s position remotely
At this point, we are fairly familiar with how MultiplayerSynchronizer node works and the overall
concept of a node’s multiplayer authority, right? One of the core mechanics in our online multiplayer
puzzle platformer game is the ability for players to collaborate by taking objects and using them as
platforms to progress through the levels’ obstacles.
In this section, we are going to see how we can dynamically change an object’s multiplayer authority
based on which player is currently interacting with it so that only that player can change the object’s
properties. Open the Crate scene at res://08.designing-onlineplatformer/Objects/Crate/Crate.tscn, and add a new MultiplayerSynchronizer node as its child.

Then, follow these steps:
1. Just like in the Player scene, we need to change the MultiplayerSynchronizer node’s Visibility Update Mode to
Physics to maintain the physics simulations consistently.

Figure 8.11 – The crate’s MultiplerSynchronizer properties
2. Then, in the Replication menu, we are going to add the CharacterBody2D node’s Position property to the syncing.

Figure 8.12 – The crate’s CharacterBody2D position property in the Replication menu

With that, believe it or not, we already have what we need to sync the crate’s position. Currently, the
crate does not have any built-in behavior to move on its own, as its position is expected to be altered
by the players who interact with it. To enable this functionality, we will make some additions to the
Crate script. To get started, let’s open the script file at res://08.designing-onlineplatformer/Objects/Crate/Crate.gd.

In the _on_interactive_area_2d_area_entered() method, we need to change the crate’s multiplayer
authority to match the player it’s interacting with. For that, we can call the
set_multiplayer_authority() method passing the area’s multiplayer authority. This area that just

entered is the player’s InteractionArea2D node, so its multiplayer authority is the same as that of the
player’s:
func _on_interactive_area_2d_area_entered(area):
lift_transformer = area.get_node
("GrabbingRemoteTransform2D")
set_multiplayer_authority
(area.get_multiplayer_authority())

With that, whenever the player’s avatar enters the crate’s InteractiveArea2D node, the player will
become the crate’s multiplayer authority and will be able to grab it and change its position once they
interact with it. With this addition, we are ready to witness the seamless synchronization of the crate’s
position as players interact with it. You can test the prototype to explore the possibilities of
collaborative gameplay and enjoy the immersive multiplayer experience we have just created!

Summary
In this chapter, we dived into the world of online multiplayer puzzle platformers, which emphasized
teamwork and collaboration. Players will be challenged to work together, leveraging their skills to
overcome obstacles and progress through intricate levels. Throughout the chapter, we explored key
concepts and techniques to enhance the multiplayer experience and create a seamless collaborative
gameplay environment.

To enable multiplayer functionality, we introduced the MultiplayerSpawner class, which dynamically
instantiates Player instances based on the number of connected players. This ensures that each player
has a unique avatar in the game, promoting a personalized and immersive multiplayer experience.
The Player class played a crucial role, and we implemented the setup_multiplayer() method to
configure its multiplayer settings. This method allowed us to set each instance’s multiplayer
authority, adjust physics and input processing, and update a visual player index label, providing
players with a clear identification in the game.
To achieve synchronization between players, we harnessed the power of MultiplayerSynchronizer
node. This powerful tool enabled us to synchronize not only the positions of players but also their
animations. By incorporating MultiplayerSynchronizer node, we created a visually captivating
multiplayer experience where players moved and interacted with the game world in perfect harmony.
This synchronization brought the multiplayer gameplay to life, enhancing immersion and ensuring a
cohesive and enjoyable shared experience.
An exciting feature we implemented was the ability for players to grab and manipulate the Crate
object. By dynamically changing the crate’s multiplayer authority, we ensured that only the player
interacting with the crate had control over its movements. This added an extra layer of collaboration
and puzzle-solving, as players can strategically use the crate as a platform to navigate the levels,
fostering teamwork and coordination.
To sum up, this chapter provided a solid foundation for understanding and implementing multiplayer
features using the Godot Engine High-level Network API. By combining the concepts and techniques
explored, we created an online multiplayer puzzle platformer prototype, where players can
seamlessly collaborate, synchronize their actions, and conquer challenges together. This chapter
opened doors to endless possibilities in future multiplayer game development endeavors,
empowering you to create engaging and interactive multiplayer experiences.
In the next chapter, we’ll leverage all the knowledge we’ve seen so far in Part 2 of this book to create
a multiplayer online adventure with a persistent section system where players can log in and out and
maintain their progress. The players will also synchronize the server’s world with their game instance
world, which also means they will be able to see all the other players that are currently playing as
well and interact with one another. It’s fundamentally a prototype that you can expand to a Massive
Multiplayer Online Role Playing Game (MMORPG) if you want.
OceanofPDF.com

9
Creating an Online Adventure Prototype
In this chapter, we will explore the fascinating world of an online space adventure game that has the
potential to evolve into a massive multiplayer online role-playing game (MMORPG). Throughout
this journey, we will lay the foundations for an immersive gaming experience, allowing players to
join a persistent world and seamlessly synchronize their game state with the current state of the game
world.
Here’s a snapshot of what the final spaceshooter adventure prototype will look like:

Figure 9.1 – Two players accomplishing the Destroy 10 Asteroids quest together

Our primary focus will be building a robust networking system that facilitates real-time interaction
among players by using the powerful Godot Engine Network API. Through this system, players will
connect to a central server, ensuring that everyone shares the same game world and can witness each
other’s actions, promoting collaboration and a sense of togetherness.
Furthermore, we will dive into the creation of a dynamic quest system capable of tracking player
progress and storing this data in a database, so that when players come back, they will maintain their

progress. Within our prototype of a space adventure, players will collaborate to complete missions
such as destroying asteroids.
We will start the chapter by understanding the role of each piece of our game: the asteroids, the
spaceship, and the player scene. Then, we will move to the core feature of an adventure game, the
quest system, where we are going to learn how to pull and push data to the server and what builds up
this robust system from both the server’s and player’s perspectives.
We will cover the following topics in this chapter:
Introducing the prototype
Logging the player in to the server
Separating server and client responsibilities
Storing and retrieving data on the server

By the end of this chapter, you will have a solid foundation for an online adventure game that can
expand into a vast and captivating MMORPG. Equipped with a persistent world, synchronized
gameplay, and a quest system, you will be well prepared to build an engaging and dynamic online
gaming experience.

Technical requirements
To access the resources for this chapter, go to our online project’s repository found at
https://github.com/PacktPublishing/The-Essential-Guide-to-Creating-Multiplayer-Games-withGodot-4.0.
With the repository in your computer, open the res://09.prototyping-space-adventure folder in the
Godot Engine editor. You will find all the necessary files for this chapter there.
Now, let us begin the onboarding process. In the next section, we will introduce the project, explore
its main classes, and identify where we need to implement networking features.

Introducing the prototype
In this section, we will gain a comprehensive understanding of the core systems driving our
prototype. As the network engineers of our fictional studio, our role is core in transforming our local
game prototype into an exciting online multiplayer game prototype. To accomplish this, we must
familiarize ourselves with the major classes and files that make up our project.
Let’s not overlook the significance of the onboarding process when we join a project. As network
engineers, applying our knowledge and insights is essential for seamless integration into the

development process. By understanding the core systems and concepts, we create a collaborative and
productive environment, empowering the team to collectively bring our vision to life.
So, let’s dive into the heart of our prototype and unlock the potential of online multiplayer gaming.
By the end of this section, you will be equipped with the necessary systems you can tweak to shape
an immersive and engaging online experience, uniting players in a dynamic and interconnected
world. In the next section, let’s understand how the Player class and scene work.

Understanding the Player scene
In any game, the player’s avatar is a fundamental element of the player’s experience. In this section,
our goal is to understand the composition of the Player scene, the scene that represents the player’s
avatar in our prototype.
The Player scene is an abstract representation of the player as an entity in the game. It is a Node2D
class that has a Spaceship scene, a Weapon2D scene, a Sprite2D node, a HurtArea2D node, a
CameraRemoteTransform2D node, and, of course, the Camera2D node.

Figure 9.2 – The Player scene node’s hierarchy

Now, let’s understand the role of the main components of this scene, namely the Spaceship and
Weapon2D nodes.

The Spaceship node is a direct child of Player node and carries most of the other components, with
the exception of the Camera2D node; instead, it uses the CameraRemoteTransform2D node to remotely
transform the Camera2D node. The Spaceship node is a RigidBody2D node that simulates the

movement of a body within an environment with no gravity and very low friction. It has two main
methods, Spaceship.thrust() and Spaceship.turn(). In the following code, we can see how we
implemented these methods:
class_name Spaceship2D
extends RigidBody2D
@export var acceleration = 600.0
@export var turn_torque = 10.0
func thrust():
var delta = get_physics_process_delta_time()
linear_velocity += (acceleration * delta) *
Vector2.RIGHT.rotated(rotation)
func turn(direction):
var delta = get_physics_process_delta_time()
angular_velocity += (direction * turn_torque) * delta

The thrust() method applies an acceleration force to Spaceship.linear_velocity property that
makes it move. Then, the turn() method applies an acceleration force to the
Spaceship.angular_velocity property that rotates it. We’ve set up the Spaceship node so that this is

all it needs to perform a nice and smooth movement. It has some damping forces as well. In the
following figure, we can see the properties related to the Spaceship scene to understand this
movement better.

Figure 9.3 – The Spaceship RigidBody2D properties settings

The Player scene controls the Spaceship node’s movement simply by calling the Spaceship.thrust()
and Spaceship.turn() methods based on the player’s inputs. In the following code snippet, we can
see how this works in the _physics_process() callback:
extends Node2D
@export var thrust_action = "move_up"
@export var turn_left_action = "move_left"
@export var turn_right_action = "move_right"
@export var shoot_action = "shoot"
@onready var spaceship = $Spaceship
@onready var weapon = $Spaceship/Weapon2D
func _process(delta):
if Input.is_action_pressed(shoot_action):
weapon.fire()
func _physics_process(delta):
if Input.is_action_pressed(thrust_action):
spaceship.thrust()
if Input.is_action_pressed(turn_left_action):
spaceship.turn(-1)
elif Input.is_action_pressed(turn_right_action):
spaceship.turn(1)

Now, if you are an attentive engineer, which at this point we can assume you are, you might have
noticed that in the _process() callback, we call the fire() method on the Weapon2D node, right? Let’s
understand how the Weapon2D node works; it’s another core class for us.
The Weapon2D scene is a Marker2D node with BulletSpawner2D, Timer, Sprite2D, and AnimationPlayer
nodes as its children. The following screenshot showcases the Weapon2D scene’s structure:

Figure 9.4 – The Weapon2D scene’s node hierarchy
BulletSpawner2D instantiates bullets and gives them a direction based on BulletSpawner2D’s
global_rotation value. We can see how this works in the following code block:

extends Spawner2D
func spawn(reference = spawn_scene):
var bullet = super(reference)
bullet.direction = Vector2.RIGHT.rotated(global_rotation)

As for Weapon2D, it uses Timer to establish a fire rate in which if Timer is currently active, it can’t
shoot. Otherwise, it plays the "fire" animation, spawns a bullet using whatever scene we set in its
bullet_scene property, and starts Timer based on Weapon2D’s fire_rate value. By default, it shoots

three bullets per second. In the following code, we can see how we implemented this behavior:
class_name Weapon2D
extends Marker2D
@export var bullet_scene: PackedScene
@export_range(0, 1, 1, "or_greater") var fire_rate = 3
@onready var spawner = $BulletSpawner2D
@onready var timer = $Timer
@onready var animation_player = $AnimationPlayer
func fire():
if timer.is_stopped():
animation_player.play("fire")
spawner.spawn(bullet_scene)
timer.start(1.0 / fire_rate)

With that, players can shoot bullets and defend themselves while they accomplish their missions. One
of these missions is to destroy some asteroids. So, in the next section, we are going to understand
how the Asteroid scene works so we can move on to the quest system afterward.

Gauging the Asteroid scene
The Asteroid scene plays a fundamental role in our prototype. It represents an object that players
must destroy in order to progress in a given mission. With the Asteroid scene working as planned, we
can evaluate the quest system. In this section, we are going to understand how the Asteroid scene
works so we have an idea of what to do in the process of turning the local gameplay prototype into an
online multiplayer prototype.
The Asteroid scene is a Node2D node with an AnimationPlayer node, a Sprite2D node, a
GPUParticle2D node, a HitArea2D scene, a HurtArea2D scene, a StaticBody2D node, and a
QuestProgress scene. We can see the scene structure in the following screenshot:

Figure 9.5 – The Asteroid scene’s node hierarchy
HitArea2D node applies 1 damage to players’ spaceships that touch it. When players shoot bullets,

their HitArea2D node applies 1 damage to the Asteroid node if they hit its HurtArea2D node. If the
Asteroid node doesn’t have any hit points left, it plays the "explode" animation, emitting some

particles through GPUParticles2D node and putting itself in the queue so SceneTree frees it from
memory as soon as the animation finishes.
Doing so emits the tree_exiting signal, which is connected to QuestProgress.increase_progress()
method. We are going to talk about QuestProgress node in the Unraveling the quest system section.
The Asteroid node’s behavior is expressed in the following code snippet:
extends Node2D
@export var max_health = 3
@onready var health = max_health
@onready var animator = $AnimationPlayer
func apply_damage(damage):
health -= damage
if health < 1:
animator.play("explode")
elif health > 0:
animator.play("hit")
func _on_hurt_area_2d_damage_taken(damage):
apply_damage(damage)
func _on_animation_player_animation_finished(anim_name):
if anim_name == "explode":
queue_free()

With that, the Asteroid node becomes a good testing subject for our quest system. In the next section,
let’s understand how this system works and the important aspects that we should consider for the
online multiplayer version of our prototype.

Unraveling the quest system
It’s time to understand the very core of what defines an adventure game. In this section, we are going
to understand how the quest system of our prototype works and what we can do with it. This will
enlighten us with a good understanding of what we need to change in order to turn it into a system
that works for an online multiplayer version of the game.
Let’s get started!

Representing a quest as a node
In this section, we will understand how the Quest node works and what we can do with it. To do that,
open the res://09.prototyping-space-adventure/Quests/Quest.tscn scene. As with all other
components of the quest system, it is a node with a script. Open the script and let’s understand it.
The Quest node ultimately represents a quest in the player’s quest log, and for that, it bundles all the
data relevant to the quest itself:
The id property that represents the quest in the database, "asteroid_1" by default.
The quest’s title, description, and target_amount properties. Note that these are exported variables, so this allows
our (fake) quest designers to directly create new quests using the Inspector. You can see the Inspector displaying all these
properties in the following figures:

Figure 9.6 – The Quest properties in the Inspector

It also has current_amount property to track the player’s progress toward the quest’s target amount, and a completed
property to tell whether the player has finished the quest already or not.
On top of that, it has a setter method for current_amount property to process the received value. It ensures that the value is
clamped between 0 and target_amount property. It also emits a signal notifying the quest was updated, and if
current_amount property is equal to target_amount property, it emits a signal notifying that the quest was completed.

In the following code snippet, we can see how this was implemented concretely:
extends Node
signal updated(quest_id, new_amount)
signal finished(quest_id)
@export var id = "asteroid_1"
@export var title = "Quest Title"
@export var description = "Insert Quest description here"
@export var target_amount = 1
var current_amount = 0 : set = set_current_amount
var completed = false
func set_current_amount(new_value):
current_amount = new_value
current_amount = clamp(current_amount, 0, target_amount)
updated.emit(id, current_amount)
if current_amount >= target_amount:
finished.emit(id)

With that, we have an object that can represent a quest in our quest system. This is the very basic
component of this system. As we saw, there is some data that makes up a Quest, right? This data is
stored in a database so we can load and store the quest’s content. In the next section, we are going to
see what this database looks like and how we can load quest content and store any changes made to
these quests.

Loading and storing quests with QuestDatabase
In any given adventure game, the players need quests to progress through the game story and overall
world design. It is likely that these quests are stored in a place where quest designers can simply
write them out and create an NPC to provide these quests to players.
Since in our fake quest designers would need some kind of database to design the quests, we made
the QuestDatabase singleton. It loads JSON files containing all the available quests in the game and
the player’s progress in each of them. In this section, we will see how we can load these files and
store the player’s progress so they won’t lose it when they leave the game, and how the
QuestDatabase singleton provides this data to other classes.

Open the scene provided in the res://09.prototyping-space-adventure/Quests/QuestDatabase.tscn
file and you will also notice that it’s nothing more than a node with a script. In the Inspector, you’ll
notice the path to two important files:

Figure 9.7 – QuestDatabase’s Inspector

These are the JSON files that QuestDatabase uses to load the game’s quest and the player’s progress
in the quests they have already started. The PlayerProgress.json file content is shown in the
following code snippet:
{
"asteroid_1": {
"completed": false,
"progress": 0
}
}

So, each quest is represented by its ID and a dictionary with an indication of whether they are already
completed or not and the progress the player has currently made. Now, for QuestDatabase.json, it is a
bit more complex; the file content is shown in the following code snippet:
{
"asteroid_1" : {
"title": "Destroy 10 Asteroids",
"description": "Destroy some asteroids,
please. They are taking too much space here",
"target_amount": 10}
}

Again, every quest is abstracted as a dictionary that reflects the quest’s ID. Inside the dictionary, we
have the "title", "description", and "target_amount" keys, which contain important data regarding
the quest’s object serialization and deserialization processes.

Now, the QuestDatabase singleton has some important methods to load, read, process, store, and even
allow other objects to access this data. Let’s briefly go through the main methods; you’ll notice there
are some extra methods in the class, but they are essentially there to retrieve specific information
about a quest’s data, such as the quest’s title.
But let’s focus on the more relevant methods:
QuestDatabase.load_database(): Loads and deserializes the QuestDatabase.json and
PlayerProgress.json files and stores their content, respectively, in the quests_database and
progress_database member variables.
QuestDatabase.store_database(): Does the opposite of the preceding method, serializing the quests_database
and progress_database member variables into their respective files.
QuestDatabase.get_player_quests(): Creates a quest_data dictionary for each key in the
progress_database dictionary, gathering their data using the auxiliary methods, and returns a quests dictionary with all
quests the player has started and their data.
QuestDatabase.update_player_progress(): Updates the player’s progress in a given quest. It receives a
quest_id, current_amount, and completed argument to do so.

In the QuestDatabase script, we can see the concrete implementation of this behavior and the
auxiliary methods. You will notice there’s an implementation of the _notification() callback, which
essentially calls the store_database() method when the application’s window receives a close
request:
func _notification(notification):
if notification == NOTIFICATION_WM_CLOSE_REQUEST:
store_database()

This guarantees that if the player quits the game through the usual means, for instance, clicking on
the close button, their progress will be saved.
With that, we have the quest data and player’s progress available at runtime and the quest system is
almost done. We just need to know what we do with all that in the end, right? In the next section, we
will understand how we use the intriguing QuestProgress nodes to update the system whenever a
player makes progress in a given quest.

Managing players’ quests
Now that we know that we can use the QuestProgress class when players get to progress in a given
quest, we need to understand how these quests are managed in the system itself. In this section, we
will understand how we retrieve quests from a quests database, how we create new quests for the
current player based on the available quests retrieved, how we manage the player’s progress in a
given quest, and how we communicate that the player has a new quest in their quest log.

Open the scene available at res://09.prototyping-space-adventure/Quests/QuestSingleton.tscn
and you will see it is a node with a script attached to it. Open the script and let’s understand what this
scene does.
As the singleton name, Quests, suggests, this scene is a set of all quests the player currently has. In
the Representing a quest as a node section, we will see how we abstract each quest as an object with
all the relevant properties, such as title, description, and id. The QuestSingleton class is
responsible for retrieving and managing the quests.
To do that, it has three core methods:
QuestSingleton.retrieve_quests(): Requests all the available quests for the players from the QuestDatabase
singleton. We talked about QuestDatabase in the Loading and storing quests with QuestDatabase section.
QuestSingleton.create_quest(): Receives a quest_data dictionary with all the relevant data to create a Quest
node, then it instantiates a Quest and maps it to the QuestSingleton.quests dictionary using the quest ID. This allows
other classes to access the Quest node using the quest ID in the upcoming method.
QuestSingleton.get_quest(): Receives a quest_id value as an argument and uses it to return the given Quest node
associated with the provided ID.
QuestSingleton.increase_quest_progress(): Receives a quest_id value as an argument and an amount value
to determine how much to increase in the provided quest’s progress.

In the following code, we can see how these behaviors were implemented:
extends Node
signal quest_created(new_quest)
var quest_scene = preload("res://09.prototyping-spaceadventure/Quests/Quest.tscn")
var quests = {}
func retrieve_quests():
var player_quests = QuestDatabase.get_player_quests()
for quest in player_quests:
create_quest(player_quests[quest])
func create_quest(quest_data):
var quest = quest_scene.instantiate()
quest.id = quest_data["id"]
quest.title = quest_data["title"]
quest.description = quest_data["description"]
quest.target_amount = quest_data["target_amount"]
quest.current_amount = quest_data["current_amount"]
quest.completed = quest_data["completed"]
add_child(quest)
quests[quest.id] = quest
quest_created.emit(quest)
func get_quest(quest_id):
return quests[quest_id]
func increase_quest_progress(quest_id, amount):
var quest = quests[quest_id]
quest.current_amount += amount
QuestDatabase.update_player_progress(quest_id,
quest.current_amount, quest.completed)

With that, QuestSingleton is able to retrieve all the quests the player is currently engaged in and
provide them to user classes so they can access and work with said quests. This will allow us to
actually increase the players’ progress in a given quest. For that, we will understand how the
QuestProgress node works.

Increasing quests’ progress
Back in the Asteroid scene, we have the QuestProgress node. This node is responsible for
communicating to the quest system when the player makes progress in a given quest. To know which
quest QuestProgress refers to, we use a variable called quest_id, and this is a fundamental concept in
our quest system. Through this data, other classes of the system can communicate with each other,
requesting changes or retrieving information about a given quest.
On top of that, the QuestProgress class has a method called increase_quest_progress(), which
requests QuestSingleton, referred to as Quests, to increase the quest’s progress by the amount value
provided, by default 1.
We saw how QuestSingleton works in the Managing players’ quests section. Nonetheless, in the
following code snippet, we can see the QuestProgress class’ code:
extends Node
@export var quest_id = "asteroid_1"
func increase_progress(amount = 1):
Quests.increase_quest_progress(quest_id, amount)

TheQuestProgress node itself is a small component of the system that works on the very end of the
system, where the final output is processed. It is meant to be used by other classes to trigger its
behavior. For instance, as mentioned in the Gauging the Asteroid scene section, the Asteroid node
uses its tree_exiting signal to trigger the QuestProgress.increase_progress() method.
This concludes our quest system onboarding. Throughout this section, we understood how objects
can increase a quest’s progress, how we retrieve quests and players’ progress from a database, how
and what kind of data we store in the database files, and how this data ends up in a node in which we
can implement higher-level behavior.
Our onboarding process is not over yet. In the upcoming section, we will understand how players will
actually see the quest information in QuestPanel node, which is a component of the last piece of our
prototype, the World scene. It is in this scene that all the action actually happens, so stay focused, and
let’s see how this works.

Breaking down the World scene

Everything we’ve seen so far will come together into the World scene. This is the scene where
everything is put together to interact. It’s the World scene that we use to test our current prototype. To
do so, open the res://09.prototyping-space-adventure/Levels/World.tscn scene and hit the Run
Current Scene button. You will be able to test the game and get a feel for the prototype.
Now, in this section, we are going to understand how we create asteroids and players in the game,
and how we display the player’s quest log on the screen. The world itself is a high-level abstraction
scene, so things are easier to understand.
The scene itself is a node called Main that has a RadialSpawner child node called Asteroids
responsible for spawning asteroids around it, a Spawner node called Players responsible for spawning
Player instances, and some CanvasLayers nodes to create the overall visual of the game, namely
BackgroundLayer node, which uses a ColorRect node to set the game’s background color, then
ParallaxBackground node, which has a ParallaxLayer node containing a GPUParticles2D node that

creates a repeating starfield for the background.
Finally, we also have InterfaceCanvasLayer node, which, as the name suggests, contains interface
elements. Here, we have an important element to wrap up the quest system: QuestPanel node. We are
going to talk about it in the Displaying quest information section. In the following screenshot, we can
see the World scene node hierarchy:

Figure 9.8 – The World scene node’s hierarchy

Here, we were able to structure a prototype that spawns some Asteroids around a given area, spawns
a pPlayer, and displays the player’s quest log with the current active quests and their information. In

the next section, let’s understand how the QuestPanel node gathers, displays, and updates information
about the player’s quests.

Displaying quest information
In the end, the quest system has a main responsibility that summarizes everything we’ve seen so far
regarding it. It has to display information about the current active quests to the player. This funnels
down to QuestPanel node, which is a UI element that displays such information based on the data it
gathers from QuestSingleton node. In this section, we are going to understand how QuestPanel node
works. To do so, open the res://09.prototyping-space-adventure/Quests/QuestPanel.tscn scene.
Note that QuestPanel node itself extends the ScrollContainer class and it has a VBoxContainer node
as its child. This allows us to display many quests for the player and they will be able to navigate
these quests using a scrollbar. We currently have only one quest, as seen in the QuestDatabase.json
file, but the ground is paved for more quests. Now, open the QuestPanel script, and let’s see how it
implements displaying quest information.
The first thing it does right at the _ready() callback is to connect the Quests singleton’s
quest_created signal to QuestPanel’s add_quest() method. Then it tells the Quests singleton to

retrieve quests, which will populate the Quests singleton with the players’ quests. Every time the
Quests singleton creates a new Quest node, adding it as its child, it emits a signal that the QuestPanel

node listens to and calls the add_quest() method. Let’s talk about the QuestPanel node member
variables and methods:
quests_labels is a dictionary used to map Label nodes to their reference using the Quest.id property as the key.
The add_quest() method creates a new Label node and sets its text property to a formatted String using the information
from the Quest node stored in the quest property. It also connects the quest.updated signal to its update_quest()
method, which we are going to talk about in a moment. Then, it adds this Label node as a child of theVBoxContainer node
and maps it in the quests_labels property for further reference.
The update_quest() method takes the quest_id String and the current_amount integer as arguments, and uses the
quest_id argument to find the proper Label node to update the text with the updated quest data.

This behavior is expressed in the following code snippet if you want to understand the concrete
implementation of how this all happens:
extends ScrollContainer
var quest_labels = {}
func _ready():
Quests.quest_created.connect(add_quest)
Quests.retrieve_quests()
func add_quest(quest):
var label = Label.new()
var quest_data = "%s \n %s/%s \n \n %s" %[quest.title,
quest.current_amount, quest.target_amount,
quest.description]
label.autowrap_mode = TextServer.AUTOWRAP_WORD_SMART

label.text = quest_data
$VBoxContainer.add_child(label)
quest.updated.connect(update_quest)
quest_labels[quest.id] = label
func update_quest(quest_id, current_amount):
var quest = Quests.get_quest(quest_id)
var quest_data_text = "%s \n %s/%s \n \n %s" %
[quest.title, quest.current_amount,
quest.target_amount, quest.description]
var label = quest_labels[quest_id]
label.text = quest_data_text

With that, we close our quest system onboarding, and you are ready to understand how you will use it
for our online multiplayer version of the prototype! You’ve seen it all, how objects can update quest
progress, where quests are gathered and stored, how we load and save a player’s progress in a given
quest, how we implement a node to represent a quest in our game, and finally, how this all comes
together to display the quest’s information to the player in a UI element.
In the upcoming section, we will see how the World’s Main node works. Its main responsibility is to
ensure the game world is running as planned with all objects in their proper places.

Initializing the game world
To ensure that the game runs as we plan, at least its initialization, we have the Main node. It
essentially spawns 30 Asteroid instances using the Asteroids node and creates an instance of the
Player scene using the Players node. As explained at the beginning of the Breaking down the World

scene section, the latter two nodes are spawners.
In this local gameplay prototype, the Main node is really simple, but keep it in mind, especially
regarding its responsibility, when you start implementing the online multiplayer features. For
reference, the Main node script is shown in the following code snippet:
extends Node
@onready var asteroid_spawner = $Asteroids
@onready var player_spawner = $Players
func _ready():
for i in 30:
asteroid_spawner.spawn()
create_spaceship()
func create_spaceship():
player_spawner.spawn()

Note that it has a create_spaceship() method instead of directly calling the player_spawner.spawn()
method. This will help you with your job later on, so you can thank our fake team for making your
job easier.
And with that, your onboarding process is done! We’ve seen how the player controls their spaceship,
how the asteroids take hits and explode, increasing the player’s progress in a quest, how the quest
system works, and what it handles and outputs. We’ve also just seen how the game world initializes
and establishes where each object should be and how many of them there should be.

Now, it’s time for the magic. In the upcoming sections, we are going to see how we will turn this
prototype into an online multiplayer game prototype where players can join anytime, so there won’t
be a lobby. We will also understand what we need to do to keep the players’ world in sync with the
server’s world and how we separate the server and client’s responsibilities using the same script. This
will be useful especially when handling our databases to prevent players from cheating and
completing quests without effort.

Logging the player in to the server
In this section, we will implement a different type of logging system. This time, the players don’t
have a lobby screen where they wait for other players to join a game and start a match. No, here the
world is always active; it doesn’t start only when the players ask the server to start the match or the
game. And this type of connection requires a different approach.
The major problem is that since the game world is always active and running, the players who join
this world need to sync their game instance to the server’s game instance. This includes the position
of objects, new objects that usually are not part of the world, for instance, other players and the
number of objects (in our case, how many asteroids are currently available), and many other factors
necessary to build a shared world.
It all starts with the player authentication, because now the server and the client are in different parts
of the game life cycle; while the player is just opening the game, the server is already handling the
game world.

Authenticating players
Don’t panic, yet. Besides the conditions of authentication being different, the overall logic is very
much the same as the one we’ve been using so far. The major difference here is that we will need to
have an Authentication node dedicated to each side of the connection performing the authentication
procedure according to the client or server’s responsibilities.
These nodes will be on the two major points of interaction for each side of the connection:
For the client, in this case the player, we will have the Authentication node on the LoggingScreen scene
For the server we will have its Authentication node on the World scene itself, waiting for players to join

Note that for each side of this relationship, we will implement distinct authentication procedures. So,
besides both nodes being called Authentication and having the same path, in other words, both being
direct children of a parent node called Main, they will be totally different classes.

They will need shared methods, but we will see that the method implementations are different. This is
all due to how RPCs work. Remember, when making an RPC, it will look for a node with the same
node path in all peer game instances, and this node must have all the same methods as the one
making the RPC, even if we are not calling these other methods. This means that the server side will
share client-side methods, and vice versa.
This will get less confusing once we start to implement it, so let’s open the res://09.prototypingspace-adventure/LoggingScreen.tscn scene and implement the client side of the authentication.

Implementing client-side authentication
In the LoggingScreen scene, you will notice a scene structure meant to be a simple logging screen
where players insert their credentials, get authenticated, and log in to the game. This is a bit similar to
the lobby we’ve been using in previous chapters, such as the one in Chapter 8, Designing an Online
Co-Op Platformer.
This time, we don’t have a panel showcasing the current players; this is not necessary as players can
join the game and experience individually even when other players are not around. Note that the
scene’s script is attached to the Authentication node this time, instead of attached to the Main node.
This is because in the World scene, the Main node has other responsibilities, so it’s better to delegate
the authentication to an exclusive node. Due to that, LoggingScreen’s authentication was also
delegated to its Authentication node.

Figure 9.9 – The LoggingScreen scene’s node hierarchy

Now, open the res://09.prototyping-space-adventure/LoggingScreen.gd script file. You will notice
there are a lot of things in common with what we’ve created in chapter 3, Making a Lobby to Gather
Players Together, so let’s focus on the necessary work we need to do this time:

1. Since this time we are only communicating with the server, we don’t need to start the game on all peers, so in the
_on_StartButton_pressed() callback, we need to send an RPC directly to the server asking it to start the game:
func _on_StartButton_pressed():
rpc_id(1, "start_game")
2. The server itself will then authenticate the player, and if everything goes well, the server will also call the client’s
start_game() method, which has a different implementation. In the client, start_game() is an RPC that only the network
authority can call and is called locally. When called, it switches the current scene to the next_scene property, which in this
case will be the World scene:
@rpc("authority", "call_local")
func start_game():
get_tree().change_scene_to_file(next_scene)

Alright, most of the code is very similar to the one we have in the implementations of the Lobby
scene. This one is cleaner as we’ve removed other methods such as the ones we used to display
logged players or display avatars.
With these changes, this code is able to send a direct request authentication for the server and start the
game on this instance of the game. In the next section, we will see the other side of this system, the
server side.

Implementing server-side authentication
Now, the server-side authentication is a bit trickier. Previously, all that we needed to do was to handle
the player’s authentication requests. But now, since the authentication happens while the server is
already running the game, we need to transfer the responsibility of setting up the hosting as well.
This means that if the current instance is the server, it will need to set up ENetMultiplayerPeer on top
of authenticating players’ credentials as well. Open the res://09.prototyping-spaceadventure/Authentication.gd file and let’s make the necessary changes.

Again, we will focus only on what we need to change based on the work we did previously, so feel
free to go through the other parts of the script if you don’t remember how this all works:
1. In the _ready() callback, let’s create the ENet server using the default PORT. Remember, since this script will be running on
both the client and server, we will need to check whether the current instance running is the server. For that, we use the
multiplayer.is_server() method. After setting up the server, we load the users’ database to properly authenticate them
as usual:
func _ready():
if multiplayer.is_server():
peer.create_server(PORT)
multiplayer.multiplayer_peer = peer
load_database()
2. The second thing we need to do is to connect as a client if the instance is not the server:
else:

peer.create_client(ADDRESS, PORT)
multiplayer.multiplayer_peer = peer
3. The third thing we need to do is to set up the start_game() method to respond to all peers remotely, so this method won’t be
called locally in the server’s instance. Inside this method, we will make an RPC to the peer that requested the game to start telling
their instance to start the game.

This allows the server to dictate whether the player can or cannot join the game, and if the player
happens to try to connect locally, simply pressing the start button won’t actually start the game as
their instance will hang, waiting for a response from the server:
@rpc("any_peer", "call_remote")
func start_game():
var peer_id = multiplayer.get_remote_sender_id()
rpc_id(peer_id, "start_game")

With these changes, we are able to have a server that can run an independent instance of the game
and wait for players to join it. Using the rpc_id() method, we can pinpoint which peer we want to
contact and establish direct communication between instances of the game. In this case, we did that
with the server and the client, but we can do it between two clients as well if necessary.
In the next section, we are going to focus on how to sync the server’s persistent World scene with the
players’ World scene, which may not reflect the current state of the shared game world.

Syncing the World scenes
When the player logs in to the game, their world will likely be different from the server’s world. For
instance, only the server should be able to spawn asteroids, and even if the client were able to spawn
them, there would be nothing to guarantee they would be in the same position. So, this is the first
thing we are going to fix.
In the next section, we will see how we can sync the Asteroid instances from the server’s world into
the client’s world.

Syncing the asteroids
Open the Asteroid scene again and let’s add a new MultiplayerSynchronizer as its child. This
MultiplayerSynchronizer will replicate the asteroid’s position and top_level properties. The

following figure showcases the asteroid’s MultiplayerSynchronizer Replication Menu settings.

Figure 9.10 – The Asteroid’s MultiplayerSynchronizer Replication Menu settings

Then, we are going to use something really interesting regarding network replication. The
MultiplayerSynchronizer node has a property called Public Visibility, which essentially enables the

replication of these properties to all connected peers. But we don’t want that. We only want it to
replicate these properties once the players are logged in and within the World scene. So, we will
toggle that property off. In the following screenshot, we can see what this property should look like
in the Inspector.

Figure 9.11 – The asteroid’s MultiplayerSynchronizer Public Visibility property in the Inspector

Before we move on to the next necessary steps, I want to present you with a trick that will help you
synchronize relevant objects all at once. Add MultiplayerSynchronizer node inside a group so that
you can perform a group call using SceneTree later on. In this case, to be clearer about the group’s
intent, let’s call it Sync. The following screenshot showcases this group with the Asteroid node’s
MultiplayerSynchronizer node inside of it.

Figure 9.12 – The asteroid’s MultiplayerSynchronizer inside the Sync group

With that, the Asteroid instances are ready to replicate their properties on the client’s World instance.
But there’s still a problem. The client’s World instance should not create these Asteroid instances;
instead, only the server should be able to spawn these objects. So, let’s open the World scene and set it
up for synchronization:
1. The first thing we need to do is to add a MultiplayerSpawner node that points to the Asteroids node. Let’s call it
AsteroidsMultiplayerSpawner, and it should have the Asteroid scene set up as its first and only element in the Auto
Spawn List property. We can see these properties configured in the following screenshot:

Figure 9.13 – The world’s AsteroidsMultiplayerSpawner properties in the Inspector

This will ensure that all the instances of the server’s world asteroids will also exist in the client’s
world as well. But note that until now, they will only be spawned, but not synced yet. So, let’s fix
that. Open the World script and let’s set it up for the sync logic.
2. First things first, in the _ready() callback, we need to prevent the World node from spawning asteroids if it isn’t the server. It
should request synchronization from the server instead. For that, it will make an RPC to the server’s sync_world method,
which we will create in the next step:
func _ready():
if not multiplayer.get_unique_id() == 1:
rpc_id(1, "sync_world")
else:
for i in 30:
asteroid_spawner.spawn()
3. Then, let’s create the sync_world() RPC method, which can be called by any peer locally. It needs to be called locally
because we will tell the server’s Asteroid instances’ MultiplayerSynchronizer nodes, which are in the Sync group, to
add the player to their visibility list, effectively syncing the Asteroid instances.
@rpc("any_peer", "call_local")
func sync_world():
var player_id = multiplayer.get_remote_sender_id()
get_tree().call_group("Sync", "set_visibility_for
",player_id, true)
set_visibility_for() is a method from the MultiplayerSynchronizer node that adds a peer to its

visibility list, which basically means a whitelist of peers it should synchronize to.
For that, it uses the peer’s ID and receives a Boolean to tell it whether this peer should or shouldn’t
see the replication of the properties set in MultiplayerSynchronizer Replication Menu. This works
because we get the ID of the player who requested to sync using the
multiplayer.get_remote_sender_id() method, so whoever requests to sync will be synced.

This is all we need for the syncing of the asteroids. Now, we are still missing the players and their
spaceships, right? In the next section, we will see how to remotely create Player instances on all
connected peers, sync their spaceships, and only allow their owner to control the spaceship.

Syncing the players
It’s time to put our players together in this vast world. In this section, we will understand how we
sync players’ scenes that were already in the World when another player joins the game.
Let’s get started:
1. Still in the World script, we are going to turn the create_spaceship() method into an RPC method that any peer can call
remotely:
@rpc("any_peer", "call_remote")
func create_spaceship():

2. Due to how the Players spawner works, we won’t be able to do the proper renaming and identification of the newly created
spaceship before it syncs to other peers. So, the create_spaceship() method takes the responsibility of spawning
spaceships as well.

Before we add the spaceship instance as a child of the Players node, we will set its name to
match the player’s peer ID. This ensures this instance has a unique name and we can use this
name to identify the proper authority of the instance:
var player_id = multiplayer.get_remote_sender_id()
var spaceship = preload("res://09.prototyping-spaceadventure/Actors/Player/Player2D.tscn").instantiate()
spaceship.name = str(player_id)
$Players.add_child(spaceship)
3. Now we come to a very important part. We are going to implement the setup_multiplayer() method in the player, which
essentially does the same thing as the one we made in Chapter 8, Designing an Online Co-Op Platformer. So, we can make an
RPC to this function here after waiting for 0.1 seconds:
await(get_tree().create_timer(0.1).timeout)
spaceship.rpc("setup_multiplayer", player_id)

With that, whenever a player asks the server’s World instance to create a spaceship, it will
instantiate a Player scene, assign it a unique ID, and ask it to configure its multiplayer settings.
Remember, since we are doing this using an RPC, this means this Player instance will configure
its multiplayer settings in all currently connected peers. But as it is now, only the server has an
instance of this Player node.
4. To fix that, we are going to add another MultiplayerSpawner node called PlayersMultiplayerSpawner to the
World scene. Its Spawn Path should point to the Players node and its Auto Spawn List should have the path to the Player
scene, res://09.prototyping-space-adventure/Actors/Player/Player2D.tscn. In the following
screenshot, we can see these properties set up in the Inspector.

Figure 9.14 – The World scene’s PlayersMultiplayerSpawner node properties in the Inspector

Now, since the instances created by the PlayersMultiplayerSpawner node will still not be configured
yet, we also need to call their setup_multiplayer() method as soon as they spawn.
5. For that, let’s connect the PlayersMultiplayerSpawner‘s spawned signal to the World scene’s Main node script, and
inside then _on_players_multiplayer_spawner() callback, we make an RPC on the recently spawned node passing
set_up_multiplayer as argument. This time, we will use the node’s name as an argument instead of player_id. This is
because we don’t have access to the ID of the player that is supposed to own this instance, so we can use the instance name
instead:
func _on_players_multiplayer_spawner_spawned(Node):
Node.rpc("setup_multiplayer", int(str(Node.name)))
6. With that, every time a player joins the game, the server will create a new Player instance for them and set this instance up. This
also works for Player instances that are already in the server’s World.

If a player joins the game, the server will spawn all other Player instances that are also currently
playing. Now, we need the Player scene itself to sync its relevant properties to its peers and to
implement its setup_multiplayer method.
7. Open the res://08.designing-online-platformer/Actors/Player/Player2D.tscn scene, and let’s start by
adding MultiplayerSynchronizer node as a child of the Player node. This MultiplayerSynchronizer node
should sync the Player instance’s position and top_level properties and the Spaceship node’s position and
rotation properties. The following screenshot showcases the Player scene’s MultiplayerSynchronizer Replication Menu:

Figure 9.15 – The Player’s MultiplayerSynchronizer Replication Menu

Since this MultiplayerSynchronizer node will work by syncing physics properties, we need to set its
Visibility Update Mode property to Physics. This will prevent some weird behaviors such as bodies
overlapping and unhandled or mishandled collisions.
Now, let’s implement the setup_multiplayer() method. In the following instructions, we are going to
create an RPC method that checks whether the current instance is a competence of the current player
and disables some important processes to prevent interaction from players into instances they don’t
own, as well as preventing overwriting properties synchronized by the network.
8. In the Player.gd script, let’s start by creating an RPC method called setup_multiplayer that any peer can call locally. It
should receive player_id as an argument:
@rpc("any_peer", "call_local")
func setup_multiplayer(player_id):
9. Then, inside this method, we need to compare whether the player_id value received as an argument matches the current
player’s peer ID. We will store this information in a variable called is_player to use for further reference:
var self_id = multiplayer.get_unique_id()
var is_player = self_id == player_id
10. With this information in hand, we can set up the player’s processes. We also need to disable camera if this isn’t the current
player and make camera the current camera if it is:
set_process(is_player)
set_physics_process(is_player)
camera.enabled = is_player
if is_player:
camera.make_current()
11. Finally, we set the player’s multiplayer authority to be player_id. This will ultimately prevent this client from making any
changes on this Player instance and propagating them on the network:
set_multiplayer_authority(player_id)

With that, we have finished all we need to do in order for players to spawn and control their
spaceships in the game. If you test the game now, you will be able to put two players together and

control their spaceships only on their game instances. For reference, the following code snippet
showcases the complete setup_multiplayer() method’s code implementation:
@rpc("any_peer", "call_local")
func setup_multiplayer(player_id):
var self_id = multiplayer.get_unique_id()
var is_player = self_id == player_id
set_process(is_player)
set_physics_process(is_player)
camera.enabled = is_player
if is_player:
camera.make_current()
set_multiplayer_authority(player_id)

Throughout this section, we learned how we can spawn already existing objects to a player’s game
instances when they log in when the game world is already running. We also saw how we can
selectively synchronize objects using the MultiplayerSynchronizer.set_visibility_for() method.
On top of that, we used the MultiplayerSpawner.spawned signal to configure spawned instances of an
object on the client’s side. In our case, we needed to configure the player multiplayer settings. To do
that, we created a method that checks whether this instance belongs to the current player, properly
disabling or enabling its processing and camera and setting its multiplayer authority accordingly.
In the next section, we are going to learn how we can separate some responsibilities in the game to
prevent cheating and to establish a more coherent multiplayer system, for instance, preventing a
player’s game instances from deleting asteroids as they are the responsibility of the server.
We will also see how we can sync players’ actions on all peers. This will be useful to replicate actions
locally; for instance, when a player shoots on their game instance, all other game instances should
perform the shooting as well.

Separating server and client responsibilities
Now that we have players sharing the same world, we need to establish which actions they are
responsible for and which actions are part of the server’s responsibility. For instance, if a player
shoots on their game instance and their bullet damages an asteroid but this asteroid was already
destroyed by another player, what should happen? For this kind of situation, the server is the perfect
mediator to prevent instance conflicts.
With all this context in place, players tell all peers, including the server, to update their Player
instance according to their actions, but only the server should have the authority to manage the actual
impact of these actions in the game world, such as if the player managed to destroy an asteroid or not.
In the next section, we are going to understand how players can sync their actions, not only their
objects’ properties, across all network-connected peers.

Shooting bullets on all instances
Since the Player scene’s Spaceship node movement is already synced by the
MultiplayerSynchronizer node, we can focus our efforts on syncing the Bullet instances’ movement

now. One way we could do that would be to use the MultiplayerSpawner and
MultiplayerSynchronizer nodes to spawn Bullet instances remotely and replicate their position,

rotation, and so on. But instead, we can make an RPC telling all Spaceship instances to call the
fire() method on their Weapon2D nodes.

This is a quick and cheap way to do this. As the Bullet nodes have a constant trajectory, there’s no
reason to sync their movement properties. The only thing relevant is where they start, that is, the
spawning position, and the direction they should move. Both these properties are being synced
already by the Player node’s MultiplayerSynchronizer node. So, we can leverage them. Nice trick,
right?
To do this, open the res://09.prototyping-space-adventure/Actors/Player/Player2D.gd script, and
in the _process() callback, change the weapon.fire() line to weapon.rpc("fire"), as shown in the
following code snippet:
func _process(delta):
if Input.is_action_pressed(shoot_action):
weapon.rpc("fire")

If you test the game now, you should see the Player instances’ Spaceship nodes shooting bullets on
all game instances: server and clients. In the following screenshot, we can see a player shooting being
replicated on the server’s game instance:

Figure 9.16 – The Payer scene’s Spaceship node shooting Bullet instances on the server’s game instance using an
RPC function

Now that the Player instances can shoot bullets on every peer instance of the game, we need to
understand who should manage the damage calculation and the destruction of the objects the Bullet
nodes hit. We’ve already talked about that, and this responsibility is the server’s.
But how do we do that? In the next section, we are going to break down the Asteroid nodes’ behavior
in order to separate what should happen on the client’s side and what should happen on the server’s
side.

Calculating an asteroid’s damage
Here, it’s time to use the multiplayer.is_server() method extensively. We need to break down the
Asteroid node’s behavior and establish what should happen when the Bullet instances on a client’s

game instance hit an Asteroid node and what should happen when these Bullet instances hit an
Asteroid node on the server side.

Open the res://09.prototyping-space-adventure/Objects/Asteroid/Asteroid.gd script, and let’s
implement the damage-taking behavior, respecting the responsibilities of each side of the connection:
1. The first thing we need to do is prevent applying any damage to the Asteroid node if the current peer isn’t the server. So, in a
client’s game instance, the Bullet node should hit the Asteroid node and disappear, but should not apply damage to the
Asteroid node. To do that, in the _on_hurt_area_2d_damage_taken() callback, we are going to check whether the
peer is the server, and if it is, we call the apply_damage() method, passing damage as an argument:
func _on_hurt_area_2d_damage_taken(damage):
if multiplayer.is_server():
apply_damage(damage)
2. Now, in the apply_damage() method, after doing the proper calculation, the server must tell the Asteroid instances on all
peers to play their proper animation, either playing "hit" or "explode". But here’s the trick: the animator doesn’t have an
RPC method to do that.

So, instead, we are going to extract this behavior into two RPC methods and call these methods.
These RPC methods should be called only by the network authority, and they should also be
called locally:
func apply_damage(damage):
health -= damage
if health < 1:
rpc("explode")
elif health > 0:
rpc("hit")
@rpc("authority", "call_local")
func explode():
animator.play("explode")
@rpc("authority", "call_local")
func hit():
animator.play("hit")
3. The last thing we need to do is to allow only the server to call the queue_free() method on the Asteroid nodes, preventing
players from cheating and completing the quest in unpredictable ways. To do that, in the
_on_animation_player_animation_finished() callback, we are going to check whether the peer is the server and
call queue_free() if the current animation is "explode":
func _on_animation_player_animation_finished(anim_name):
if multiplayer.is_server():
if anim_name == "explode":
queue_free()

Since the server, which is the Asteroid node’s multiplayer authority, is removing the Asteroid
instance from its SceneTree, the World node’s AsteroidsMultiplayerSpawner node will ensure that
the Asteroid instances spawned on the clients’ game instances will also be removed as well. Isn’t
the Godot Engine’s Network API clever?
With that, each side of the connection is performing its duty. The client side plays animations based
on the Asteroid node’s state, while the server side deals with the actual impacts of Bullet nodes
hitting Asteroid nodes. In this section, we saw how we can work around the issue when a behavior

needs to be replicated remotely on all peers, but the built-in class, for instance the AnimationPlayer,
doesn’t have a way to do it.
We also learned how to separate things and give each side of the connection the power to execute
their responsibility. While the client side must instantiate bullet’s and do all the processing of the
shooting, the server side does its part by processing the damage dealt by the Bullet nodes and
handling the Asteroid node’s life cycle.
In the next section, we are going to strengthen this knowledge by applying the same principles to the
quest system. How does the player retrieve their quests? What is the client’s responsibility? Should
the client store the player’s progress? What about the server? How does it handle clients’ requests and
maintain information consistently between play sessions? That’s what we are going to talk about.

Storing and retrieving data on the server
It’s time to handle a sensitive topic when it comes to online adventure games: databases. Note that in
this book, we are not focusing on the best and most secure way to handle and protect a database.
Instead, we are practicing and understanding what the Godot Engine Network API allows us to
achieve and exploring its possibilities.
That said, in this section, we are going to implement the necessary steps to establish a
communication channel where the client can retrieve its quests data from the server and send their
progress updates to the server.
To do that, we are going to work with the two main classes in our quest system, QuestSingleton node
and the QuestDatabase node. But before we set these classes up for this new challenge, we need to
change how the database is structured. Since now the QuestDatabase node will work by delivering
and handling multiple players’ data, the PlayerProgress.json file needs to have its data linked to a
user. So, let’s create these fake users, matching the ones in FakeDatabase.json file, and store this
arbitrary data.
Open the res://09.prototyping-space-adventure/Quests/PlayerProgress.json file and create two
new keys, one for user1 and another for user2. Then, add some manual data matching the original
structure for each user key:
{
"user1":{
"asteroid_1":{
"completed":false,
"progress":4
}
},
"user2":{
"asteroid_1":{

"completed":false,
"progress":2
}
}
}

Now, with this in mind, remember that we can, and should, use the user we have stored in the
AuthenticationCredentials singleton to refer to any sensitive user data. This is important because

it’s how we are going to properly manage users’ requests and deliver the data accordingly. In the next
section, we are going to see how QuestSingleton node should retrieve and update quest data.

Implementing the quest system’s client side
It’s time to finally have our quest system ready to work in a network where players can retrieve
quests from a remote database, make progress on them, and store their information for the future. In
this section, we are going to see what the QuestSingleton node’s role is in this online multiplayer
environment.
So, let’s open the res://09.prototyping-space-adventure/Quests/QuestSingleton.gd script and get
started with that. In the following instructions, we will see how we can retrieve and update quest data
in a remote QuestDatabase:
1. The retrieve_quests() method needs a complete, but simpler and more elegant, revamp. The easiest way to create new
quests in this online environment is to make the client request the remote QuestDatabase to create them remotely. We will see
how this happens in depth in the Implementing the quest system’s server section.
2. But for now, we will wait for 0.1 seconds to guarantee that everything is in place, and then we can make an RPC on the
QuestDatabase node’s get_player_quests() method if this QuestSingleton node is not the server’s. Remember to
pass AuthenticationCredentials.user property as an argument to the get_player_quests() method:
func retrieve_quests():
if multiplayer.is_server():
return
await(get_tree().create_timer(0.1).timeout)
QuestDatabase.rpc_id(1, "get_player_quests",
AuthenticationCredentials.user)
3. Now, since the server’s QuestDatabase node will create the quests on the client’s QuestSingleton node, we need to turn
the create_quest() method into an RPC method that only the authority can call remotely:
@rpc("authority", "call_remote")
func create_quest(quest_data):
4. Finally, in the increase_quest_progress() method, we need to call the
QuestDatabase.update_player_progress() method using an RPC directly to the server as well. Let’s not forget to
also pass AuthenticationCredentials.user as an argument as well:
func increase_quest_progress(quest_id, amount):
if not quest_id in quests.keys():
return

var quest = quests[quest_id]
quest.current_amount += amount
QuestDatabase.rpc_id(1, "update_player_progress",
quest_id, quest.current_amount, quest.completed,
AuthenticationCredentials.user)

With that, the QuestSingleton node will ask the server’s QuestDatabase node to create the current
player’s quests, and whenever the player makes progress in a quest, the client’s QuestSingleton node
updates the server’s QuestDatabase node about the current quest’s progress, ultimately delegating to
the server the responsibility of handling this important data.
Now, my friends, comes the last piece of our puzzle. In the next section, we are going to understand
how the server side of this system works now that it is put in an online multiplayer environment.

Implementing the quest system’s server side
In this section, we will add the necessary functionalities to the QuestDatabase node in order for it to
properly provide and store players’ quest data. To do that, we are going to use RPCs extensively
together with the multiplayer.is_server() method to prevent some behaviors from happening on the
players’ instances of the QuestDatabase node.
We do this mainly to maintain the quest data only on the server side, so clients don’t run into the
temptation to cheat directly on their machines. This will be an extensive section, so take a breather.
We’ve been through quite a bit of information up to this point. Take a pause, and once you feel ready,
come right back.
Ready? Okay, open the res://09.prototyping-space-adventure/Quests/QuestDatabase.gd script and
let’s get started. In the upcoming instructions, we are going to tweak the current QuestDatabase
node’s methods and even create new ones in order to make it work as it should, starting with…the
_ready() method:

1. In the _ready() callback, we should only load the database files if the current peer is the server:
func _ready():
if multiplayer.is_server():
load_database()
2. We do the same thing in the _notification() callback. We should only store the files if the current peer is the server, so let’s
add this check together with the notification check:
func _notification(notification):
if notification == NOTIFICATION_WM_CLOSE_REQUEST
and multiplayer.is_server():
store_database()
3. Moving on to get_player_quests(), it should now be an RPC method that any peer can call remotely:
@rpc("any_peer", "call_remote")

func get_player_quests():
4. Since it’s now an RPC, we will store the peer ID of the client that requested this data so we can use this later on when we respond
to the request:
func get_player_quests():
var requester_id = multiplayer.get_remote_
sender_id()
5. Then, add an argument called user to the method’s signature so we know which key to look at in the progress_database
dictionary. Remember, now each user has their own key with their progress data in the PlayerProgress.json file, so this is
how we access the proper user data:
func get_player_quests(user):
var requester_id = multiplayer.get_remote_
sender_id()
var quests = {}
for quest in progress_database[user]:
6. Now, we have some changes to make in the get_progress() and get_completion() method signatures, right? We need
to add the user as an argument. So, let’s call them using this argument:
for quest in progress_database[user]:
var quest_data = {}
quest_data["id"] = quest
quest_data["title"] = get_title(quest)
quest_data["description"] = get_description(quest)
quest_data["target_amount"] = get_target_amount
(quest)
quest_data["current_amount"] = get_progress
(quest, user)
quest_data["completed"] = get_completion
(quest, user)
quests[quest] = quest_data
7. Now, we need to fix the methods’ signatures to match the previous changes and allow them to receive a user argument and
access the user key in the progress_database:
func get_progress(quest_id, user):
return progress_database[user][quest_id]["progress"]
func get_completion(quest_id, user):
return progress_database[user][quest_id]
["completed"]
8. Back to the get_player_quests() method – for each quest key found in progress_database dictionary for a user,
we will make an RPC directly to the create_quest() method of the client’s QuestSingleton node, passing the
quest_data dictionary we just created:
for quest in progress_database[user]:
var quest_data = {}
quest_data["id"] = quest
quest_data["title"] = get_title(quest)
quest_data["description"] = get_description
(quest)
quest_data["target_amount"] = get_target_
amount(quest)
quest_data["current_amount"] = get_progress
(quest, user)
quest_data["completed"] = get_completion

(quest, user)
quests[quest] = quest_data
Quests.rpc_id(requester_id, "create_quest",
quest_data)
9. Finally, let’s also turn update_player_progress() into an RPC method that any peer can call remotely. It should also
receive a user argument to update the progress on the proper user key in progress_database. This should only happen if
this is the server’s instance of the QuestDatabase node, of course:
@rpc("any_peer", "call_remote")
func update_player_progress(quest_id, current_amount,
completed, user):
if multiplayer.is_server():
progress_database[user][quest_id]["progress"] =
current_amount
progress_database[user][quest_id]["completed"] =
completed

And that wraps up our quest system and database management logic on both the client and server
sides. If you test the res://09.prototyping-space-adventure/MainMenu.tscn scene and log in as a
user, you will be able to see QuestPanel displaying the quest data correctly with the current player’s
progress on the quest. In the following screenshot, we can see user2’s quest information:

Figure 9.17 – QuestPanel displaying user2’s Destroy 10 Asteroids quest information

The following screenshot displays user1’s quest information. So, we can assume that our system is
working as it should, properly loading, displaying, and modifying players’ quest progress:

Figure 9.18 – QuestPanel displaying user1’s Destroy 10 Asteroids quest information

With that, our top-down space adventure prototype is ready! Congratulations on making it all the way
to this point. This chapter tested out everything we’ve seen so far extensively, and it closes Part 2,
Creating Online Multiplayer Mechanics, of this book, where we created five prototypes to learn the
ins and outs of Godot Engine’s high-level Network API.
Hopefully, by now, you feel confident in building and testing more prototypes on your own. In Part
3, Optimizing the Online Experience, which we are going to start in the next chapter, we are going to
see how we can use the available tools to improve upon the experiences we created in Part 2. We will
talk about how to debug and profile the network, optimize data requests, implement optimization
techniques such as prediction and interpolation, cache data, and more.

Summary
In this chapter, we learned how to allow players to join in the middle of a game run; how to
synchronize their game instances; how to load, retrieve, send, and store information on a remote
database; how to create a quest system; and overall, how to structure the very basics of an online
multiplayer adventure game. In the next chapter, we are going to learn how to debug and profile the
network so we can find bottlenecks and potential areas of improvement and optimization for our
games. See you there!
OceanofPDF.com

Part 3:Optimizing the Online Experience
One of the core aspects of developing an application, especially a game, is to make the experience
smooth and keep it without any hiccups or lag. When talking about games, which are real-time
experiences, this is even more relevant. So, throughout this part of the book, we learn about the
debugging and profiling tools necessary to assess potential bottlenecks and then we implement
techniques to effectively optimize the network usage of the final project from Part 2.
This part contains the following chapters:
Chapter 10, Debugging and Profiling the Network
Chapter 11, Optimizing Data Requests
Chapter 12, Lag and Packet Loss Compensation
Chapter 13, Caching Data to Decrease Bandwidth

OceanofPDF.com

10
Debugging and Profiling the Network
With Chapter 9, Creating an Online Adventure Prototype, we concluded Part 2, Creating Online
Multiplayer Mechanics, of our journey, where we learned how we can use Godot Engine’s HighLevel Network API to turn local gameplay mechanics into online multiplayer mechanics. Now, it’s
time to go beyond implementation and start the optimization of our mechanics. This chapter
inaugurates Part 3, Optimizing the Online Experience, of our journey through creating online
multiplayer games with Godot Engine.
It’s important that you have read, understood, and implemented the content provided in Chapter 9,
Creating an Online Adventure Prototype, because we are going to use the final project as our main
subject through the following chapters in Part 3.
In this specific chapter, we are going to understand how we can use Godot Engine’s built-in
Debugger dock to assess and profile our game performance. For that, we are going to understand and
use tools such as the Profiler tab, which helps us understand the rendering time of each frame by
showing how many resources each function takes and how this impacts the processing time. We are
also going to see one of the most important tools for our network craft, the Network Profiler tab,
which helps us understand how many network resources each node’s Remote Procedure Call (RPC)
functions are taking and how our MultiplayerSynchronizers are performing, giving us a good
overview of potential issues in our network implementation. Finally, we are going to learn how to use
the Debugger dock’s Monitors tab and the Performance singleton to figure out potential bottlenecks
in our game and gather data to design potential solutions.
By the end of this chapter, you will understand how to use the powerful Debugger tools, and the
elements in the following figure won’t scare you anymore; instead, they will be some of your most
reliable allies:

Figure 10.1 – The Debugger’s Network Profiler (top) and Monitors (bottom) showing and plotting profiling data

Don’t be surprised if you come back to this figure at the end of the chapter and understand what each
of those graphs and charts means. You will get used to them, as they will appear in abundance
throughout the next chapters, especially Chapter 11, Optimizing Data Requests.

Technical requirements
As mentioned previously, it’s crucial that you’ve read and followed the instructions provided in
Chapter 9, Creating an Online Adventure Prototype. Here, in this chapter, we are going to use the
final product you should have by the end of the previous chapter. You can access the resources for
this chapter in the repository provided in the following link:
https://github.com/PacktPublishing/The-Essential-Guide-to-Creating-Multiplayer-Games-withGodot-4.0
With the result of Chapter 9, Creating an Online Adventure Prototype, ready, we can move on to
understanding how we can improve it.

Introducing Godot’s Debugger
The Debugger is a developer’s best friend. Most of the work we do doesn’t have anything to do with
creating and implementing features; instead, it has everything to do with assessing potential problems
these implementations cause and fixing them. The Debugger dock is where Godot Engine talks to us,
showing errors, warnings, resource consumption, object count, and more. So, we should listen
carefully and properly address the issues and data it shows us. We can even ask it to track custom
data, as we are going to see in the Using the Monitors tab section.
If you have been developing games with Godot Engine for enough time to run into errors, you have
probably stumbled on the Debugger dock more than you’d like to, right? In this section, we will go
in-depth to understand how to turn it into our best friend and actually wish it pops up. Let’s start by
understanding each of its tabs, how to read them, and what to expect from them, starting with the
most common and probably the one you’ve already had a hard time with: the Stack Trace tab.

Mastering the Stack Trace tab
When you click on the Debugger dock, Godot Engine’s editor will open the Stack Trace tab. Let’s
use the following figure to navigate it and understand what each of its elements does.

Figure 10.2 – The Debugger dock’s Stack Trace tab and its elements

You can see that each element of the Stack Trace tab in the figure is associated with a number, which
will facilitate a better understanding. In the following list, we have the element’s name and a brief
explanation about it:
The Stack Frames panel is the stack of functions that leads to an error or a breakpoint (highlighted and marked with 1 in Figure
10.2).
The Filter Stack Variables field is where you can filter variable names to display them in the panel below (highlighted and
marked with 2 in Figure 10.2).
The Members panel is where you can find the variables within a given script including temporary variables and scope-specific
variables. Here, you can also see and edit their values (highlighted and marked with 3 in Figure 10.2).

The Breakpoints panel is where you can see information about a breakpoint reached in the script of a given instance (highlighted
and marked with 4 in Figure 10.2).
The Skip Breakpoints button, when toggled on, allows the execution of the game to run ignoring breakpoints (highlighted and
marked with 5 in Figure 10.2).
The Copy Error button copies the current error, if any, to your clipboard (highlighted and marked with 6 in Figure 10.2).
Clicking on the Step Into button when the application is paused, including when it reaches a breakpoint, will execute the next
script instruction (i.e., line). It will enter in indented blocks it would naturally go into, executing the whole code (highlighted and
marked with 7 in Figure 10.2).
Clicking on the Step Over button when the application is paused, including when it reaches a breakpoint, will execute the next
script instruction (i.e., line) but skip indented blocks (highlighted and marked with 8 in Figure 10.2).
The Break button pauses the application as if it reached a breakpoint (highlighted and marked with 9 in Figure 10.2).
The Continue button resumes the application if it was paused (highlighted and marked with 10 in Figure 10.2).

With these elements at our disposal, we have the ability to experiment with our scripts and gather
invaluable information about our game. For instance, we can see step by step how Godot Engine
processes a given set of instructions using the Step Into button and see the stack of functions it
executes and how the objects’ variables change with each step.
A cool tip to use this to its fullest is to not be afraid to add breakpoints all over your scripts to
understand when, what, how, and why your objects change and the whole chain of events that caused
such changes.
In this section, we’ve gone through the Stack Trace tab, which gives us an overview of our game’s
flow and provides us with multiple ways of gathering information about the changes that happen
through this flow, allowing us to understand the whole chain of cause-effects that led to a given
change. This is especially helpful together with our next tab, the Errors tab. Let’s talk about it in the
next section.

Debugging with the Errors tab
It may sound weird but, in many situations, you might wish for Godot Engine to prompt an error,
especially when dealing with network features, as sometimes you are left waiting for something to
happen. And if the packets sent don’t reach their destination, you will be hanging there waiting for an
error to pop up, but packets not reaching their destination isn’t an error in itself. Still, it’s an
undesired situation that can leave you confused.
The Errors tab is where you work with thousands of other developers, who worked on the
development of Godot Engine’s core and identified thousands of errors and documented them so that
when they happen, you have some light on the issue and are able to fix it.

However, not only errors are displayed in this tab. The Errors tab also shows warnings about your
script. They don’t necessarily break your application but are something you should be aware of and
make a decision on. For instance, it’s common to get warnings about arguments in a function that are
not being used in the function’s implementation. The following figure displays the Error tab and its
elements associated with numbers, just like in the Mastering the Stack Trace tab section:

Figure 10.3 – The Session 1 Debugger dock’s Errors tab and its elements

Now, let’s understand what each of these elements is and how they can be useful for us:
The Errors and Warnings panel is where all the warnings and fatal and non-fatal errors are displayed. You can click on an error
or warning to expand it and go to the script line that triggered it. You can also double-click to expand an error or warning and
display the code stack that led to the error. When you double-click an expanded error or warning, you collapse it (highlighted and
marked with 1 in Figure 10.3).
The Expand All button expands all the errors and warnings (highlighted and marked with 2 in Figure 10.3).
The Collapse All button collapses all the errors and warnings (highlighted and marked with 3 in Figure 10.3).
The Clear button empties the Errors and Warnings panel (highlighted and marked with 4 in Figure 10.3).

Something interesting about dealing with errors and warnings is that you can create your own error or
warning messages. This is especially good when working with your teammates, but also, since we are
working with more than one instance of the game running, it’s a good way to compartmentalize
messages to their instance’s Error tab. As the Output dock is shared between all instances, it may
get really confusing to identify where a print() statement is coming from. So you can use the
push_error() and push_warning() built-in methods instead and Godot will only show them in the

game session’s Debugger dock that triggered the error or warning. The following figure showcases
the Error tab of Session 3 with a custom warning expanded so we can see where it comes from:

Figure 10.4 – The Session 3 Errors tab highlighting a custom warning among other built-in warnings

Notice that the Debugger button at the bottom tells us there’s a total of 20 errors and warnings, but
when we open the Errors tab in Session 3, there are only 13. This is because the other errors come
from other sessions and are in their respective Errors tabs.
With this powerful tool in our arsenal, we can trigger all sorts of errors and warnings in each
individual game session, allowing us to distinguish which session is the server, which ones are
players if any peer is getting a specific error that others aren’t, and so on. In the next section, we will
talk about our first performance-based debugging tab, the Profiler tab, where we can see how our
game is performing, how many resources it is taking, and which objects and functions are taking the
most out of our computer.

Exploring the Profiler tab
Most developers are always looking for the most efficient, cheap, and ingenious optimizations to
make their code run in a toaster. Well, while this is a nice and beautiful fantasy, the reality is that you
shouldn’t be so focused on optimizing your code unless you really need it. There’s a saying in the
industry that states, “Premature optimization is the doom of an application.”
Focus on the premature word here.
So, if premature optimization is something bad, but optimization in itself is something good, when is
the right time to optimize your game or application? The answer is not set in stone and there’s no
clear point that we can just point out and say “Here, after X days of development, it’s time to
optimize,” or “After you reach 80% of production, it’s the sign to optimize.” No, instead, you should
address issues as they show up and create the habit of diagnosing your game’s performance and
deciding whether, based on your audience’s computers’ specs, you are going to need to squeeze some
resources or not. This can happen on production day 1, or years after launching the game.

So, you need to engage in the habit of looking at how your game is performing and looking for areas
of improvement regularly.
The Profiler tab is one of your best allies in optimization. It is in this tab that you will see rendering
time, physics simulation time, audio processing time, and even how much time each of your custom
script functions is taking to process and how many times they were called. Let’s take a look at the
following figure and understand how the Profiler tab displays all this information.

Figure 10.5 – Session 2’s Debugger dock Profiler tab and its elements

Let’s understand the role of each of these elements, again, following their number in the figure:
The Functions panel displays the currently available functions that the profiler can track (highlighted and marked with 1 in
Figure 10.5).
The Start button initializes the measurement. Note that without toggling this on, the profiler won’t do anything. Profiling is quite
resource-intensive, so by default, it’s off (highlighted and marked with 2 in Figure 10.5).
The Clear button clears the current data gathered and displayed (highlighted and marked with 3 in Figure 10.5).
The Measure drop-down menu allows us to change the type of data we want to measure (highlighted and marked with 4 in Figure
10.5). The current options are as follows:
Frame Time (ms) is how many milliseconds Godot Engine takes to process a frame.
Average Time (ms) is how long a function takes to process. This averages the time of each call of any given function.
Frame % is the percentage a given function takes to process relative to the frame’s rendering time. For instance,
functions that are more resource-intensive take a bigger percentage.
Physics Frame % is the same as Frame % but relative to the physics frame process.
The Time Scope drop-down menu allows us to change the functions’ time scope that we want to measure (highlighted and marked
with 5 in Figure 10.5), and it has the following options:
Inclusive, which will take into account the time a function and all its nested functions took to render
Self, which will only take into account the individual time of each function without considering the function calls that
the measured function made

The Frame # stepper, or spinbox, marks the frame you are currently assessing (highlighted and marked with 6 in Figure 10.5).
Changing the frame number will allow you to accurately see the function’s measurements related to this frame in the Functions
panel.
The Measurement Graph panel is where the data is plotted so we can see it and access any unusual data. Each measured function
has its own color to make it easy to see it on the graph (highlighted and marked with 7 in Figure 10.5).

The Profiler is a powerful ally ready to give us access to important data regarding resource
management. Now that we understand how to use it, let’s move on to the second profiler on the
Debugger dock, Visual Profiler.
This one specializes in visual resources and potential bottlenecks so that we can improve our game’s
visuals regarding rendering and other visual procedures.

Exploring the Visual Profiler tab
On top of knowing how many processing resources your functions are taking from the CPU, it’s also
important to assess how much the rendering-related tasks (such as culling, lightning, and draw calls)
are taking from the GPU. The Visual Profiler tool can help you keep track of what is causing the
most delay in rendering a frame on the CPU and GPU. By identifying these sources of potential
bottlenecks caused by rendering, you can optimize your CPU and GPU performance.
The Visual Profiler tab is quite similar to the Profiler tab but specializes in tracking and measuring
rendering-related tasks. Take a look at the following figure to understand how the Visual Profiler tab
displays all of this information.

Figure 10.6 – Session 3’s Debugger dock Visual Profiler tab and its elements

In order to gain a deeper understanding of each of these elements, let us take a closer look at their
individual roles. Again, we are going to follow the elements in the numeric order:
The Tasks panel displays the rendering-related tasks divided into categories. Note that they are broken down into elements such as
the related viewport and canvas layer (highlighted and marked with 1 in Figure 10.6).

The Start button, just like in the Profiler tab, initializes the profiling. Visual profiling is also turned off by default (highlighted
and marked with 2 in Figure 10.6).
The Clear button clears the current data gathered in the profiling session (highlighted and marked with 3 in Figure 10.6).
The Measure drop-down menu (highlighted and marked with 4 in Figure 10.6) allows us to select two measurement options:
Frame Time (ms) is the time taken to render a frame in milliseconds
Frame % is the percentage a given procedure takes from the rendering time of a given frame

The Fit to Frame checkbox will fit the graph to the default frame scale (highlighted and marked with 5 in Figure 10.6). Disable it
to fit the graph onto over 60 Frames Per Second (FPS) portions.
The Linked checkbox zooms the CPU and the GPU graphs to fit the same scale (highlighted and marked with 6 in Figure 10.6).
The Frame # stepper, just like in the Profiler tab, marks the current frame you are assessing. Rendering tasks displayed in the
Tasks panel relate to this frame (highlighted and marked with 7 in Figure 10.6).

Visual Profiler is yet another powerful ally when optimizing the rendering performance of your
game and is a game-changing tool that can help you assess what may be causing lags and frame
drops in your game. In the next section, we are going to understand yet another powerful tool
available for us to assess our game’s health, the Monitors tab, where we can find all sorts of
interesting information regarding our game.
Well, let’s dive into it so we understand how each of these, among other available data, will help us
address potential issues in our game’s performance.

Exploring the Monitors tab
Here is the part where you can really feel like a game doctor. Monitors allows us to assess important
data as graphs and see the game’s overall health. In this tab, we can track performance-related data in
graphs. By default, it presents some useful data, such as the following:
Time-related data, such as FPS, process time, and physics process time
Memory-related data, such as static memory, dynamic memory, and message buffers
Object-related data, such as the total object count, resource count, node count, and orphan nodes

There’s a series of properties you can track and plot into graphs so you can analyze your game’s
health and spot potential areas for improvement. In the following figure, you can see the Debugger
Monitors tab with some properties being tracked and plotted. Note that these properties are toggled
on in the left panel by default. The Monitors tab will only plot charts for properties we toggle on in
the left panel:

Figure 10.7 – Session 2’s Debugger dock Monitors tab and its elements

The Monitors tab seems to be the simplest of the tabs we’ve seen so far, but it is still very powerful,
so let’s understand the two core elements that build it up:
The Monitor panel is where we can find the available monitors. A monitor is data marked for tracking. Note that there are plenty
of monitors by default. By using them, we can obtain some valuable information about our project’s health (highlighted and
marked with 1 in Figure 10.7).
The Graphs panel is where the monitors are plotted as graphs, and each monitor has its own graph and measures. Only the
monitors checked in the Monitor panel are plotted in the Graphs panel (highlighted and marked with 2 in Figure 10.7).

Note that there is no start, stop, or clear button on the Monitors tab. This is because Godot will
always track the monitorable data.
Something interesting about the Monitors tab is that, on top of the default monitors, we can also
create custom monitors using the Performance singleton. We are going to talk about that in the
Identifying the project’s bottlenecks section, where we will also talk about the Monitors panel in
depth. In the next section, we will talk about the Video RAM tab, where we can assess our videorelated resources.

Getting to know the Video RAM tab
The Video RAM tab is useful when you want to understand what resources are causing the most
impact on your video memory. This is of great help, especially in 3D games, but it can also be useful
for 2D games – for instance, when we want to assess whether we need to pack more sprites into a
single texture.
The Video RAM tab is quite a simple panel with the essential information you need to assess videorelated memory consumption. In the following figure, we can see it is made of a single table with
four columns inside a panel:

Figure 10.8 – Session 2’s Debugger dock Video RAM tab panel

This is an intuitive panel with the necessary data we need to understand the video memory usage of
our resources. Let’s understand the type of information each of these columns presents:
Resource Path is the path in our Godot Engine’s project to the resource.
Type is the type of the tracked resource. In the preceding figure, all the resources are of the Texture type, but this can be a variety
of other types. It can be useful to compare whether it’s worth making an AtlasTexture Resource or a set of simple textures,
for instance.
The Format column is where we can find the data regarding the file’s format.
Usage is what we actually want in the end. It answers an important question: Given all the previous information, how much
memory does this resource take?

NOTE
There’s an option to save the table as a CSV file if you want to export it and make some table operations or create charts.
This can be very useful for presentations, for instance.

The Video RAM tab in Godot Engine’s Debugger dock is useful for assessing video-related memory
consumption in games. It presents information on the resource path, type, format, and usage of video
memory for each resource, helping us understand which resources we can improve, combine,
remove, mix, and match to squeeze our available memory and open space for more resources. This
kind of optimization is also good for low-end devices as, by using this, we can decrease the necessary
specs to run the game. In the next section, we will talk about the Misc tab, where we can find the last
clicked Control node during the debugging section.

Grasping the Misc tab
As mentioned previously, the Debugger Misc tab allows us to see the last Control node clicked in the
Debugging section; note that this updates in runtime. This can be helpful to address crashes, screen
flow, and most likely, which Control node is consuming inputs, and fix that in case we can have
another Control node responsible for that. For instance, this is common when you have a ColorRect

node that you use to fade the screen. If you don’t set Mouse Filter to Ignore, it will consume mouse
events and prevent the player from interacting with other UI elements. In the following figure, we
have the Misc tab for our game:

Figure 10.9 – Session 3’s Debugger dock Misc tab and its elements

The Misc tab is quite simple, and we can’t do a lot with it. Still, it’s a good companion when we want
to address interface-related issues, so let’s understand the elements that build up this debugging tool:
The Clicked Control row displays the last clicked Control node in the debugging section (highlighted and marked with 1 in
Figure 10.9).
The Clicked Control Type row displays the type of the clicked control (highlighted and marked with 2 in Figure 10.9).
The Live Edit Root row displays the current root node in the live SceneTree instance (highlighted and marked with 3 in Figure
10.9).
The Set From Tree button has no official documentation and it seems to be disabled all the time, so we couldn’t test what this
button does (highlighted and marked with 4 in Figure 10.9).
The Clear button clears the data in the previously mentioned rows (highlighted and marked with 5 in Figure 10.9).
The Export measures as CSV button allows you to export a CSV file with the data in the aforementioned rows. It might be
useful for keeping track of how the game flows based on the interactions with its controls (highlighted and marked with 6 in
Figure 10.9).

A good use case for this tab might be Point ‘n’ Click games. Since most interactions in this game
happen with mouse clicks, we can use the Debugger Misc tab to identify which element led to a
specific event. For instance, when clicking on a menu while a dialogue is being displayed, which one
should consume the mouse click? Well, if the one you chose isn’t consuming the input, you can use
the Debugger Misc tab to see what’s happening.
We just finished covering almost all the tools we can use to debug and profile our game. The only
missing one is, for you, our fake studio’s network engineer, the most important one. The Network

Profiler is where you are going to find the impact of your RPCs and synchronizers, along with other
relevant information related to the High-Level Network API. Let’s get right into it!

Understanding the Network Profiler
It’s time to meet your best ally, the one that will help you address issues related to your craft as the
network engineer of our fake studio and come up with potential solutions for the problems that
appear along your journey. The Network Profiler, as the name suggests, is a profiler specialized in
network-related profiling. It displays information about RPCs’ size and count, both sent and received,
the node making and receiving the RPCs, MultiplayerSynchronizer nodes’ network consumption and
syncing count, and even a bandwidth meter, which are all we need to assess the impact of our
network code.
Note that the Network Profiler, by default, only tracks the High-Level Network API bandwidth. So, if
you are using low-level approaches, such as PacketPeerUDP, UDPServer, StreamPeerTCP, and
TCPServer, their consumption may not be taken into account by the Network Profiler by default. We

are going to see how we can address that in the Using the Monitors tab section.
Let’s dive into the features we have available in the Network Profiler tab. Again, each element in
this interface will be numbered for further reference.

Figure 10.10 – Session 2’s Debugger dock Network Profiler tab and its elements

Although the Network Profiler has fewer elements than the other profilers, each of its elements is
more complex as well. You may have also noticed that there’s no graph element, right? So, assessing
this data can be a bit less natural. But let’s understand what each of these elements does and how we
can use them:
The RPC panel displays each node that sends and receives RPCs (highlighted and marked with 1 in Figure 10.10). On the right,
we can see the Incoming RPC count and size and the Outgoing RPC count and size in bytes:
The Node column displays the node path to the node sending and receiving RPCs.

The Incoming RPC column displays the count and size of RPCs this node is receiving in bytes. This means other
nodes in the network are calling RPCs in this particular node. Note that all Asteroid nodes have an Incoming RPC
value of 3, which is probably because they receive 3 calls to process damage and are destroyed right after the third
one.
The Outgoing RPC column displays the count and size, in bytes, of RPCs this node is sending. This means it is
calling RPCs on other nodes. Notice that Weapon2D has a big Outgoing RPC value because it’s constantly telling its
peers’ instances to fire bullets.
The Start button. Just like in the previous profilers, network profiling is turned off by default; by pressing this button, we can start
profiling (highlighted and marked with 2 in Figure 10.10).
The Clear button clears the current data gathered in the profiling session (highlighted and marked with 3 in Figure 10.10).
The Bandwidth meter displays the total bandwidth consumption in bytes per second of the current profiling session (highlighted
and marked with 4 in Figure 10.10):
Down displays how many bytes per second it downloaded in this profiling session
Up displays how many bytes per second it uploaded during this profiling session

The Synchronization panel displays all the MultiplayerSynchronizer nodes, their SceneReplicationConfig
resource, which is always built-in by default, the sync count, and sync size in bytes (highlighted and marked with 5 in Figure
10.10):
The Root column displays the root node of the MultiplayerSynchronizer node’s scene
The Synchronizer column displays the tracked MultiplayerSynchronizer
The Config column displays the SceneReplicationConfig resource associated with
MultiplayerSynchronizer
The Count column displays how many times this particular MultiplayerSynchronizer node synced its
replication data
The Size column displays the total amount of data the synchronization took, in bytes, during the current profiling
session

With all this information in our hands, we can make sense of how our work is having an impact on
the project’s overall performance. Knowing how many times a node calls its RPCs, how many times
other nodes call its RPCs, the amount of data exchanged, and more can help us properly address the
necessary bandwidth a player needs to play the game properly, and also optimize the game to
embrace players with lower network profiles.
In the next section, we are going to learn how we can use the powerful tools we’ve seen so far to spot
the bottlenecks in our network approach using the Network Profiler, but also extend our profiling by
adding custom monitors to the Monitors tab. With that, we can pinpoint what we want Godot to
report to us.

Identifying the project’s bottlenecks

With all the tools we’ve seen so far in this chapter at our disposal, it’s time to use them to assess our
project’s health and look for areas of improvement. Since your focus here is on networking, we are
going to concentrate on features related to this area. In this section, we will use the final version of
the Chapter 9, Creating an Online Adventure Prototype, project to look for areas of improvement
using Network Profiler and the Monitors debugging tools. You will learn how to do the following:
Analyze the incoming and outgoing RPC count and size to identify potential bottlenecks in the network code
Use the bandwidth meter to track the total bandwidth consumption and come up with possible solutions
Assess the synchronization count and size of MultiplayerSynchronizer nodes to optimize replication data
Create custom monitors to analyze relevant data specific to your project and track potential issues

Let’s get started with the tool that will be our reliable companion through the process of identifying
the issues related to the High-Level Network API, the Network Profiler.

Using the Network Profiler
In the previous section, we saw the Network Profiler, one of the most powerful tools available to us
for identifying issues related to the High-Level Network API. In this section, we will dive deeper into
using the Network Profiler to identify bottlenecks related to RPCs and MultiplayerSynchronizer
nodes. To accomplish this, we will be using the final version of the Chapter 9, Creating an Online
Adventure Prototype, project.
As mentioned before, we can use the Network Profiler to gather information about the size and count
of a node’s incoming and outgoing RPCs, MultiplayerSynchronizer nodes’ network consumption,
syncing count, and even a bandwidth meter. By understanding and analyzing this data, we can
identify potential issues in our network code and come up with possible solutions.
To start, let’s take a closer look at the incoming and outgoing RPC count and size to identify potential
bottlenecks in our network code. We will also use the bandwidth meter to track the total bandwidth
consumption and come up with possible improvements.
After that, we will assess the synchronization count and size of MultiplayerSynchronizer syncing to
optimize replication data.
By the end of this section, you will have a better understanding of how to use the Network Profiler to
identify and address issues related to your game’s network performance. So, let’s get started!
RPCs are a straightforward and efficient way to pass data and trigger remote events over the network.
However, it’s important to use them judiciously to avoid overloading the network.

In this section, we will analyze the data related to our project’s RPCs and explore potential
improvements. We will be implementing solutions in the next chapters, but for now, our focus is on
learning how to look at the data critically and make informed decisions.
We start by playing the res://09.prototyping-space- adventure/MainMenu.tscn scene with three
game sessions opened. Let’s start the Network Profiler on all three of them.

Figure 10.11 – The Session 1 Debugger Network Profiler starting profiling

Then, let’s pick one to be the server while using the others as clients, in other words, as players. To
enable multiple game sessions, you can select the Run 3 Instances option in the Debug → Run
Multiple Instances menu.
With all three sessions opened, let’s identify which one is the server. For that, open the Debugger
Misc tab and look for the one where the last Clicked Control is ServerButton. In my case, it’s the
Session 2 game instance, as shown in the following figure.

Figure 10.12 – Using Session 2’s Debugger Misc tab to find the server’s game instance

Now that we know that Session 2 corresponds to the server, we can infer that the other two sessions
are the clients. With this information in mind, we can start debugging with some premises. For
instance, we can expect that the server will have a higher count of RPCs, especially the server’s
QuestDatabase.

To test whether this modification worked, I destroyed the Asteroids with one of the players’ game
instances, so go ahead and do the same. After destroying all 30 Asteroids, let’s analyze the data that
the Network Profiler collected. At this point, you can stop the Network Profiler if you want. In the
following figure, we have the Session 1 data, so we can assume it’s a client.

Figure 10.13 – The Session 1 Debugger Network Profiler displaying the data it gathered

Let’s start with a brief analysis of the RPC counts and size. You can see that in the first row, we have
a player Spaceship/Weapon2D with a high Incoming RPC count. This is probably the fire() method
being called from another client’s game instance, so we can assume the player that destroyed the
Asteroids used Session 3.
This client called this method 693 times. The fire() method doesn’t rely on any data that would
require streaming it this many times. Weapon2D essentially has two major states:
Firing
Not firing

This means that we could improve this RPC count by sending a Boolean value through the network
once when the player presses the firing action and when they release the firing action. In the
meantime, Weapon2D itself would just toggle between these two states, firing and not firing, and use
process() to spawn Bullets based on their fire rate. This would reduce this RPC count by a lot.

Did you notice how important this assessment can be as you build your project and adjust it along the
way? Pretty cool, right?
Next, let’s take a look at the QuestDatabase node in the fourth row. It’s the only node that has an
outgoing RPC count, right? So, it’s making requests to the server’s game instance. It made a total of
30 RPCs, but notice that their size is comparatively bigger than the 693 incoming fire() RPCs. This
means that the data transmitted through this RPC is bigger. We should pay attention to it. This is
likely to be the update_player_progress() method. Notice that we have 30 Asteroids, and every time

we destroy one of them, we make an RPC to the update_player_progress() method. The count is
correct and I can’t see a clear area of improvement in this regard. It has a ratio of 1:1 – one event, one
trigger. So, we are likely to figure out a way to improve the data; maybe compress it somehow to
decrease the overall bandwidth.
Finally, let’s take a look at the Asteroids’ RPC count. Every single one of them receives only 3 RPCs;
this is probably due to the server’s Bullets hitting the Asteroids, which leads to the server calling the
hit() method twice on the clients’ instances. Then, it calls the explode() method the third time a

Bullet hits
the Asteroid. It seems that this class is pretty healthy regarding its RPC counts on the client’s side.
There’s nothing to improve on this side of the relationship. Let’s take a look at the server’s side. The
following figure showcases the server’s Network Profiler. Note that, in this playtest, the server is
represented by the Session 3 instance of the game.

Figure 10.14 – The Session 3 Debugger Network Profiler displaying the data it gathered

The server has outgoing RPCs on its Asteroids instances, and they also have a total count of 3, so it
sounds like there’s a symmetry here, right? You would be fooled into thinking that there are no
improvements to make on the server side as well. Remember, in Chapter 9’s Separating server and
client responsibilities section, the server should calculate the damage and remove the Asteroids from
the SceneTree instance, so there’s no reason to play animations on the server. Ideally, the server will
be a headless instance, so there’s really no reason to play animations on it. But we won’t dwell in
these lands yet. What we can do in the current project is to change the hit() method’s RPC
annotation to only call it remotely and not locally. This way, at least the hit animation will only play
on the client’s side.
Let’s take the chance that we are working with the Asteroids and also make an analysis of their
MultiplayerSynchronizer nodes. You can see on the right panel’s Count column that we have some

quite high numbers. But remember… the Asteroids don’t move, yet. At least not in this

implementation. So why keep updating their positions constantly? The only time their properties
should be synced is when the World node calls its sync_world() method. After that, there’s no reason
to keep updating the asteroids’ properties. So, we can use the asteroids MultiplayerSynchronizer
update_visibility() method inside the sync_world() method and decrease this bandwidth

consumption as well.
By using the Network Profiler, we already identified areas for improvement, such as reducing the
number of RPCs sent to the Weapon2D.fire() method and manually calling the
MultiplayerSynchronizer syncing to decrease overall bandwidth. We also saw that we can change the

RPC annotation of Asteroid.hit() to only call it remotely and not locally to reduce unnecessary
animations on the server side.
Well, with just a brief analysis, we spotted some clear areas for improvement, didn’t we? And we
haven’t even finished our assessment yet! In the next section, we will see how we can use the
Performance singleton to create custom monitors and track them in the monitors track.

Using the Monitors tab
In the previous section, we learned about the Network Profiler and how it can help us identify
potential bottlenecks in our game’s network performance. In this section, we will focus on another
powerful debugging tool in Godot Engine: the Monitors tab.
The Monitors tab allows us to track and analyze specific data points in real time. We can use it to
keep track of variables, functions, and even custom data points that we define ourselves. By
monitoring these data points, we can gain insight into how our project is performing and identify
areas for improvement.
In addition to the built-in monitors, we can also create custom monitors to track specific variables or
functions in our project. To do this, we need to use the Performance.add_custom_monitor() method,
passing an ID, a callable instance, and, optionally, an array as arguments. Godot will create a
monitor in the Monitors tab using the id argument and track the data using the Callable instance
passed in the callable argument. This means that every time we trigger an event that should count
for the data tracking, we need to execute the callable instance.
During the current section, we will use the Monitors tab to track some data regarding the
QuestDatabase node and the QuestSingleton node. By monitoring these data points, we will gain

some insights into how our quest system is performing and identify potential areas for improvement.
Let’s start by opening the res://09.prototyping-spaceadventure/Quests/QuestDatabase.gd script.
We are going to create a member variable to keep track of how many times the

QuestDatabase.update_player_progress() method was called. We can name this variable
quest_update_count and set its default value to 0. Then, we need to create a method that returns its

current value; let’s call this method get_quest_update_count():
func get_quest_update_count():
return quest_update_count

To update quest_update_count, let’s increment its value after the server successfully updates the
player’s progress in a given quest. So, in the update_player_progress() method, add a line inside the
if multiplayer.is_server() statement incrementing quest_update_count by 1 :

@rpc("any_peer", "call_remote")
func update_player_progress(quest_id, current_amount, completed, user):
if multiplayer.is_server():
progress_database[user][quest_id]["progress"] = current_amount
progress_database[user][quest_id]["completed"] = completed
quest_update_count += 1

With that, we have everything ready to add get_quest_update_count() to our Monitors tab. For that,
in the _ready() callback, create a Callable variable pointing to QuestDatabase using the self
keyword, and pointing to "get_quest_update_count". We can name this Callable variable callable
to simplify the process:
func _ready():
if multiplayer.is_server():
load_database()
var callable = Callable(self, "get_quest_update_count")

Then, let’s call the Performance.add_custom_monitor() method. To keep things organized, we will
use a category named "Network" for our custom monitors. So, in the id argument, we will pass
"Network/Quests Updates" and pass callable as the second argument:

func _ready():
if multiplayer.is_server():
load_database()
var callable = Callable(self, "get_quest_update_count")
Performance.add_custom_monitor("Network/Quests Updates", callable)

Let’s start by opening the res://09.prototyping-space- adventure/Quests/QuestDatabase.gd script.
We are going to create a member variable to keep track of how many times the method was called.
Now, to test whether this custom monitor is working and assess the data it will provide, let’s test the
game using three debugging sessions and use one of the clients to destroy some Asteroids. This time
around, my server is on Session 2. The following figure showcases Session 2’s Monitors tab. You
can find the Quests Updates monitor at the very bottom of the Monitor panel; tick the checkbox and
Godot will display the tracked data.

Figure 10.15 – The Session 2 Debugger Monitors tab displaying the Quests Updates tracked data

Notice that Godot counted only 58 quest updates. So I may have missed one asteroid. Interesting,
right? Why does one Asteroid trigger two calls to the QuestDatabase.update_player_progress()
method? Well, remember that currently the quest progress is shared among all peers, so this can grow
exponentially. If there were 3 players, there would be 96 calls to
QuestDatabase.update_player_progress(). We need to figure out a way to limit that. One quick

solution is to check whether the quest is already completed, and if it is, stop updating it. This would
limit this particular quest to 10 calls per player, which would be a good improvement.
Let’s make this comparison, just for testing purposes. Open res://09.prototyping-spaceadventure/Quests/QuestSingleton.gd and let’s create a monitor that would only increment until the

quest reaches the target amount required to complete the quest. To do that, let’s create a new member
variable called increase_count and set its value to 0 by default:
var increase_count = 0

Then, let’s create a method called get_quest_increases() that will return this variable:
func get_quest_increases():
return increase_count

In the _ready() callback, if this is a client instance, we will add a new custom monitor using the
previous method as callable, just like we did with QuestDatabase.get_quest_update_count():
func _ready():
if not multiplayer.is_server():
var callable = Callable(self, "get_quest_increases")
Performance.add_custom_monitor("Network/Quest Increases", callable)

Now, inside the increase_quest_progress() method, we will create an if statement that will only
increment increase_count while quest.current_amount is less than quest.target_amount:
func increase_quest_progress(quest_id, amount):
if not quest_id in quests.keys():
return
var quest = quests[quest_id]
quest.current_amount += amount
QuestDatabase.rpc_id(1, "update_player_progress", quest_id, quest.current_am
ount, quest.completed, AuthenticationCredentials.user)
if quest.current_amount < quest.target_amount:
increase_count += 1

Let’s test the game again and see what happens in the clients’ Monitors tab. In the following figure,
there’s something very interesting happening.

Figure 10.16 – The Session 2 Debugger Monitors tab displaying the Quests Increases tracked data

This time around, Session 2 corresponds to a player – particularly, the player logged in using the
user2 credentials. Why this is relevant? Notice that there were only four increments to
increase_count in this game instance. This is due to the fact that, in the res://09.prototypingspaceadventure/Quests/QuestDatabase.json file, user2 already destroyed five asteroids, so it only needed

five more to complete the quest. This means that we can improve this aspect of our game even
between play sessions. The more progress a player makes in a game session, the fewer RPCs we will
need to make to the server if we implement this approach; pretty cool, isn’t it?
Throughout this section, we learned how we can use the Performance singleton to create new
monitors in the Monitors tab using the Performance.add_custom_monitor() method. We also saw
how we can create methods to collect data about potential bottlenecks in our game. Finally, we saw
some potential fixes to the issues we found while debugging the game in order to optimize it.

Summary
With that, we conclude our chapter! Throughout this chapter, we introduced the Debugger dock,
which is a powerful tool for assessing and debugging potential problems in our game, as well as for
optimizing its performance.
We explored the Stack Trace tab, which gives us an overview of our game’s flow and provides us
with multiple ways to gather information about the changes that happen throughout this flow,
allowing us to understand the whole chain of cause and effect that led to a given change. We also
talked about the Errors tab, which is where we work together with thousands of other developers
who worked on the development of Godot Engine’s core and identified thousands of errors and
documented them so that when they happen, we have some light on the issue and can fix it.
On top of that, we explored two powerful performance-based debugging tabs: the Profiler tab and
the Visual Profiler tab. The Profiler tab is one of your best allies in this task, as it allows you to see
rendering time, physics simulation time, audio processing time, and even how much time each of
your custom script functions is taking to process and how many times they were called. The Visual
Profiler tab specializes in tracking and measuring rendering-related tasks and can help you keep
track of what is causing the most delay in rendering a frame on the CPU and GPU.
However, the protagonists of the chapter were the Network Profiler and Monitors tabs. We saw how
we can identify potential bottlenecks related to RPCs and MultiplayerSynchronizer nodes by
analyzing data gathered by the tool. By understanding and analyzing this data, we came up with
possible solutions to optimize network code. In addition to that, we learned how to use the
Performance singleton and create custom monitors to track specific data points in real time in the

Monitors tab. By monitoring these data points, we gained insights into how our project is performing
and even made a test for a potential improvement.
In the next chapter, we are going to optimize data requests, especially regarding the quests data from
the QuestDatabase.get_player_quests() method.
By optimizing the way we request and handle data, we can improve our game’s performance and
provide a better experience for our users. See you there!
OceanofPDF.com

11
Optimizing Data Requests
Welcome to Chapter 11, Optimizing Data Requests, where we will use the tools that we saw in
Chapter 10, Debugging and Profiling the Network, and finally implement improvements to the
network code that we wrote in Chapter 9, Creating an Online Adventure Prototype.
In this chapter, we will understand a bit more about bandwidth and throughput by analyzing the
current state of our game. We saw, in the Using the network profiler section of Chapter 10,
Debugging and Profiling the Network, that we have some improvements to make, especially
regarding the MultiplayerSynchronizers and the QuestDatabase data transmission. So, here, we will
see how we can decrease the number of requests and how we can compress and decompress data to
reduce the bandwidth and throughput and make our game available to more people in a more reliable
and optimal way.
By the end of this chapter, you will understand that there are many ways to optimize a game and most
of the optimizations will depend on the specific demands of the game itself. As you progress, you
will develop a keen sense and understanding of how to assess potential areas of improvement and the
kind of data you are looking for, as well as some general techniques to address bottlenecks in your
network code.
So, this chapter will cover the following topics:
Understanding network resources
Decreasing the requests count
Data compression with ENetConnection

Technical requirements
As mentioned in Chapter 10, Debugging and Profiling the Network, Part 3, Optimizing the Online
Experience, is based on the final version of the project made in Chapter 9, Creating an Online
Adventure Prototype, so it’s fundamental to have read, practiced, and implemented the concepts
presented there.
You can get the files necessary to get started with this chapter through the following link. These files
have the implementations we’ve made in Chapter 10, Debugging and Profiling the Network:

https://github.com/PacktPublishing/The-Essential-Guide-to-Creating-Multiplayer-Games-withGodot-4.0/tree/11.optimizing-data-requests
It’s also necessary that you have read and understood the concepts and tools presented in Chapter 10,
Debugging and Profiling the Network, so that we can move forward under the assumption that you
already know what they are and how to use them properly. In particular, you will need to understand
how the Debugger’s Network Profiler and Monitors tools work. So, if you aren’t sure how to use
these tools, please take some time to go back and read Chapter 10, Debugging and Profiling the
Network, so you can master these and other debugging tools.

Understanding network resources
We’ve already mentioned the importance of bandwidth and throughput; in Chapter 1, Setting up a
Server, we even had a brief introduction to and a visual representation of the topic in Figure 1.3 and
Figure 1.4. Now it’s time to wrap our heads around these concepts, which are fundamental to
network usage optimization and will be our major resources to measure the improvements we made
toward our optimization goals.
As a general rule, the less bandwidth and the lower the throughput of our network code, the better. Of
course, we need to keep in mind that all optimizations should maintain the game experience, so we
are in a very delicate position. Different from other processing, memory, and graphics optimizations,
our work can’t create “beautiful accidents,” such as a processing optimization that can lead to a cool
mechanic. No, our job as network engineers is to replicate the already established mechanics and
effects to all peers in a network. Let’s understand how we do that.
When talking about bandwidth, it might be surprising to hear that most games don’t actually need to
have huge infrastructures available. For instance, a video conference takes way more bandwidth than
a complex first-person shooter or a war simulator with tons of physics simulation because it works
with processed data in the form of rendered images that must be passed around and re-created in each
of the participants’ instances of the conference. In the case of games, most of the necessary resources
to create the simulations are already available on the user’s machine, so most of our job is to
communicate through messages what the computer should load to sync the client’s and server’s game
instances. It’s well established that players need a bandwidth of about 5 Mbps to play most modern
online multiplayer games, including huge franchises such as Call of Duty, League of Legends, and
Fortnite.
In Part 1, Handshaking and Networking, of this book, we saw that games work mostly with
unreliable data, meaning that most of the time, we only need to know the latest data regarding an

object in the game in order to sync it. This decreases the network usage a lot and allows us to focus
on the specific types of data necessary to replicate the server’s game world in clients’ game worlds.
The major concern in online multiplayer games is the consistency with which we can keep on the
data transmission stream – ultimately, whether we can maintain the throughput of our network
consistently. This can be affected by latency and other external aspects, so all we can do is design a
communication architecture that takes into account how latency can affect our throughput. Of course,
we will also try to keep the bandwidth to a minimum so that if a household has many devices
connected to the same network, our game has room to keep the data flowing.
So, keep in mind that bandwidth and throughput are our major resources and we will be looking at
them to find areas that we can improve in our game.
You might still be trying to work out the difference between bandwidth and throughput. So, let’s
briefly assess them both. We were introduced to these concepts in Chapter 1, Setting up a Server, so
if you don’t quite remember what they are, take a brief moment to read the What is the UDP
protocol? section of the chapter.
We are going to use bandwidth to understand how much of the network our game needs to perform
correctly, meaning how much data we expect to transmit through the network taking into account all
the measurements we observed using the network profiler. This means that if we have 1,000
MultiplayerSynchronizers syncing 5 KB of data per second at any given point of our game, we will
need a network with a 5 Mbps velocity. Note that this might not be consistent transmission of 5 Mbps
throughout the whole game session, but it’s a recommendation based on our measurements that the
game might require a network that can manage up to 5 Mbps to play smoothly. In summary,
bandwidth is the amount of space available in a connection for data transmission, not the
transmission itself.
Now, the actual thing we are looking to optimize is the throughput, which points to how many
packets and the size of these packets we are actually transmitting through the network. The
throughput is our actual data flow. You can think about it using an analogy where bandwidth is a pipe
and throughput is the water. We can’t stream more water than a pipe can support; instead, we can
stream water up to the available pipe size. In the same way, the amount of throughput we can have is
based on the available bandwidth capacity.
You can see an illustration of a good and bad throughput-bandwidth relationship in the following
figure:

Figure 11.1 – An illustration of a good and bad throughput-bandwidth relationship

Note that with good throughput, the data sent and received is consistent and doesn’t exceed the
bandwidth, whereas with bad throughput, the data packets are inconsistent in size and frequency, and
some are even lost in the middle of the transmission. When packets don’t reach their destination, we
call it packet loss, and this can cause lots of headaches and complaints from players.
With packet loss, the client doesn’t know how to handle their game instance properly. Where should
the second player’s spaceship be? Did it stop shooting? Is it shooting at an Asteroid node or are there
no more Asteroid nodes to shoot? Is the Asteroid node they were shooting at there yet? We are going
to see, in Chapter 12, Implementing Lag Compensation, how to handle these situations, but ideally,
we should avoid them by paying attention to the throughput.
With all that said, network engineers are left in a very delicate position when the resources available
for optimization don’t leave space for new mechanics to emerge. We take the already implemented
mechanics and try to fit them all into the available resources, usually squeezing them to keep up with
any potential changes that may require more of these resources, for instance, a new mechanic that
requires more bandwidth. So, we can’t experiment a lot when optimizing the network.

In the next section, let’s talk about how we can initiate our optimizations by decreasing the number of
requests that our game makes. We are going to assess the problems presented in Chapter 10,
Debugging and Profiling the Network, such as in Weapon2D massive RPC count and unnecessary
syncs of the Asteroid node’s MultiplayerSynchronizer node.

Decreasing the requests count
Previously, in Chapter 10, Debugging and Profiling the Network, we saw that there was a
disproportional and unnecessary number of requests being made to the Weapon2D node’s fire() RPC
method, and we even came up with what could be a solution for this issue. We also saw that we can
decrease the Asteroid node’s sync problem by only updating it once a given player requests a
synchronization using the World node’s sync_world() RPC method.
In this section, we are going to implement these optimization methods and improve the overall
performance of our network. Let’s start with the Weapon2D node issue.

Reducing the weapon fire count
Sometimes we may need to make changes in the core code of a feature in order to improve its
network performance, even when its local performance stays the same, or may even drop. When
talking about optimization, we are always trying to balance things out and figure out how to use the
available resources in a way that allows more players to enjoy a better experience. Network resources
are particularly a priority in most online multiplayer games since it’s through a good network that
players will be able to get the most out of their shared experiences. So, let’s make some changes to
how Player2D node fires Weapon2D node. Let’s open the res://09.prototyping-spaceadventure/Objects/Weapon/Weapon2D.tscn scene first and carry out the following steps:

1. Connect the timeout signal of Timer node to Weapon2D node and create a callback method named
_on_timer_timeout():

Figure 11.2 – Timer node’s timeout signal connecting to theWeapon2D node’s _on_timer_timeout() callback
2. Open the res://09.prototyping-space-adventure/Objects/Weapon/Weapon2D.gd script and, in the
_on_timer_timeout() callback, call the fire() method so Weapon2D node fires on every Timer node’s tic.
3. Then, let’s create an RPC method that can be called by any peer and should also be called locally. We will use this method to
change Weapon2D’s firing state, so it should receive a Boolean variable as an argument:
@rpc("any_peer", "call_local")
func set_firing(firing):
4. Inside this method, we will check the firing state, and if it’s true, we will call the fire() method as well; otherwise, we
will tell Timer to stop:
@rpc("any_peer", "call_local")
func set_firing(firing):
if firing:
fire()
else:
timer.stop()
5. With that, we can remove the RPC annotation on the fire() method and the if timer.is_stopped() statement, since
now Timer itself tells when Weapon2D fires. The fire() method should look like this after that:

func fire():
animation_player.play("fire")
spawner.spawn(bullet_scene)
timer.start(1.0 / fire_rate)

With that, Weapon2D will fire based on the timeout signal from Timer. With the new RPC method, we
can change the firing state, starting or stopping the creation of new bullets. The Weapon2D script
should look like this at this point:
class_name Weapon2D
extends Marker2D
@export var bullet_scene: PackedScene
@export_range(0, 1, 1, "or_greater") var fire_rate = 3
@onready var spawner = $BulletSpawner2D
@onready var timer = $Timer
@onready var animation_player = $AnimationPlayer
func fire():
animation_player.play("fire")
spawner.spawn(bullet_scene)
timer.start(1.0 / fire_rate)
@rpc("any_peer", "call_local")
func set_firing(firing):
if firing:
fire()
else:
timer.stop()
func _on_timer_timeout():
fire()

Now, we need to know when Weapon2D’s firing state changes, and to do that, we will need to make
some changes to Player2D. So, open res://09.prototyping-spaceadventure/Actors/Player/Player2D.gd and implement the following steps:

1. Remove the whole _process() callback code. Then, override the _unhandled_input() callback:
func _unhandled_input(event):
2. Inside the _unhandled_input() callback, we are going to check whether the "shoot" action was pressed or released. If
pressed, we set the weapon firing state to true, and if released, it’s set to false (remember, we should do that using the
rpc() method so the player shoots on all network peer instances):
func _unhandled_input(event):
if event.is_action_pressed("shoot"):
weapon.rpc("set_firing", true)
elif event.is_action_released("shoot"):
weapon.rpc("set_firing", false)
3. Next, we need to add a line to the setup_multiplayer() method to also toggle the _unhandled_input() process based
on whether the instance of the spaceship is the current player or a remote player:
func setup_multiplayer(player_id):
var self_id = multiplayer.get_unique_id()
var is_player = self_id == player_id
set_process(is_player)
set_physics_process(is_player)
set_process_unhandled_input(is_player)

With that, Player2D will toggle Weapon2D’s firing state based on whether the "shoot" action was
pressed or released, instead of calling it every frame while "shoot" was pressed.
Let’s make an assessment of this improvement. Turn on the network profiler and let’s see how this
goes. Remember that depending on the duration of the profiling section, we may get different results,
so this isn’t as accurate as a unit test; but still, it will give us a good sense of any potential
improvements we’ve made. In the following figure, we have Session 1 as the server, receiving RPCs
from the client’s Player2D instance:

Figure 11.3 – The Session 1 Debugger’s Network Profiler tab highlighting thePlayer2D node instance’s incoming RPCs

As you can see in the figure, I destroyed all 30 asteroids in a play session of around 20.0 seconds,
with a total of six RPC calls from Player2D instance. If you compare this to Figure 10.13, where we
had 693 calls for a session with about the same duration, this is more than 115x fewer calls. I think
we did a good job here.
So, in this section, we learned how to optimize data requests in our game to improve network
performance. We focused on how to decrease the number of requests being made in the game by
optimizing the firing of Weapon2D node. We also saw how to create an RPC method that can change
Weapon2D’s firing state, and how to toggle the firing state based on the "shoot" action being pressed or

released instead of triggering the firing on every frame in the _process() callback. Finally, we saw
how to use the network profiler to assess the impact of these optimizations on the game’s
performance. In the next section, we will work on decreasing the requests of Asteroid’s
MultiplayerSynchronizer.

Decreasing Asteroid’s syncing count
Another issue we saw in Chapter 10, Debugging and Profiling the Network, was regarding the way
Asteroid node’s MultiplayerSynchronizers sync their position to players. Since they don’t move

throughout the play session, there’s no need to keep updating their position and other properties on a
regular basis. Instead, we only need to sync them once when the player asks World node to sync.
So, open the res://09.prototyping-space-adventure/Objects/Asteroid/Asteroid.tscn scene and
make the necessary changes to improve this aspect of our network engineering.
Here, we just need to set the MultiplayerSynchronizer node’s Visibility Update Mode property to
None:

Figure 11.4 – Asteroid node’s MultiplayerSynchronizer node Visibility Update Mode property set to None

With that, we just have to do the syncing manually now. The MultiplayerSynchronizer node has a
method called update_visibility(), which receives an argument where we can pass the ID of the
peer we want to sync with; if we pass 0, it updates all peers instead.
Note that this method takes into account the filters we set in the Syncing the asteroids section of
Chapter 9, Creating an Online Adventure Prototype, using the set_visibility_for() method,
meaning only the peers added using this method will be synced. So, in our case, if we don’t add the
peer to the filtering using the set_visibility_for() method, this peer won’t be synced, even if we
use the update_visibility() method, passing the correct peer ID.
The best place to manually sync the Asteroid node’s properties will be in the World class, so open the
res://09.prototyping-space-adventure/Levels/World.gd script . Then, inside the sync_world()

method, let’s add another group call to the "Sync" group, but this time to the update_visibility
method, and pass player_id as an argument. The whole sync_world() method should look like this:

@rpc("any_peer", "call_local")
func sync_world():
var player_id = multiplayer.get_remote_sender_id()
get_tree().call_group("Sync", "set_visibility_for",
player_id, true)
get_tree().call_group("Sync", "update_visibility",
player_id)

With that, all Asteroid nodes should only sync once to every player, decreasing the total network
resource usage.
Let’s profile this change as well to see its impact on the overall network consumption. The following
figure showcases the sync count of some asteroids’ MultiplayerSynchronizers:

Figure 11.5 – The Session 2 Debugger’s Network Profiler highlighting the Asteroid nodes’ MultiplayerSynchronizer
nodes’ sync counts

Compare this to Figure 10.13, where we had hundreds and hundreds of updates, and for every frame,
the update count would increase. After what we’ve done, they only increase once a player enters a
session and only to that specific player. Pretty good job, right?
In this section, we saw how to optimize data requests by decreasing the asteroid nodes’
MultiplayerSynchronizer nodes’ syncs. To do that, we disabled the automatic synchronization by

setting MultiplayerSynchronizer node’s Visibility Update Mode property to None and manually
syncing by using the MultiplayerSynchronizer.update_visibility() method once the player joins
the game.
In the upcoming section, we will see how we can compress data to optimize the packet’s size. Until
now, we’ve only dealt with how many packets we send or receive, but the size of these packets is
very important to handle as well. Let’s understand what we have available to do that.

Compressing data with the ENetConnection class
The Godot Engine’s high-level network API includes the ENetConnection class. This class is available
after a connection between peers, such as the server and client, is established. Using ENetConnection,
we can tweak the peer’s connections, allowing us to tell, for instance, the compression method. We

can access the ENetConnection instance after the peers have successfully connected. For that, we can
use the ENetMultiplayerPeer.host property.
There are five available compression methods to use in the ENetConnection class:
None, which can be used through the CompressionMode enumerator’s COMPRESS_NONE option. This is what the
documentation says:

This uses the most bandwidth but has the upside of requiring the fewest CPU resources. This
option may also be used to make network debugging using tools like Wireshark easier.
ENet’s built-in Range Coder, which can be used through the CompressionMode enumerator’s COMPRESS_RANGE_CODER
option. This is what the documentation says:

[This is] ENet’s built-in range encoding. Works well on small packets, but is not the most efficient
algorithm on packets larger than 4 KB.
FastLZ, which can be used through the CompressionMode enumerator’s COMPRESS_FASTLZ option. This is what the
documentation says:

This option uses less CPU resources compared to COMPRESS_ZLIB, at the expense of using
more bandwidth.
ZLib, which can be used through the CompressionMode enumerator’s COMPRESS_ZLIB option. This is what the
documentation says:

This option uses less bandwidth compared to COMPRESS_FASTLZ , at the expense of using more
CPU resources.
Zstandard, which can be used through the CompressionMode enumerator’s COMPRESS_ZSTD option. This is what the
documentation says:

Note that this algorithm is not very efficient on packets smaller than 4 KB. Therefore, it’s
recommended to use other compression algorithms in most cases.
You can find more about ENetConnection and CompressionMode in the Godot docs through the
following link:
https://docs.godotengine.org/en/stable/classes/class_enetconnection.html#enum-enetconnectioncompressionmode
It’s time to work on the size of the data we are transmitting through the network. In the following
steps, we will implement compression to decrease our game’s packet size and optimize the
transmission of data through the network. Note that, as always, there’s a trade-off between the
bandwidth and CPU resources. Our game currently doesn’t have any issues regarding CPU usage. So,
at this point, we can focus on optimizing the network resources. For that, we can use the

COMPRESS_ZLIB compression mode. To do that, let’s open the res://09.prototyping-spaceadventure/Authentication.gd script and complete the following steps:

1. Right before we set multiplayer_peer to the peer in the _ready() callback, we are going to change the
ENetConnection compression mode. For that, we access the host property and use the compress() method, passing
EnetConnection.COMPRESS_ZLIB as an argument:
func _ready():
if multiplayer.is_server():
peer.create_server(PORT)
load_database()
else:
peer.create_client(ADDRESS, PORT)
peer.host.compress(EnetConnection.COMPRESS_ZLIB)
multiplayer.multiplayer_peer = peer

We need to do this here because the compression mode needs to be set before the connection is
established, which happens after we set the multiplayer.multiplayer_peer property.
2. We also need to do the same thing in the res://09.prototyping-spaceadventure/LoggingScreen.gd script so
that this connection also matches the server’s connection compression. Again, before setting
multiplayer.multiplayer_peer, we set ENetConnection’s compression to COMPRESS_ZLIB:
func _ready():
peer.create_client(ADDRESS, PORT)
peer.host.compress(ENetConnection.COMPRESS_ZLIB)
multiplayer.multiplayer_peer = peer

With that, we are able to change the compression mode used in our game’s network connection as
soon as the players join the game’s world. For now, this won’t make a huge impact. As we saw in the
previous quotes from the documentation, most of the compression algorithms aim at having data
packets be either below 4 KB or above 4 KB. Our game’s packets currently haven’t even reached the
Kilobytes yet, so…this may not have a big, if any, impact at this point, to be honest.
If we want to measure how much bandwidth we are using and get at least a glance at any possible
improvements, we can use the Debugger’s Monitors to track EnetConnection instances’ sent and
received data. For that, we can use the ENetConnection.pop_statistic() method to create two
relevant monitors using the Performance singleton to add our custom monitors. Let’s do it:
1. Still in the World class script, create a method called get_received_data(). This method needs to return an integer or
floating point so we can use it to create a monitor. In this case, it will return the received data statistic from the current
ENetConnection. For that, we can use the pop_statistic() method, passing
ENetConnection.HOST_TOTAL_RECEIVED_DATA as an argument:
func get_received_data():
var enet_connection = multiplayer.multiplayer_
peer.host
var data_received = enet_connection.pop_statistic
(ENetConnection.HOST_TOTAL_RECEIVED_DATA)
return data_received

2. Then, we are going to create another method called get_sent_data() and do the same thing, but passing
ENetConnection.HOST_TOTAL_SENT_DATA as an argument this time around:
func get_sent_data():
var enet_connection = multiplayer.multiplayer_
peer.host
var data_sent = enet_connection.pop_statistic
(ENetConnection.HOST_TOTAL_SENT_DATA)
return data_sent
3. Now, in the _ready() callback, where we check to see whether this instance is the server or not, right above where we create
the Asteroid instances, we are going to add the respective callable to the Performance singleton using the
Performance.add_custom_monitor() method, like so:
var callable = Callable(self, "get_received_data")
Performance.add_custom_monitor("Network/Received
Data", callable)
callable = Callable(self, "get_sent_data")
Performance.add_custom_monitor("Network/Sent
Data", callable)
for i in 30:
asteroid_spawner.spawn()

Now, we are able to monitor the differences between each compression mode and see the one that
better fits our game. In the following figure, we compare the usage of the COMPRESS_ZLIB and
COMPRESS_NONE compression modes:

Figure 11.6 – A comparison between the monitors of the data sent and received using the COMPRESS_ZLIB and
COMPRESS_NONE compression modes

Note that with the COMPRESS_ZLIB compression, we had a peak of 12,509 bytes on the received data,
while we had a peak of 48,802 bytes in the data sent. Meanwhile, using COMPRESS_NONE, we peaked at
14,470 bytes in the received data and 80,234 bytes on the sent data – even with very small data

packets, we have massive gains, especially on the server’s data sent metrics, so we also did a good
job there!

Summary
In this chapter, we learned how to optimize data requests in our game to improve network
performance. We focused on decreasing the number of requests being made in the game by
optimizing the firing of the weapon. We saw how to create an RPC method that can change the
weapon’s firing state and how to toggle the firing state based on the “shoot” action being pressed or
released instead of triggering the firing on every frame in the _process() callback. Finally, we saw
how to use the network profiler to assess the impact of these optimizations on the game’s
performance.
After that, we tackled the issue of Asteroid node’s MultiplayerSynchronizers’ syncs. We disabled the
automatic synchronization by setting the Visibility Update Node of MultiplayerSynchronizer to
None and manually synced by using the MultiplayerSynchronizer.update_visibility() method
once the player joins the game. This decreased the Asteroid node’s sync count and decreased the
total network resource usage. We also saw how to measure the effectiveness of these optimizations
using the debugger’s network profiler.
Finally, we learned about the Godot Engine’s high-level network API’s ENetConnection class, which
offers compression methods to optimize the packet size. We saw how to use the
ENetConnection.pop_statistic() method to create custom monitors using the Performance singleton

to track ENetConnection’s sent and received data. We compared the usage of the COMPRESS_ZLIB and
COMPRESS_NONE compression modes and found that even with very small data packets, we have

massive gains, especially on the server’s data sent metrics.
In the next chapter, we are going to get even deeper into optimization. We are going to use
interpolation and prediction to decrease the MultiplayerSynchronizer syncing count of the player’s
spaceship while trying to keep the movement consistent throughout the game network instances. See
you there!
OceanofPDF.com

12
Implementing Lag Compensation
Welcome to one of the most anticipated chapters in the book. Here, we will dive into the core of
online multiplayer game optimization. In the world of online gaming, where players from across the
globe unite to embark on epic adventures, two formidable adversaries lurk in the shadows; they are
lag and latency. These foes can transform a thrilling gaming experience into a frustrating trial. In this
chapter, we’ll confront these challenges head-on, arming you with the knowledge and tools to
mitigate their impact and create an engaging online gaming environment.
In this chapter, we will use Remote Procedure Calls (RPCs) to implement lag compensation
techniques, in order to make the Player node’s Spaceship node maintain its position and rotation,
synced throughout the game instances across the network. For that, we will understand the core
issues regarding packet loss and latency, something common when we use unreliable packets, as we
do when using the ENet protocols. Then, we will fake some latency and packet loss by using Timer
nodes so that we can understand how these issues may display in the actual game. After that, we will
talk about some common techniques to create solutions for these issues.
By the end of the chapter, you will understand how we can fake some smooth movement, even when
the game’s MultiplayerSynchronizer fails to deliver data across peers’ game instances.
In this chapter, we will cover the following topics:
Introducing lag issues
Dealing with unreliable packets
Common compensation techniques

Technical requirements
As mentioned in Chapter 10, Debugging and Profiling the Network, Part 3, Optimizing the Online
Experience, of this book focuses on the final version of the project made in Chapter 9, Creating an
Online Adventure Prototype, so it’s fundamental to read, exercise, and implement the concepts
presented there. You can get the files necessary to start this chapter at the following link:
https://github.com/PacktPublishing/The-Essential-Guide-to-Creating-Multiplayer-Games-withGodot-4.0/tree/12.prediction-and-interpolation. They contain the progress we’ve made for
optimizations in Chapter 11, Optimizing Data Requests.

It’s also necessary that you have read and understood the concepts and tools presented in Chapter 11,
Optimizing Data Requests, so that we can continue with the assumption that you already know what
they are and how to use them properly.

Introducing lag issues
Addressing lag and unreliable packets involves three techniques – interpolation, prediction, and
extrapolation. These techniques smoothen player movements, maintain responsiveness, and
anticipate object movements. The Godot Engine’s physics simulation and RPC method are crucial in
these techniques, aiding in realistic object movement and data synchronization, despite network
issues.
Lag and latency are the archenemies of any online multiplayer game. Lag, often used interchangeably
with latency, refers to the delay between a player’s action and its corresponding effect in the game.
It’s the momentary pause between pulling the trigger and seeing the enemy fall. Latency, on the other
hand, represents the time it takes for data to travel from a player’s device to the game server and
back. Together, these factors can disrupt the fluidity of gameplay, leaving players frustrated and
disconnected from the virtual world.
Within the world of online multiplayer gaming, the transmission of data is seldom a seamless
journey. Unreliable packets, those mischievous bits of information, can create issues by arriving out
of order or disappearing altogether. When packets are out of order, a player might see an opponent
magically teleport across the map and back or perform impossible feats. Data loss results in vital
game updates never reaching their intended destination, leaving characters and objects frozen in time.
Our mission in this chapter is to combat these issues and bring order to the chaos.
In the realm of online multiplayer gaming, a recurring and often frustrating issue that plagues both
developers and players alike is the challenge of lag and latency. In this section, we’ll talk about these
two fundamental aspects of online gaming and shed light on the profound impact they have on a
player’s experience. As you already discovered in previous chapters, creating a seamless and
immersive multiplayer environment requires a nuanced understanding of these concepts.
Now, let’s talk about the impact of lag and latency on gameplay. When a player experiences lag, it
disrupts the flow of the game and can lead to missed opportunities, frustration, and, in competitive
scenarios, unfavorable outcomes. Imagine firing a weapon in an online shooter, only to have the shot
register seconds later, long after your target has moved to safety.
Understanding the causes of lag and latency is crucial for effective mitigation. Network congestion,
hardware limitations, and geographic distance between players and servers are common causes.

Network congestion occurs when the data traffic on a network is too high, causing data packets to be
delayed or lost. Hardware limitations, such as a slow internet connection or an underpowered
computer, can also contribute to latency.
Mitigating lag and latency is a constant challenge for game developers. One strategy is server
optimization, where game servers are finely tuned to handle large volumes of data efficiently.
Another approach is client-side prediction and interpolation, techniques that help to smooth out
gameplay even when there are network delays; we will talk about these in the Common compensation
techniques section. On top of these, choosing the right network infrastructure, such as Content
Delivery Networks (CDNs), can significantly reduce latency by placing game assets closer to
players.
We’ve peeled back the layers of lag and latency, understanding how these factors impact online
multiplayer games. We saw some of their causes and discussed strategies for mitigation, all with the
goal of enhancing a player’s gaming experience. In the next section, we will talk about issues specific
to unreliable packets, which are what we usually use to transfer data over a network in online
multiplayer games.

Dealing with unreliable packets
One of the top concerns that developers grapple with when creating online multiplayer games is the
reliability of data packets. In this section, we’ll see the complexities surrounding unreliable packets,
shedding light on the issues they bring to the forefront of online multiplayer games. As you’ve
already gleaned from our discussions, understanding these challenges is core to crafting a smooth and
immersive multiplayer gaming experience.
Unreliable packets, as the name suggests, are data packets sent over a network without any
guarantee of arrival or order. They’re like letters in the wind, reaching their destination only if the
conditions are favorable. These packets are used to transmit non-critical data in online games, such as
character positions, because they offer lower latency compared to reliable packets, which come with
built-in delivery assurances at the expense of potential lag.
One of the primary issues associated with unreliable packets is packet loss. This occurs when packets
sent from one player’s device fail to reach a server or another player’s device. It’s like pieces of a
puzzle disappearing into thin air, leading to incomplete and inconsistent data. In a fast-paced action
game, packet loss can manifest as abrupt character teleportations, vanished projectiles, or
inexplicable desynchronization among players.

Another challenge is the out-of-order arrival of packets. In an ideal world, data packets would arrive
at their destination in the same order they were sent. However, the unpredictability of network routes
can cause packets to arrive out of order, leading to chaos in the game world. Imagine receiving
instructions to assemble a piece of furniture, only to receive the steps out of sequence; it’s a recipe for
confusion and frustration. Usually, in these cases, we only use the latest data and ignore the older
ones, as only the most recent information is relevant to the game.
The consequences of unreliable packets can be dire for gameplay. Packet loss and out-of-order
arrivals can lead to player disconnection, incorrect character positions, and erratic synchronization
among players. For example, a player’s character might appear to jump from one location to another
due to missing packets. This not only disrupts immersion but also undermines the fairness and
integrity of competitive play.
Mitigating the issues brought on by unreliable packets requires a multifaceted approach. Developers
often employ techniques such as client-side prediction, where the client makes informed guesses
about missing data to maintain a coherent game state. Interpolation, another valuable tool, smooths
out the jitters caused by missing packets by smoothly transitioning between known data points.
In this section, we saw that packet loss is a common issue where packets fail to reach their
destination, leading to incomplete and inconsistent data. We also saw that some packets may arrive
out of order, causing chaos in the game world. These issues can result in player disconnection,
incorrect character positions, and erratic synchronization among players. In the next section, we are
going to see the most common compensation techniques to solve these and the lag-related issues.

Common compensation techniques
Welcome to the most anticipated section in our journey through the realm of online multiplayer game
development. In the previous sections, we unraveled the complexities of networking,
synchronization, and the intricacies of dealing with unreliable packets. Now, we stand at a crucial
juncture, ready to explore the fascinating world of interpolation, prediction, and extrapolation, a
trio of techniques that hold the key to creating seamless and responsive online gaming experiences,
or at least to get as close as we can to this Holy Grail.
Picture this – you’re in the heat of an intense multiplayer battle, and the stakes couldn’t be higher. In
the world of online gaming, every second counts, and every move must be precise. But what happens
when network latency rears its head, causing a slight delay in transmitting data between players? This
is where interpolation, prediction, and extrapolation come to the rescue.

One of the cornerstones of implementing interpolation, prediction, and extrapolation is the
integration of physics simulation. In Godot Engine, the physics engine plays a crucial role in
determining how objects move and interact within the game world. By marrying physics with
prediction algorithms, you can create a realistic and responsive gameplay experience that feels in
sync with the laws of our virtual universe.
To orchestrate the symphony of data synchronization, we’ll take rid of the Player node’s
MultiplayerSynchronizer node and employ some RPC methods. These functions serve as the

conductor of our data orchestra, allowing us to send the necessary information to clients or a server
precisely when it’s needed. With RPCs, we can trigger the transmission of interpolated, predicted, or
extrapolated data, ensuring that all players stay on the same page.
In the next sections, we’ll jump into the implementation of interpolation, prediction, and
extrapolation in our online multiplayer top-down adventure prototype. By the end, you’ll understand
how these techniques work together to compensate for network latency. So, fasten your seatbelts, for
we are about to navigate the intricacies of smooth and responsive gameplay in the dynamic world of
online multiplayer gaming.

Implementing server-side motion
To have a better setup to understand how lag influences the gameplay experience, we are going to
make some changes to the Player scene and scripts. Instead of allowing the movement to happen on
the client side and being synced to the server and other peers, a player will use input events to change
the movement of a server’s Spaceship instance. This will allow us to also decrease the amount of
syncing data sent by MultiplayerSynchronizer, since now we will have the motion simulated, based
on Spaceship’s thrusting and rotating states. To do that, let’s open the res://09.prototyping-spaceadventure/Actors/Player/Player2D.tscn scene. Then, follow the following steps:

1. Select the MultiplayerSynchronizer node, and in the Replication menu, disable Spaceship’s position and rotation
sync on both the Spawn and Sync options:

Figure 12.1 – The Player scene’s MultiplayerSynchronizer Replication menu, with the Spaceship position and rotation
properties disabled
2. Then, let’s open the res://09.prototyping-space- adventure/Actors/Player/Player2D.gd file, and we
will make some changes to the setup_multiplayer() method. The first thing to do here is to remove the line that enables
the _physics_process() and _process() callbacks, leaving only _unhandled_input(). We will see why in the
following steps:
@rpc("any_peer", "call_local")
func setup_multiplayer(player_id):
var self_id = multiplayer.get_unique_id()
var is_player = self_id == player_id
set_process_unhandled_input(is_player)
camera.enabled = is_player
3. Then, we will check whether the current instance isn’t the server; if it isn’t, we call the make_current() method, effectively
enabling this player’s Camera2D node on their game instance:
func setup_multiplayer(player_id):
var self_id = multiplayer.get_unique_id()
var is_player = self_id ==
player_id
set_process_unhandled_input(is_player)
camera.enabled =
is_player
if not multiplayer.is_server():
4. Next, we will lay the groundwork the new Spaceship node movement logic, get rid of the _physics_process() callback,
and work in the _unhandled_input() callback instead. The whole logic follows the same idea of Weapon2D; Spaceship
will have thrusting, direction, and turning variables that we can use to change its movement. Based on the input
events we get in _unhandled_input(), we will change the state of these variables. The secret here is that we will use the
rpc_id() method to change these states on the server’s Spaceship instance.

The following snippet showcases the _unhandled_input() callback after adding this new logic:
func _unhandled_input(event):
if event.is_action_pressed("shoot"):
weapon.rpc("set_firing", true)
elif event.is_action_released("shoot"):
weapon.rpc("set_firing", false)
# Thrusting logic. The spaceship enables its thrust based on if the `thurst_acti

on` was pressed or released
if event.is_action_pressed(thrust_action):
spaceship.rpc_id(1, "set_thrusting", true)
elif event.is_action_released(thrust_action):
spaceship.rpc_id(1, "set_thrusting", false)
# Turning logic. If a turning key is just pressed or still pressed, the spaceshi
p turns, it only stops turning if neither `turn_left_action` or `turn_right_action
` are pressed.
if event.is_action_pressed(turn_left_action):
spaceship.rpc_id(1, "set_direction", -1)
spaceship.rpc_id(1, "set_turning", true)
elif event.is_action_released(turn_left_action):
if Input.is_action_pressed(turn_right_action):
spaceship.rpc_id(1, "set_direction", 1)
12 Implementing Lag Compensation 8
else:
spaceship.rpc_id(1, "set_turning", false)
spaceship.rpc_id(1, "set_direction", 0)
if event.is_action_pressed(turn_right_action):
spaceship.rpc_id(1, "set_direction", 1)
spaceship.rpc_id(1, "set_turning", true)
elif event.is_action_released(turn_right_action):
if Input.is_action_pressed(turn_left_action):
spaceship.rpc_id(1, "set_direction", -1)
else:
spaceship.rpc_id(1, "set_turning", false)
spaceship.rpc_id(1, "set_direction", 0)
5. Now, let’s move on to the res://09.prototyping-space- adventure/Objects/Spaceship/Spaceship.gd
script, where we will implement the variables and methods necessary for the aforementioned changes to work. First, let’s declare
the properties and their setter methods:
@export var thrusting = false : set = set_thrusting @export var turning = false :
set = set_turning
@export_range(-1, 1, 1) var direction = 0 : set = set_direction
6. Then, let’s declare these methods; here’s the trick – they are RPCs that any peer can call, and they will be called locally:
@rpc("any_peer", "call_local")
func set_thrusting(is_thrusting):
thrusting = is_thrusting
@rpc("any_peer", "call_local")
func set_turning(is_turning):
turning = is_turning
@rpc("any_peer", "call_local")
func set_direction(new_direction):
direction = new_direction
7. Then, we will make changes to the thrust() and turn() methods. The whole idea is that they will receive the delta as an
argument now. The turn() doesn’t need to receive a direction argument anymore, since the direction became a member
variable:
func thrust(delta):
linear_velocity += (acceleration * delta) * Vector2.RIGHT.rotated(rotation)
func turn(delta):
angular_velocity += (direction * turn_torque) * delta
8. Finally, we will use the _physics_process() callback to call the thrust() and turn() methods, based on the thrusting
and turning variable states:
func _physics_process(delta):

if thrusting:
thrust(delta)
if turning:
turn(delta)

With that, we have everything we need to keep the movement as it was, but now the server is
responsible for responding to the player’s input instead of being passive to how the Spaceship
node behaved in the player’s game instance. This is important, due to how lag and latency
compensation works, as we need an instance of the game to always fall back to if we need to
update some data that may have been lost on the network. On top of that, some techniques
involve the server side ultimately handling discrepancies. There’s an excellent video on YouTube
called How to reduce Lag - A Tutorial on Lag Compensation Techniques for Online Games that
explains the role of each side of the connection in lag compensation techniques. This video is
available at this link and is highly recommended: https://www.youtube.com/watch?
v=2kIgbvl7FRs.
Now that we have this in place, we can start to implement the actual techniques that will help us deal
with this issue. In the next section, we will set up our fake lag mechanisms, which are basically
twoTimers, and see how we can use the Tween node to implement interpolation in our game so that we

can create a fluid motion, based on the sparse Spaceship node position and rotation updates.

Bridging the gaps with interpolation
Interpolation is the art of filling in the gaps between received data points. When data packets arrive
at irregular intervals due to network latency or packet loss, interpolation ensures that the movement
of characters, objects, and projectiles appears smooth and continuous. Imagine it as the magic glue
that binds fragmented data, allowing players to witness uninterrupted, fluid motion.
In this section, we will see how we can use the Tween class to interpolate the sparse data we will
receive from players. Tween is a specialized class that is used to interpolate values in Godot Engine.
We will also use the lerping methods, lerp() and lerp_angle(), to find the correct values to use in
the interpolation, especially for Spaceship’s rotation angles.
To fake some latency, we will use Timer nodes so that we can see how our interpolation will work in
different scenarios. However, ideally, you would use ENetPacketPeer.get_statistic() method
passing ENetPacketPeer.PEER_ROUND_TRIP_TIME as argument to get access to the actual network
latency. We can access the ENetPacketPeer instance referring to the server’s peer connection using
multiplayer.multiplayer_peer.get_peer(1)in order to call the get_statistic() method on it. So, to

access a player’s latency to a server, we can use the following code snippet:
# Only clients should get statistics about their connection with the server, so we don't

call that on the server itself.
if not multiplayer.is_server():
var server_connection = multiplayer.multiplayer_peer.get_peer(1)
var latency = server_connection.get_statistic(ENetPacketPeer.PEER_ROUND_TRIP_TIM
E))
print(latency)

That being said, we are going to make some changes to the Player scene and script so that we can
implement the interpolation logic and understand how to use this technique. Open the
res://09.prototyping-space-adventure/Actors/Player/Player2D.tscn scene and follow the

following steps to implement our interpolation logic:
1. Since we are not syncing the Spaceship node’s position and rotation properties using the MultiplayerSynchronizer
node anymore, we are going to add Timer node to simulate some latency. So, add a new Timer node to the scene, and name it
InterpolationTimer.

Figure 12.2 – Player’s scene node hierarchy with the newly added InterpolationTimer
2. Then, let’s set Process Callback to Physics and Wait Time to 0.1. In this context, Wait Time represents, in seconds, the latency
we want to simulate. A 0.1 wait time would be as high as a 100 ms latency, which is already high enough for players to start
noticing some jittering and noticeable delays in their interactions.

Figure 12.3 – The InterpolationTimer node settings
3. With that, our next step is to connect the timeout signal to the Player node’s script; we can create a callback method called
_on_interpolation_timer_timeout(), like so:

Figure 12.4 – The InterpolationTimer timeout signal connection
4. Then, let’s move on to the res://09.prototyping-space-nadventure/Actors/Player/Player2D.gd script.
Here, we will create two new variables to store the previously known Spaceship node’s position and rotation. This will be
necessary to interpolate from the previous to the newest values moving forward:
@onready var previous_position = spaceship.position
@onready var previous_rotation = spaceship.rotation
5. Now, in the _on_interpolation_timer_timeout() callback, we will make two RPC calls. One to the the
"interpolate_position"method and the other to the "interpolate_rotation" method. These methods will ask for
two arguments – the target property (for example, position or rotation), and the duration of the interpolation. In this case, we will
use the InterpolationTimer.wait_time property as the duration, since this is the time interval between network updates
in this context. We will set up these methods in the following steps:
func _on_interpolation_timer_timeout():
rpc("interpolate_position", spaceship.position, $InterpolationTimer.wait_time)
rpc("interpolate_rotation", spaceship.rotation, $InterpolationTimer.wait_time)
6. Now, let’s declare these methods, starting with interpolate_position(). Only the server should be able to call these
methods remotely because it’s the server that will update these properties, so their @rpc annotation should use "authority"
and "call_remote" as options:

@rpc("authority", "call_remote")
func interpolate_position(target_position, duration_in_seconds):
7. Inside the interpolate_position() method, the first thing we will do is create a new Tween instance and store it in a
variable, using the create_tween() method:
@rpc("authority", "call_remote")
func interpolate_position(target_position, duration_in_seconds):
var tween = create_tween()
8. Then, we will use the lerp() function to figure out the final value we will use in the interpolation. For the position property,
this is not as useful, but it will be in the rotation case. However, let’s do it this way to maintain some consistency between these
functions:
@rpc("authority", "call_remote")
func interpolate_position(target_position, duration_in_seconds):
var tween = create_tween()
9. Since we are playing with a body that will run some physics simulation, it’s safer to use the
Tween.TWEEN_PROCESS_PHYSICS mode in tween variable so that the interpolation happens during the physics processing.
For that, we use the Tween.set_process_mode() method:
@rpc("authority", "call_remote")
func interpolate_position(target_position, duration_in_seconds):
var tween = create_tween()
var final_value = lerp(previous_position, target_position, 1.0)
tween.set_process_mode(Tween.TWEEN_PROCESS_PHYSICS)
10. Then, we can start the actual interpolation; we will store it into a variable called tweener, as Tween.tween_property
returns a PropertyTween object that we can use when necessary. In this function, we pass four arguments – the object, the
property that’s going to be interpolated, the target value, and the duration of the interpolation in seconds:
@rpc("authority", "call_remote")
func interpolate_position(target_position, duration_in_seconds):
var tween = create_tween()
var final_value = lerp(previous_position, target_position, 1.0)
tween.set_process_mode(Tween.TWEEN_PROCESS_PHYSICS)
var tweener = tween.tween_property(spaceship, "position", final_value,
duration_
in_seconds)
11. To ensure the interpolation will happen from the previous known value and the most recent one, we will change tweener’s
starting value, using the from() method and passing previous_position as an argument:
@rpc("authority", "call_remote")
func interpolate_position(target_position, duration_in_seconds):
var tween = create_tween()
var final_value = lerp(previous_position, target_position, 1.0)
tween.set_process_mode(Tween.TWEEN_PROCESS_PHYSICS)
var tweener = tween.tween_property(spaceship, "position", final_value,
duration_
in_seconds)
tweener.from(previous_position)
12. Then, we update previous_posistion to match the now-known most current value, which is our final_value:
@rpc("authority", "call_remote")
func interpolate_position(target_position, duration_in_seconds):var tween =

create_tween()
var final_value = lerp(previous_position, target_position, 1.0)
tween.set_process_mode(Tween.TWEEN_PROCESS_PHYSICS)
var tweener = tween.tween_property(spaceship, "position", final_value,
duration_
in_seconds)
tweener.from(previous_position)
previous_position = final_value
13. As for interpolate_rotation, we will do the same thing, but this time, we will use the lerp_angle() function. This is
because interpolating angles is a bit trickier, as we would need to know the shortest path between the starting and target angles.
Using this function with a weight of 1.0 provides the final value properly and saves us a lot of time. The whole
interpolate_rotation() method is very similar to the interpolate_position() method but, of course, passing
the previous_rotation variable instead of the previous_position variable. It looks like this:
@rpc("authority", "call_remote")
func interpolate_rotation(target_rotation, duration_in_seconds):
var tween = create_tween()
var final_value = lerp_angle(previous_rotation, target_rotation, 1.0)
tween.set_process_mode(Tween.TWEEN_PROCESS_PHYSICS)
var tweener = tween.tween_property(spaceship, "rotation", final_value,
duration_
in_seconds)
tweener.from(previous_rotation)
previous_rotation = final_value
14. Now, we need to start InterpolationTimer if the current instance is the connection’s server. For that, move to the
setup_multiplayer() method and add an else statement; inside it, start the timer. Don’t forget to remove the line that sets
up the new instance authority, as from now on, the server itself will always be Player’s authority. The
setup_multiplayer() method should look like this:
@rpc("any_peer", "call_local")
func setup_multiplayer(player_id):
var self_id = multiplayer.get_unique_id() var
player_id
set_process_unhandled_input(is_player)
is_player
if not multiplayer.is_server():
camera.make_current()
else:

is_player = self_id ==
camera.enabled =

And there we have it – our interpolation logic is ready to smoothly move and rotate our Spaceship
node, just by getting sparse updates from a server. Note that since we are faking some latency, we
are using a fixed interpolation duration. In a more realistic scenario, you’d use the
ENetPacketPeer.PEER_ROUND_TRIP_TIME statistic as a reference for the actual interpolation

duration.
In this section, we saw how we can use the Timer node to fake some latency and, by using the Tween
class, interpolate between two known values for the Spaceship node’s position and rotation. We also
saw how to access some statistics regarding the connection between two peers, especially regarding
the latency between clients and a server. However, what happens when we need to keep some
consistency in movement while we don’t get updates from the server? This is what we will discuss in
the next section!

Playing ahead with prediction
Prediction, different from interpolation, is all about playing ahead of the game – quite literally. It
involves making informed guesses about an object’s future position based on its past behavior. When
network delays cause data updates to lag, prediction steps in, ensuring that your character’s actions
remain responsive and instantaneous, even in the face of network hiccups.
To implement prediction, we are going to use some Newtonian physics to calculate the Spaceship
node’s velocity and project, based on this calculation, where it will likely be in the next tic, and use it
to extrapolate its position and rotation moving forward. This will help us prevent the Spaceship node
from idling.
A core aspect of prediction and extrapolation is that they aim to fix some drawbacks of the
interpolation. For instance, from time to time, we need to re-sync the actual Spaceship node’s
position because, otherwise, due to the interpolation duration and potential latency involved, the
Spaceship node will always be lagged behind, and this can accumulate to a point where the game

isn’t played in real time anymore. Also, we will use this synchronization time as a reference for the
predictions. So, open the res://09.prototyping-space-adventure/Actors/Player/Player2D.tscn
scene, and let’s start implementing the necessary steps:
1. First of all, let’s add a new Timer node, and name it SynchronizationTimer. This one needs to be at a pace greater than
InterpolationTimer.

Figure 12.5 – Player’s scene hierarchy with the SynchronizationTimer node
2. Then, we will connect SynchronizationTimer node’s timeout signal to the Player node’s script in a callback, which
we can name _on_synchronization_timer_timeout().

Figure 12.6 – The SynchronizationTimer timeout signal connecting to Player’s _on_synchronization_timer_timeout()
method
3. Then, let’s open the res://09.prototyping-space- adventure/Actors/Player/Player2D.gd script, and in
the setup_multiplayer() method, we will also start SynchronizationTimer if this instance is the server:
@rpc("any_peer", "call_local")
func setup_multiplayer(player_id):
var self_id = multiplayer.get_unique_id()
var is_player = self_id == player_id
set_process_unhandled_input(is_player)
camera.enabled = is_player
if not multiplayer.is_server():
camera.make_current()
else:
$InterpolationTimer.start()
$SynchronizationTimer.start()
4. Now, in the _on_synchronization_timer_timeout() callback, we will make two RPCs – one to a method called
synchronize_position() and another to a method called synchronize_rotation(). We will implement these
methods shortly, but for now, just know they ask for a target position and rotation, respectively, and a synchronization tic. For the
synchronization tic, we will use the SynchronizationTimer node’s wait_time property as reference:
func _on_synchronization_timer_timeout():
rpc("synchronize_position", spaceship.position,
$SynchronizationTimer.wait_time)
rpc("synchronize_rotation", spaceship.rotation,
$SynchronizationTimer.wait_time)

5. Now, let’s start by implementing the synchronize_position() method. Only the Multiplayer Authority (in this case, the
server) should be able to make an RPC to this method, and since the server doesn’t need to sync its own Spaceship node, it
should only call remotely:
@rpc("authority", "call_remote")
func synchronize_position(new_position, synchronization_tic):
6. Inside this method, we will stop all currently processing Tween instances; note that this approach works in our game because we
only have the interpolate_*() methods creating Tween instances. If you have other Tween instances running in your
game, I recommend storing them in an array and running through them to stop the active ones. We do that to stop the interpolation
from continuing as we will set the Spaceship node’s final position manually:
@rpc("authority", "call_remote")
func synchronize_position(new_position, synchronization_tic):
for tween in get_tree().get_processed_tweens():
tween.stop()
7. Then, we will create a variable to store the future position, based on a prediction we will make, taking the previous and the new
positions we just received. We will work on the prediction method later, but for now, just know that it will ask for a new position
and how many seconds ahead you want to predict. We will use this prediction to extrapolate movement when we implement
extrapolation in the Gazing into the future with extrapolation section:
@rpc("authority", "call_remote")
func synchronize_position(new_position,
synchronization_tic):
for tween in get_tree().get_processed_tweens():
tween.stop()
var future_position = predict_position(new_position, synchronization_tic)
8. After that, we can set the Spaceship node’s position to the new position and update previous_position to match the
most recent value, so in the next tic, it maintains a reference to the previously updated value:
@rpc("authority", "call_remote")
func synchronize_position(new_position, synchronization_tic):
for tween in get_tree().get_processed_tweens():
tween.stop()
var future_position = predict_position(new_position, synchronization_tic)
spaceship.position = new_position
previous_position = new_position
9. As for the predict_position() method, it will happen locally on the client’s machine, so there’s no need to make an RPC
here. Let’s declare the function’s signature and see how we can predict the future with some physics:
func predict_position(new_position, seconds_ahead):

Inside the predict_position() method, we will calculate the distance from the previous position
to the new one. We will also calculate the direction from the previous position to the new position
so that we have Vector2 to work with, predicting the movement’s velocity:
func predict_position(new_position, seconds_ahead):
var distance = previous_position.distance_to(new_position)
var direction = previous_position.direction_to(new_position)
10. With that, we will calculate the movement’s linear velocity, based on how many seconds ahead we want to predict. We will then
set this linear velocity as the Spaceship.linear_velocity property so that we it doesn’t idle between updates, asthe
Spaceship node will start moving using this new velocity:

func predict_position(new_position, seconds_ahead): var distance =
previous_position.distance_to(new_position) var direction =
previous_position.direction_to(new_position) var linear_velocity = (direction *
distance) / seconds_ahead spaceship.linear_velocity = linear_velocity
11. Finally, we will add the linear velocity to the new position to predict what will be the next position. We will then return this new
position so that we can use this value when we decide to extrapolate the Spaceship node’s movement:
func predict_position(new_position, seconds_ahead):
var distance = previous_position.distance_to(new_position)
var direction = previous_position.direction_to(new_position)
var linear_velocity = (direction * distance) / seconds_ahead
spaceship.linear_velocity = linear_velocity
var next_position = new_position + (linear_velocity * seconds_ahead)
return next_position
12. The logic to predict the rotation will be exactly the same, but take into account that we will use the learp_angle() built-in
method to figure out the closest angle to extrapolate to. The synchronize_rotation() method will look like this:
@rpc("authority", "call_remote")
func synchronize_rotation(new_rotation, synchronization_tic):
for tween in get_tree().get_processed_tweens():
tween.stop()
var future_rotation = predict_rotation(new_rotation, synchronization_tic)
spaceship.rotation = new_rotation
previous_rotation = new_rotation
13. The predict_rotation() method will look like this:
func predict_rotation(new_rotation, seconds_ahead):
var angular_velocity = lerp_angle(previous_rotation, new_rotation, 1.0) / second
s_ahead
spaceship.angular_velocity = angular_velocity
var next_rotation = spaceship.rotation + (angular_velocity * seconds_ahead)
return next_rotation

With that, we can start to make assumptions of where the Spaceship node is likely to be in the
near future, based on SynchronizationTimer node’s tics. However, note that this is a very
important available function on the server side, as sometimes, we may want to use it to mitigate
lag in Player interactions and trigger the right game events. For instance, if we decide to have
some player versus player (PvP) interactions, we may need to predict where a given player’s
Spaceship was when another player fired their gun. This is because, due to latency, the player
may have made a guessed shot and landed a hit. However, it is up to the server to decide whether
the shot would actually land, given the latency and other aspects.
In this section, we have seen two important techniques to handle lag and latency in online multiplayer
games – prediction and synchronization. Prediction involves making informed guesses about an
object’s future position and rotation, based on its past behavior. To implement prediction, Newtonian
physics calculations are used to calculate the Spaceship node’s velocity and project its likely future
position and rotation.

We also saw how to implement the synchronization process, by stopping ongoing Tween instances and
updating the Spaceship node’s position and rotation accordingly.
In the next section, we will use the predicted position and rotation to extrapolate Spaceship node’s
movement, both linear and angular, so that if we happen to miss updates, we can at least fake a
movement and fix it in the synchronization later if necessary.

Gazing into the future with extrapolation
Extrapolation is the visionary member of the lag compensation trio, gazing into the future to
anticipate where objects will be next. By analyzing the current state of a game and the trajectory of
objects, extrapolation extends beyond the data you have, offering a glimpse into what lies ahead. This
technique is particularly handy for fast-paced games, where a split-second delay can mean the
difference between victory and defeat.
The whole idea of extrapolation is that it is an interpolation into the future. Using the predictions
we’ve made, we can create another interpolation, based on some assumptions of where a player is
likely to be while we wait for its actual position. This will prevent hiccups and idling between
updates. Let’s implement our extrapolation algorithm. Open the res://09.prototyping-spaceadventure/Actors/Player/Player2D.gd script, and follow the following steps:

1. Starting with the function’s signature, the extrapolation_position() method will ask for the next position and duration
in seconds that the extrapolation lasts for. Here, we will use terms similar to the ones in prediction, such as seconds_ahead, as
we will work with future timing:
func extrapolate_position(next_position, seconds_ahead):
2. This function only happens on the client side, so there’s no need to add any RPC annotations to it. Inside this function, we will use
a new Tween instance to interpolate from the previous known position to the predicted next position, using seconds_ahead
variable as the duration:
func extrapolate_position(next_position, seconds_ahead):
var tween = create_tween()
tween.set_process_mode(Tween.TWEEN_PROCESS_PHYSICS)
var tweener = tween.tween_property(spaceship, "position", next_position,
seconds_ahead)
tweener.from(previous_position)
3. And that’s basically it. We will call the extrapolate_position() method inside the synchronize_position()
method right before updating the current and previous positions. Also, we will use the future_position variable, which
stores the predicted position as an argument for the extrapolated next position:
@rpc("authority", "call_remote")
func synchronize_position(new_position, synchronization_tic):
for tween in get_tree().get_processed_tweens():
tween.stop()
var future_position = predict_position(new_position, synchronization_tic)

extrapolate_position(future_position, synchronization_tic)
spaceship.position = new_position
previous_position = new_position
4. We do the same thing for the extrapolate_rotation() method. It should look like this:
func extrapolate_rotation(target_rotation, seconds_ahead):
var tween = create_tween()
tween.set_process_mode(Tween.TWEEN_PROCESS_PHYSICS)
var tweener = tween.tween_property(spaceship, "rotation", target_rotation,
secon
ds_ahead)
tweener.from(previous_rotation)
5. The synchronize_rotation() method should look like this after adding the line to call the
extrapolate_rotation() method, using the future_rotation variable as an argument:
@rpc("authority", "call_remote")
func synchronize_rotation(new_rotation, synchronization_tic):
for tween in get_tree().get_processed_tweens():
tween.stop()
var future_rotation = predict_rotation(new_rotation, synchronization_tic)
extrapolate_rotation(future_rotation, synchronization_tic)
spaceship.rotation = new_rotation
previous_rotation = new_rotation

In this section, you learned about the concept of extrapolation in the context of online multiplayer
game development. Extrapolation is a technique that looks into the future to anticipate where objects
will be next. By analyzing the current state of a game and the trajectory of objects, extrapolation
extends beyond the available data, providing a glimpse into what lies ahead. It is particularly useful
in fast-paced games where a split-second delay can significantly impact gameplay. The
implementation of extrapolation involves interpolating from the previous known position and rotation
to the predicted next position and rotation, using Tween instances, with the duration set to the desired
time into the future.

Summary
In this chapter, we learned about the issues caused by lag, latency, and packet loss. Then, we saw how
to fix them by implementing lag compensation techniques. We explored the concepts of interpolation,
prediction, synchronization, and extrapolation to ensure smooth and responsive gameplay, even in the
face of network delays.
First, we delved into interpolation, which is the core technique regarding lag compensation.
Interpolation helps to fix some drawbacks of latency and sparse data updates by animating between
two known values, while actual updates don’t arrive. This ensures that the Spaceship node won’t
idling, waiting for new updates from the network. It will smoothly move toward new data, instead of
abruptly teleporting to it.

Then, we discussed prediction, which involves making informed guesses about an object’s future
position, based on its past behavior. By using Newtonian physics calculations, we were able to
calculate the spaceship’s velocity and project its likely future position and rotation. This helps
prevent idle movements and keeps gameplay responsive.
We then explored extrapolation, which extends beyond available data to anticipate where objects will
be next. By interpolating from the previous known position and rotation to the predicted next position
and rotation, we were able to create smooth movements, even when updates were missed. This
technique is particularly useful in fast-paced games where split-second delays can significantly
impact gameplay.
By implementing these lag compensation techniques, we can provide players with a seamless and
immersive multiplayer gaming experience, even in the presence of network hiccups and delays.
In the next chapter, we will see how we can store some data on a client’s machine to reduce the
bandwidth used in our game, relying on data that the players already have available on their
machines.
OceanofPDF.com

13
Caching Data to Decrease Bandwidth
When it comes to reducing bandwidth usage and optimizing network usage in game development,
there is a powerful technique that always comes to mind: caching.
Caching solves the question of why we should keep downloading the same data repeatedly when we
can download it once, store it somewhere, and reuse it whenever needed. In this chapter, we will
delve into caching techniques and learn how to apply them to efficiently download, store, and reuse
images and other relevant data. For that, we will use a database that contains image URLs that we are
going to download directly from the internet into our players’ machines.
To demonstrate the implementation of these caching techniques, we will prototype a new feature in
our game project, where players will have the ability to upload custom images for their spaceships.
To save time and focus solely on the network aspect of this feature, we will avoid implementing user
experience and user interface aspects, leaving those tasks to the talented individuals in our imaginary
indie studio. Your role, as a developer, will be to tackle the network-related aspects of this feature and
ensure its seamless integration.
In the following screenshot, you can witness the exciting results of this feature in action. Two players
are engaging in the game with their own custom spaceship sprites, which have been downloaded
from the server. These sprites are sourced from Twemoji, an open source repository of Creative
Commons-licensed emojis maintained by Twitter.

Figure 13.1 – The custom spaceship sprites downloaded from the server for the two players

The topics covered in this chapter are as follows:
Understanding caching
Setting up the HTTPRequest node
Implementing texture caching
Implementing database caching
Going further with caching

Technical requirements
It is worth mentioning that this chapter builds upon the concepts presented in Chapter 10, Debugging
and Profiling the Network, as well as the project developed in Chapter 9, Creating an Online
Adventure Prototype. Therefore, it is crucial to familiarize yourself with the concepts and techniques
discussed in those chapters to fully grasp the optimization methods presented here. We will also build
upon the final project from Chapter 12, Implementing Lag Compensation, for which you can get the
files through the following link:

https://github.com/PacktPublishing/The-Essential-Guide-to-Creating-Multiplayer-Games-withGodot-4.0/tree/12.prediction-and-interpolation
Moreover, throughout this chapter, it is important to have a basic understanding of how to upload and
host content on online services. For instance, we will be downloading files directly from the project’s
GitHub repository and from a service called ImgBB, a free image-hosting platform. Without
understanding the mechanisms behind content hosting and retrieval using direct links, you may
encounter difficulties in understanding and implementing the processes we are about to explore.
To enrich your learning experience, I highly recommend downloading the latest version of the
Twemoji repository, which can be obtained from https://github.com/twitter/twemoji. By exploring
this repository, you will gain further insights into how images and other media content can be
managed and incorporated into your game development projects.
That said, let’s understand what caching is and how we are going to use it in our game project.

Understanding caching
In online multiplayer games, every second counts. Players expect seamless, real-time experiences
without interruptions. This is where caching becomes a powerful ally in optimizing game
performance. So, what exactly is caching, and why is it crucial for online multiplayer games?
Caching is the process of storing frequently accessed data or resources on a local device or
intermediate server. These resources can include images, sound files, 3D models, or even small
snippets of code. Instead of fetching these resources from a remote server every time they are needed,
the game stores them locally. When a request for these resources arises, the game checks whether it
already has a local copy. If it does, it uses the local version, significantly reducing loading times and
conserving precious network bandwidth.
The principle behind caching is simple yet effective: if you’ve used something once, it’s likely you’ll
need it again. In the context of our multiplayer game, this means that the images, sounds, and assets
that players download to customize their spaceships can be cached locally on their devices. When
another player comes into view, the game can retrieve these assets from the local cache instead of redownloading them. This creates a more streamlined experience and reduces the stress on the network.
Caching offers numerous advantages in online multiplayer games. The most prominent benefit is an
enhanced gaming experience. By using cached resources, players can swiftly interact with others, see
their personalized spaceship designs, and engage in combat without significant delays. Reduced
loading times translate to more fluid and immersive gameplay. Moreover, this process eases the strain
on the server, enabling it to handle more players simultaneously.

Caching is not just about speed; it’s also about efficiency. Downloading the same resources
repeatedly not only wastes bandwidth but also makes the game less environmentally friendly and
potentially costly for players with limited data plans. By caching frequently used resources, the game
becomes faster, more eco-friendly, and cost-effective.
In the following sections, we will explore how to leverage the powerful HTTPRequest node to
implement caching for customized spaceship images. We will dive into the processes of downloading
these images and ensuring their availability in each player’s cache, enhancing the online multiplayer
experience. Stay tuned for a step-by-step guide on how to implement caching in your game.

Setting up the HTTPRequest node
As mentioned in the chapter’s introduction, we are going to implement a feature that allows players
to use custom sprites on their spaceships.
To prototype this feature, we will download images from a third-party image-hosting service that
offers free image hosting. We will accomplish this by using a Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP)
request to retrieve the image file from the third-party servers. Let’s delve into the workings of HTTP
to fully understand how it operates and grasp the implementation process.

Understanding the HTTP protocol
HTTP serves as the foundation for communication on the World Wide Web. It is a protocol that
defines the interaction and data exchange between clients and servers. Invented by Tim Berners-Lee
in the early 1990s, HTTP was initially designed to facilitate the retrieval of hypertext documents,
commonly known as web pages. Over time, it has evolved to support various types of content,
including images, videos, and files.
When a client, such as our player, wants to retrieve a resource from a server, it initiates an HTTP
request. This request consists of a method that specifies the desired action to be performed on the
resource, along with a Uniform Resource Locator (URL) that indicates the location of the resource.
The most-used HTTP methods are GET, POST, PUT, and DELETE. In the context of downloading images,
the GET method is what we typically employ.
Upon receiving the HTTP request, the server processes it and prepares an HTTP response. This
response contains the requested resource, accompanied by metadata such as the HTTP status code,
content type, and content length.

Additionally, the server includes headers in the response to provide further information or
instructions to the client.
To download images using HTTP, the client sends a GET request to the server, specifying the URL of
the image. The server then processes this request and sends back an HTTP response that contains the
image data. The client receives this response and interprets it to display the image to the user.
HTTP operates as a stateless protocol, meaning that each request-response cycle is independent and
does not retain any information about previous interactions.
However, mechanisms such as cookies and session management can be employed to maintain state
and enable more complex interactions.
In summary, HTTP serves as the protocol that facilitates communication between clients and servers
on the web. It enables us to download images and other resources by sending HTTP requests to
servers and receiving HTTP responses that contain the requested data. Understanding the workings of
HTTP is essential for implementing features such as downloading images in our game project.
The reason we are going to use HTTP requests is because the types of files we want to cache are
fairly large compared to the kind of data we usually transfer using Remote Procedure Calls (RPCs).
Remember, the ENet library relies heavily on UDP, which isn’t the best option when we want reliable
big chunks of data exchange; as UDP aims for high-speed data exchange, packets may arrive at their
destination unorganized, and they may not even arrive at the destination at all. When dealing with
images, we quickly reach kilobytes or even megabytes of data, so compared to our usual byte
exchanges through RPCs and MultiPlayerSynchronizers, it’s very heavy content. But HTTP is meant
precisely for that. In the upcoming section, we are going to set up the HTTPRequest nodes and a
minimal database where we will pair the players’ usernames and the URLs of their custom spaceship
sprites. This database is intended to go on the server side and be cached in the player’s machine later,
as we will see in the Implementing database caching section.

Setting up the scenes and database
Let’s begin setting up the scenes and database.
To create our database, let’s open the res://09.prototyping-space-adventure/ folder and create a
new text file. You can quickly do that by right-clicking the folder in the FileSystem dock. The
following screenshot displays the menu that pops up. From there, select New | TextFile....

Figure 13.2 – Creating a new text file directly through the FileSystem dock

Then, create a file named PlayerSpaceships.json, as shown in the following screenshot:

Figure 13.3 – Creating a new text file named PlayerSpaceships.json

Now, regarding the content, we are going to maintain the users from the FakeDatabase we created in
Chapter 2, Sending and Receiving Data, and pair them with the URLs from the images we want to
prototype. In this case, I used a service called ImgBB, which allows me to upload the images I
rendered from the Twemoji repository. I used the rocket and the saucer emojis as references for these
custom sprites. The content of the PlayerSpaceships.json file will look like this:
{
"user1": "https://i.ibb.co/KxqzJMp/rocket.png",
"user2": "https://i.ibb.co/d7BR6hX/saucer.png"
}

Note that you can experiment with other images and hosting services. As long as you have the
image’s direct link, usually pointing to the .png file, you will be good.
Now, it’s time to set up the HTTPRequest nodes. We are going to start by downloading the
PlayerSpaceships.json file from the server. In our case, this file is hosted on GitHub, but you can

store it on another server as long as you have a direct link to the actual database file. In our case you
can find it here:
raw.githubusercontent.com/PacktPublishing/The-Essential-Guide-to-Creating-Multiplayer-Gameswith-Godot-4.0/13.caching-data/source/09.prototyping-space-adventure/PlayerSpaceships.json

With the PlayerSpaceships.json file up on the internet, let’s see how we can download it to our
players’ machines with the following steps:
1. Create a new scene and use an HTTPRequest node as the root node.
2. Rename it to SpaceshipsDatabaseDownloadHTTPRequest, as this node will be responsible for downloading the
database from the internet.
3. Attach a new script to this node and save the scene and the script. Here I saved them directly as res://09.prototypingspace- adventure/SpaceshipsDatabaseDownloadHTTPRequest.
4. Now, open the script, and let’s do the following:
1. Create an exported variable for the path to the folder that we will use for caching. Here it’s important to use the
user:// data folder path so Godot Engine properly adapts the path depending on the platform the game is running
on:

extends HTTPRequest
@export_global_dir var cache_directory = "user://.cache/"
2. Then, create a new exported variable that should point to where the database file is going to be saved. Let’s keep its
default filename and put it into the cache folder:
extends HTTPRequest
@export_global_dir var cache_directory = "user://.cache/"
@export_global_file var spaceships_database_path = "user://.
hips.json"

cache/PlayerSpaces

3. After that, we can export yet another variable. But now we need to store the link of the location where the
PlayerSpaceships.json file will be downloaded from:
extends HTTPRequest
@export_global_dir var cache_directory = "user://.cache/"
@export_global_file var spaceships_database_path = "user://.cache/PlayerSpaces
hips.json"
@export var spaceships_database_link =
"https://raw.githubusercontent.com/PacktPublishing/The-Essential-Guide-to-CreatingMultiplayer-Games-with-Godot-4.0/13.caching-data/source/09.prototyping-spaceadventure/PlayerSpaceships.json"
4. With that, we can move on to the actual downloading method. Create a new method called
download_spaceships_database() and let’s start its implementation.
5. The first thing we are going to do here is to check whether there’s a cache directory already. If we don’t have it yet, we
will create it:
func download_spaceships_database():
var directory_access = DirAccess.open(cache_directory)
if not directory_access:
DirAccess.make_dir_absolute(cache_directory)
6. Then, we will check whether the PlayerSpaceships.json file exists. If it doesn’t, we will start the actual
download. The first thing to start the download is to set the file path in the download_file member variable:

func download_spaceships_database():
var directory_access = DirAccess.open(cache_directory)
if not directory_access:
DirAccess.make_dir_absolute(cache_directory)
var file_access = FileAccess.open(spaceships_database_path, FileAccess.READ)
if not file_access:
download_file = spaceships_database_path
7. With download_file set, we can make the request to the file. For that, we will use the request() method,
which asks for a URL. This method uses the GET method by default to make requests, which is what we want in this
case. But you can change this in the third argument, right after passing some custom headers if you want. We don’t
have to pass anything other than the URL in our case:
func download_spaceships_database():
var directory_access = DirAccess.open(cache_directory)
if not directory_access:
DirAccess.make_dir_absolute(cache_directory)
var file_access = FileAccess.open(spaceships_database_path, FileAccess.READ)
if not file_access:
download_file = spaceships_database_path
request(spaceships_database_link)
8. After that, we need to wait for the request to finish. Remember, since this is an asynchronous procedure, the game
needs to wait for it to complete before moving on to any logic that depends on this file:
func download_spaceships_database():
var directory_access = DirAccess.open(cache_directory)
if not directory_access:
DirAccess.make_dir_absolute(cache_directory)
var file_access = FileAccess.open(spaceships_database_path, FileAccess.READ)
if not file_access:
download_file = spaceships_database_path
request(spaceships_database_link)
await request_completed

After following the preceding steps, we should have our SpaceshipsDatabaseDownloadHTTPRequest
working. If you want to, you can test it out. For that, call the download_spaceship_database() method
in the _ready() callback and run the scene. After that, if you open the user data folder, you will see
the .cache/ folder and if you enter this folder you should find the PlayerSpaceships.json file there.
Note that in this case the .cache/ is a hidden folder, so make sure you can see hidden folders in your
file manager. To quickly open the user data folder, you can go to Project | Open User Data Folder,
as shown in the following screenshot:

Figure 13.4 - Open User Data Folder from the Editor’s Project tab

Now, let’s create the TextureDownloadHTTPRequest scene so we can use the data in
PlayerSpaceships.json to effectively download the players’ custom spaceship sprites. For that,

follow these steps:
1. Create a new scene and use an HTTPRequest node as root.
2. Rename it TextureDownloadHTTPRequest as this is the one actually responsible for downloading the textures from the
internet.
3. Save the scene as res://09.prototyping-space- adventure/TextureDownloadHTTPRequest.tscn and
attach a script to it, then in the script let’s do the following:
1. Export a variable that should point to the PlayerSpaceships.json file in the player’s machine, so this path
should use the user:// file path:

extends HTTPRequest
@export_global_file var spaceships_database_file = "user://.cache/PlayerSpaces
hips.json"
2. Create a new method called download_spaceship(). This method should receive two arguments, one for the
user and another one for the file path where the sprite will be saved:
extends HTTPRequest
@export_global_file var spaceships_database_file = "user://.cache/PlayerSpaces
hips.json"
func download_spaceship(user, sprite_file):
3. Then, inside this method, we will create a new Dictionary called players_spaceships, which will start
empty but will soon store the content from the PlayerSpaceships.json file:

func download_spaceship(user, sprite_file):
var players_spaceships = {}
4. Now, we are going to check whether the file provided by the spaceships_database_file path exists. If it
does, we will open it, convert it to a string using FileAccess.get_as_text() , and parse it from JSON format
to Dictionary object format, storing it in the players_spaceships variable:
func download_spaceship(user, sprite_file):
var players_spaceships = {}
if
FileAccess.file_exists(spaceships_database_file):
var file = FileAccess.open(spaceships_database_file, FileAccess.READ)
players_spaceships = JSON.parse_string(file.get_as_text())
5. After that, we can download the user sprite based on the URL provided by the PlayerSpaceships.json
database and store it in the file path provided by the sprite_file argument. For that, we will use
HTTPRequest.download_file and download it using the HTTPRequest.request() method. Note that this
method returns an error if the request has any issues. Let’s store this in an error variable to allow other classes to
verify whether the request was successful:
func download_spaceship(user, sprite_file):
var players_spaceships = {}
if FileAccess.file_exists(spaceships_database_file):
var file = FileAccess.open(spaceships_database_file, FileAccess.READ)
players_spaceships = JSON.parse_string(file.get_as_text())
if user in players_spaceships:
download_file = sprite_file
var error = request(players_spaceships[user])
6. Since HTTP requests may take some time to finish downloading the content requested, we need to wait for the
HTTPRequest.request_completed signal before ending the function and returning the error. Note that if the
function doesn’t reach any of these conditional statements, we should return FAILED to acknowledge to other classes
that spaceships_database_file doesn’t exist or user doesn’t exist in the database:
func download_spaceship(user, sprite_file):
var players_spaceships = {}
if FileAccess.file_exists(spaceships_database_file):
var file = FileAccess.open(spaceships_database_file, FileAccess.READ)
players_spaceships = JSON.parse_string(file.get_as_text())
if user in players_spaceships:
download_file = sprite_file
var error = request(players_spaceships[user])
await request_completed
return error
return FAILED

Alright, this ends our journey to set up HTTPRequests. We created the database and the two nodes
responsible for working on its data, downloading the database to the players’ machines, and
downloading the content in the database as well, in this case, the players’ spaceships’ custom sprites.
You can test the scene as well by calling the download_spaceship() method using "user1" and
"user://.cache/user1_spaceship.png" as arguments. Just make sure that you’ve run the
SpaceshipDatabaseDownloadHTTPRequest scene first so the PlayersSpaceships.json file exists in the

user://.cache/ folder. With that, you should see a new image downloaded right in your user data

folder! The following screenshot shows what my user://.cache/ folder looks like:

Figure 13.5 – The user data folder with the PlayerSpaceships.json file and user1’s custom spaceship sprite

In this section, we learned about the usage of HTTP requests for caching data and downloading
images in the user data folder. We saw the difference between UDP and HTTP when it comes to
transferring large files such as images and how to use the HTTPRequest node to use the HTTP protocol
in Godot and transfer data from the internet to our machine.
In the upcoming section, we will discuss the implementation of texture caching in the game itself,
allowing for real-time changes to the players’ spaceships. This feature will be achieved by using the
HTTPRequest nodes we created and our minimal database to get the URLs of the players’ custom

spaceship sprites.

Implementing texture caching
In the previous section, we introduced the HTTPRequest node, a built-in solution offered by Godot
Engine to make HTTP requests. Then we created TextureDownloadHTTPRequest, which is a custom
node specialized in downloading images from our PlayersSpaceship.json database. Now, let’s dive
deeper into integrating this node into our Player2D class so we can actually use it in our prototype.
In this section, we will create a method to enable the server to change a player’s spaceship sprite
dynamically. But we won’t just load any sprite; we’ll fetch the proper file from the user://.cache/
folder we set up in the Setting up the scenes and database section. This approach will enhance the

customization and interaction in your game, allowing the server to deliver custom sprites to players
in real time.
To achieve this, we’ll create a method called load_spaceship(). This method will play a fundamental
role in our implementation. It will be an RPC function that the server can trigger remotely for
specific players. Well, let’s get started! Open the res://09.prototyping-spaceadventure/Actors/Player/Player2D.tscn scene and work through the following steps:

1. Let’s start by adding an instance of TextureDownloadHTTPRequest directly as a child of the Player node.

Figure 13.6 – TextureDownloadHTTPRequest instantiated in the Player scene
2. Then, open the res://09.prototyping-space-adventure/Actors/Player/Player2D.gd script.
3. Let’s store a reference to the TextureDownloadHTTPRequest node. We can call it just http_request for short:
@onready var http_request = $TextureDownloadHTTPRequest
4. Then, right below the setup_multiplayer() method, let’s create the load_spaceship() method. It will be an RPC
method that should only be remotely callable by the server and should also be called locally, so the server also updates the image.
This method receives the user, which loads the spaceship:
@rpc("authority", "call_local")
func load_spaceship(user):

5. Now, inside this method, we are going to create the file path to the spaceship texture file in the player’s machine and store it in a
variable called spaceship_file. This file path is composed of the "user://.cache/" string, followed by the user
value we got as an argument, and we will append "_spaceship.png" to create the proper file path with an image extension:
@rpc("authority", "call_local")
func load_spaceship(user):
var spaceship_file = "user://.cache/" + user + "_spaceship.png"
6. With a proper file path to work with, the next step is to see whether this file already exists because the whole idea of caching data
is that, if it already exists in the player’s machine, we can load it instead of re-downloading it and reduce resource consumption.
The following code checks whether the file exists. If it does, we call the update_sprite() method passing
spaceship_file as an argument. We are going to create the update_sprite() method in a moment:
@rpc("authority", "call_local")
func load_spaceship(user):
var spaceship_file = "user://.cache/" + user + "_spaceship.png"
if FileAccess.file_exists(spaceship_file):
update_sprite(spaceship_file)
7. Now, TextureDownloadHTTPRequest will play its role. If the file doesn’t exist in the cache folder, we call the
TextureDownloadHTTPRequest.download_texture() method and wait for it to finish; remember, it’s an
asynchronous method. And if this method returns an OK error, meaning there’s actually no error, we also call the
update_sprite() method so the game performs the procedures to effectively update the spaceship’s sprite. The following
code checks whether the update_sprite() method returns anything other than OK. If the update_sprite() method
doesn’t return OK, it means no sprite will be loaded. Since the custom sprite doesn’t affect the player’s core experience, we can
just assume we can keep the default sprite and let the game run:
@rpc("authority", "call_local")
func load_spaceship(user):
var spaceship_file = "user://.cache/" + user + "_spaceship.png"
if FileAccess.file_exists(spaceship_file):
update_sprite(spaceship_file)
else:
if await http_request.download_spaceship(user, spaceship_file) == OK:
update_sprite(spaceship_file)
8. Now let’s create the update_sprite() method. This is the method that effectively changes the Sprite node’s Texture
property. It will load the image from the file path using the Image.load_from_file() method and turn it into an
ImageTexture using the ImageTexture.create_from_image() method:
func update_sprite(spaceship_file):
var image = Image.load_from_file(spaceship_file)
var texture = ImageTexture.create_from_image(image)
$Spaceship/Sprite2D.texture = texture

In this section, we saw how to use the TextureDownloadHTTPRequest node to download and cache the
images from our database. We also saw how to dynamically change a player’s spaceship sprite using
the cached images, loading them as image resources and turning them into an actual ImageTexture
that the spaceship’s Sprite2D node can use.
Now, the missing part of this process is…how we actually get the PlayersSpaceship.json database
and where we call the load_spaceship() method. Well, that’s what we are going to do in the next

section!

Implementing database caching
With everything in place, it is time to go one step above and work on the World scene that is going to
glue everything together and run the proper procedures to ensure that all players will see the same
custom sprites. We do that in this node because this is the class responsible for setting up everything
related to world synchronization, which includes the players’ spaceship custom sprites. We will need
to make some changes in some core methods to achieve that, but this is for the better.
Since we are working with a prototype, there’s no fear of altering function signatures and other core
aspects of a class. But note that if this was production-ready, we would call this class “closed” and
avoid making core changes like the ones we are about to make. This would keep our game code base
consistent and avoid errors. Though the changes we are about to make will mostly extend the class
functionalities, we will add an argument to the World.create_spaceship() method, breaking the
function’s contract since it didn’t ask for any arguments before. But, as said, this is a prototype, and
we have the freedom to tweak things as we want. So, let’s open the res://09.prototyping-spaceadventure/Levels/World.tscn scene and implement the improvements by working through the

following steps:
1. First things first, let’s add an instance of the SpaceshipsDatabaseDownloadHTTPRequest node as a direct child of the
World node.

Figure 13.7 – SpaceshipsDatabaseDownloadHTTPRequest instantiated in the World scene
2. Then, let’s open the res://09.prototyping-space-adventure/Levels/World.gd script and start the code by
adding a reference to the SpaceshipsDatabaseDownloadHTTPRequest node. We can simply call it http_request
here as well:
@onready var http_request = $SpaceshipsDatabaseDownloadHTTPRequest
3. We will also create a new variable to store a dictionary that will pair player_ids and their user. This will allow us to look
into this variable to find the proper username related to each player’s peer ID so we can easily map them in our database moving
forward:
var player_users = {}
4. Now, in the _ready() callback, after waiting briefly for the 0.1 SceneTree’s timer to timeout, we will wait for
http_request to download the spaceships database as well. Remember, this only happens if the instance running the game
isn’t the server:
func _ready():
if not multiplayer.is_server():
await(get_tree().create_timer(0.1).timeout)
await http_request.download_spaceships_database()

5. Still in this if statement, we will make a small change. When making the RPC to the server’s create_spaceship() method,
we will also pass the player’s user. For that, we will use the long-time-forgotten AuthenticationCredentials singleton!
func _ready():
if not multiplayer.is_server():
await(get_tree().create_timer(0.1).timeout)
await http_request.download_spaceships_database()
rpc_id(1, "sync_world")
rpc_id(1, "create_spaceship", AuthenticationCredentials.user)
6. Moving on to the create_spaceship()method, we need to, of course, change its function signature to support the user
argument:
@rpc("any_peer", "call_remote")
func create_spaceship(user):
7. Then, before adding the spaceship as a child of the Players node, we will use its name (which is essentially a string version
of the player’s peer ID) as a key in the player_users dictionary and set this key’s value to the user argument. With that, we
effectively paired the player’s ID with their username:
@rpc("any_peer", "call_remote")
func create_spaceship(user):
var player_id = multiplayer.get_remote_sender_id()
var spaceship = preload("res://09.prototyping-spaceadventure/Actors/Player/Play er2D.tscn").instantiate()
spaceship.name = str(player_id)
player_users[spaceship.name] = user
8. After making the RPC to the newly instantiated player spaceship’s setup_multiplayer() method, we will make the magic
happen by also making an RPC to the load_spaceship() method, triggering the procedures we made in the Implementing
texture caching section. The updated version of the create_spaceship() method will look like this after these changes:
@rpc("any_peer", "call_remote")
func create_spaceship(user):
var player_id = multiplayer.get_remote_sender_id()
var spaceship = preload("res://09.prototyping-spaceadventure/Actors/Player/Play er2D.tscn").instantiate()
spaceship.name = str(player_id)
player_users[spaceship.name] = user
$Players.add_child(spaceship)
await(get_tree().create_timer(0.1).timeout)
spaceship.rpc("setup_multiplayer", player_id)
spaceship.rpc("load_spaceship", user)

Great! With that, whenever a player jumps into the game, their spaceship will change its sprite to the
custom sprite the player uploaded, if any. Now, we need to also make this happen to the spaceships
that were already in the game world when the player joined. For that, we need to make some changes
in the _on_players_multiplayer_spawner_spawned() callback. Still in the res://09.prototypingspace-adventure/Levels/World.gd script, let’s implement the changes by moving on to the
_on_players_multiplayer_spawner_spawned() method and go through the following steps:

1. Let’s revamp the whole logic of this callback and make it from scratch. We are going to start by creating a variable to store the
player’s peer ID, which we can get by turning the recently spawned node’s name into an integer. Node names are StringNames
so they are not pure strings, meaning we need to turn them into default strings before turning them into integers:

func _on_players_multiplayer_spawner_spawned(node):
var player_id = int(str(node.name))
2. After that, we will make the global RPC to the setup_multiplayer() method, just as we did before, but now we pass
player_id as the argument:
func _on_players_multiplayer_spawner_spawned(node):
var player_id = int(str(node.name))
node.rpc("setup_multiplayer", player_id)
3. Then comes the interesting part. After making this RPC, if the spawned node, in other words the spawned player, happens to be in
another player’s game instance, instead of the server’s instance, we will also make an RPC directly to the server, asking it to sync
this spaceship using a method (which we are going to create soon) called sync_spaceship(), which receives a player ID as
its argument:
func _on_players_multiplayer_spawner_spawned(node):
var player_id = int(str(node.name))
node.rpc("setup_multiplayer", player_id)
if not multiplayer.is_server():
rpc_id(1, "sync_spaceship", player_id)
4. Let’s move on to the sync_spaceship() method now. Let’s create this method with an RPC annotation that will allow any
peer to remotely call it and it will also be called locally on the server. Remember, this method receives player_id as its
argument:
@rpc("any_peer", "call_local")
func sync_spaceship(player_id):
5. Inside the sync_spaceship() method, we will first and foremost store a reference to the ID of whoever made the RPC to this
function. This will allow us to make the rpc_id() method call directly to the player that just joined the game, instead of making
a call to every player every time a player joins the game:
@rpc("any_peer", "call_local")
func sync_spaceship(player_id):
var requester = multiplayer.get_remote_sender_id()
6. Then, we will find the correct player in the Players node children by using the get_node() method and appending the
player_id. Remember, since the player_id is also the node’s name, this is how we can easily find it among all the
Players children:
@rpc("any_peer", "call_local")
func sync_spaceship(player_id):
var requester = multiplayer.get_remote_sender_id()
var node = get_node("Players/%s" % player_id)
7. After that, we will find the player’s username. For that, we will use player_id as a key in player_users, which will return
us the proper username:
@rpc("any_peer", "call_local")
func sync_spaceship(player_id):
var requester = multiplayer.get_remote_sender_id()
var node = get_node("Players/%s" % player_id)
var user = player_users[node.name]
8. Finally, with the user in our hands, we can make an RPC to the load_spaceship() method on this requester's instance of the
node that represents the spaceship spawned on their instance of the game:

@rpc("any_peer", "call_local")
func sync_spaceship(player_id):
var requester = multiplayer.get_remote_sender_id()
var node = get_node("Players/%s" % player_id)
var user = player_users[node.name]
node.rpc_id(requester, "load_spaceship", user)

And we did it! With this in place, the game is now able to load, store, and sync players’ custom
spaceship sprites. If you run the game now you can see the game caching data to decrease bandwidth
and downloading and updating the players’ spaceship sprites in real time. The following screenshot
displays the before and after of implementing this feature.

Figure 13.8 – The before and after implementing the custom sprites feature

Something interesting that you can check if you want to measure how much difference caching
makes is to remove the statements that check whether the files exist in the user://.cache/ folder and
add a Monitor to monitor the TextureDownloadHTTPRequest and
SpaceshipsDatabaseDownloadHTTPRequest downloaded bytes. For that, you can use the
HTTPRequest.get_downloaded_bytes() method. For instance, the following code snippet displays how

we can create a Monitor in the TextureDownloadHTTPRequest node:
func _ready():
var callable = Callable(self, "get_texture_downloaded_bytes")
Performance.add_custom_monitor("Network/Texture Download Bytes", callable)
func get_texture_downloaded_bytes():
return get_downloaded_bytes()

And with that, we can test our game multiple times to simulate players logging in and out of the
game and see how the caching impacts each stage. Something you will notice is that after the images
have been cached, they are almost instantaneously updated when players log in to the game again.
The following screenshot displays the actual impact on the network usage in bytes before and after
caching the images in the player’s machine:

Figure 13.9 – A comparison between the network consumption the first time the player downloads the textures and after
caching the textures in their machine

In this section, we saw how to implement database caching for custom spaceship sprites in our game.
The World scene is responsible for synchronizing the game world, including the players’ spaceship
sprites. So, we made some changes to it to achieve the caching we’ve implemented in previous
sections. We saw how to use the SpaceshipsDatabaseDownloadHTTPRequest node to download the
spaceships database and make RPCs to update players’ spaceship sprites and sync spaceship sprites
when players join the game. At the end of the section, we used a Monitor and the
HTTPRequest.get_downloaded_bytes() method to see how caching reduces bandwidth usage and

improves network efficiency.

Note the number of bytes saved in Figure 13.9 with only two textures cached! Imagine, in the long
run, how this could impact hundreds and even thousands of players as they log in and out of the game
multiple times a day. And we are only talking about textures here. What else can we cache and
effectively save hundreds of thousands of network bytes on? Well, that’s what we are going to see in
the upcoming section.

Going further with caching
Well, as we saw, images are not the only type of data we can download through the internet using the
HTTPRequest node; for instance, we also downloaded the PlayersSpaceship.json file, which is a text

file. But we can download pretty much anything using this protocol, provided it is stored in an HTTP
page. But sometimes, some files are not stored and made available publicly on an HTTP page that
any browser can access. Usually in this type of situation, the backend engineer will create a REST
API that we can use to retrieve these files directly from the database where they are stored.
This type of feature demands a physical infrastructure and the development of a custom REST API so
we can work with it. Unfortunately, this goes way beyond the scope of this book. But the whole idea
is that you can perform an HTTP request using custom headers and a custom URL that resembles an
RPC. So, in the very URL itself you would add some parameters that the REST API would interpret
as a method call and arguments. It’s very similar to what we did in Chapter 2, Sending and Receiving
Data, and REST APIs usually use JSON-formatted strings as the main data structure as well.
For instance, you can check out a series on my YouTube channel that relies heavily on REST APIs to
integrate a third-party service into a game of mine called Moon Cheeser. The REST API is provided
by LootLocker and at some point, I download a whole PacketScene from their server to cache it in the
player’s machine and allow them to always have a copy of their purchased skin. You can check this
particular video at the following link:
https://youtu.be/w0qz-pJMIBo?si=WF2KH9-FRyO8glVq
Well, I’m going to use LootLocker’s public API as an example here too. This is the HTTP request I
used to retrieve the file associated with the skin the player purchases:
curl -X GET "https://api.lootlocker.io/game/v1/assets/list?count=10&filter=purchasabl e"
\-H "x-session-token: your_token_here"

This translates into the following GDScript code, using an HTTPRequest node:
var url = "https://api.lootlocker.io/game/v1/assets/list?count=10&filter=purchasable"
var header = ["Content-Type: application/json", "x-session-token: %s" % LootLocker.tok
en]
request(url, header)

Now comes the interesting part that we haven’t explored yet. The HTTPRequest.request_completed
signal is emitted when this request is completed and the server gives a response to the client with
some very interesting data, including the response’s body, which usually is a JSON file containing the
URL to the file we want. So, you can connect this signal to a signal callback and access the
response’s body to get access to what the server provides you with regarding the request. This can go
from the content of a file itself to a JSON file containing much more information, including the URL
to download the file you want.
To avoid going off on a tangent here, I highly recommend you watch the video and understand how
we download a resource-intensive file. In this case, I downloaded a custom PackedScene instance
together with its dependencies, such as an image necessary to make the purchased skin display
properly, and cached it into players’ devices.
With this in your hands, you can implement all sorts of caching and save tons of resource usage, both
for your players and your server, since it won’t be constantly delivering the same files to the same
clients repeatedly.

Summary
Well, it’s time to wrap this chapter up! In this chapter, we discussed what caching is and how it
allows us to save bandwidth. We learned how to implement it for custom spaceship sprites in our
game. For that, we saw how we can use the HTTPRequest node to download files over the internet by
making HTTP requests. We also implemented a custom Monitor to see how much data we saved
throughout a play session by caching textures. Finally, we saw how caching can go beyond image
and text files and the possibility of using REST APIs to download all sorts of files using HTTP.
With that, my fellow Godot Engine developers, we reach the end of our journey!
We started as people who didn’t know how to send a simple message to another computer, and
became fully fledged network engineers ready to create the games of our dreams and allow players to
have a shared experience, enjoy their time together, and build communities around the world.
Congratulations on completing this journey. You are now capable of one of the most amazing things
any human being can do: to connect people together toward a shared goal.
This is my farewell. I’m very proud of what we went through, and I hope you use this power for
good. You can definitely expect more from me to come. But for now, that’s it.

Thank you so much for reading. Keep developing, and until the next time!
OceanofPDF.com

Index
As this ebook edition doesn't have fixed pagination, the page numbers below are hyperlinked for
reference only, based on the printed edition of this book.

A
annotation 49
Asteroid
syncing count, decreasing 241-243
AuthenticationCredentials Autoload
creating 25, 26
Autoloads 24
AvatarCards
cleaning 65

B
bandwidth 8, 234, 235

C
C6
caching 271-273
channels 75
working 75-77
chat messages
sending 77-79
chat system 75
Checkers 101
Checkers project 103, 104

CheckerBoard scene 109-112
CheckerBoard, updating and syncing 114
coordinates, using to update board 115, 116
FreeCell scene 107-109
MultiplayerSynchronizer 112
MultiplayerSynchronizer setup, in Piece scene 113, 114
Piece, removing from board 116, 117
Piece scene 104-107
players’ teams setup 118-120
players’ turns, serializing 112
remote turn shifts, handling 118
team pieces, disabling 120, 121
team pieces, enabling 121-123
win and lose conditions, managing 123, 124
client 5
creating 12-14
Collision Layers 132
Collision Masks 132
Content Delivery Networks (CDNs) 251

D
data
compressing, with ENetConnection class 243-247
DDoS attacks 7
Debugger 211
Errors tab 212-214
Misc tab 220, 221
Monitors tab 218, 219

Profiler tab 214-216
Stack Trace tab 211, 212
Video RAM tab 219, 220
Visual Profiler tab 216-218

E
ENet 6
ENetConnection class
data, compressing with 243-247
ENetMultiplayerPeer API 47
ENetMultiplayerPeer class 6
extrapolation 250, 252, 268

F
functions
calling, remotely with RPCs 48

G
Godot Engine 252

H
handshake 5, 6
testing 14-18
handshake request 5
handshake response 5
HTTPRequest node
setting up 274
Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP) 274, 275

I

interpolation 250, 252, 256
IP address 10

J
JSON files
cons 33
pros 33
JSON format 21

L
lag 249-251
lag compensation techniques 252
extrapolation 268, 269
interpolation 256-262
prediction 263-267
server-side motion, implementing 253-256
latency 7, 235, 249-251
lobby
testing 67-70
login screen, with RPCs
EnetMultiplayerPeer connection, establishing 55-57
player, authenticating 60-63
remaking 54
RPC functions template, creating 58-60

M
massive multiplayer online role-playing game (MMORPG) 167
Monitors tab
using 228-232

Multiplayer Authority 52, 79, 265

N
network 5
resources 234-236
Network API 75
network congestion 251
Network Profiler 221-223
using 224-227

O
online quiz game 84-86
lobby, setting up 86, 87
lobby system 90
local mechanics, turning into remote gameplay 94, 95
match, starting 89, 90
new players, displaying 88, 89
online turns, implementing 90-92
players’ answers, sending to server 98-100
questions database 95, 96
questions, loading and updating 96-98
updating players, about round 92-94

P
packet loss 236
packets 6, 19, 20
sending, with PacketPeerUDP 24
packet switching 20
peer’s data

updating, remotely 79, 80
platformer project 146, 147
Crate class 148-150
crate’s position, updating remotely 163-165
InteractiveArea2D class, working 150-152
physical objects, syncing 161
Player class 147, 148
Player multiplayer controls, setting up 159-161
players control, giving in PlayerSpawner 155-159
PlayerSpawner class 152, 153
player’s position and animations, synchronizing 162, 163
players, spawning in match 153, 154
player
avatars, adding 63, 64
avatars, loading 39-44
avatars, retrieving 65-67
player, authenticating 32
fake database, loading 32-34
reply to authentication request 35-37
session, maintaining 37, 38
players’ credentials
sending, to server 26-29
player versus player (PvP) interactions 267
Pong project 128
Ball scene 129-131
ball’s position, updating 140, 141
online multiplayer paddles, setting up 135

paddle’s owner, modifying 135-137
paddle’s position, coordinating 142, 143
players’ paddle, assigning 137-139
players’ paddles, working 128, 129
players’ scores, managing 131, 132
remote objects, syncing 139
signal emitted by ScoreArea Node, to update displayed score 133-135
port 10
prediction 250, 252, 263

R
reliable data exchange 75
Remote Procedure Call (RPC) 47, 48, 90, 249
functions, calling remotely 48
limitation 48
login screen, remaking with 54
requirements 51, 52
requests count
reducing 237
@rpc annotation 49, 50

S
serialization 22, 23
server 5
creating 10-12
session token 35
spaceshooter adventure prototype 167, 169
Asteroid scene, gauging 173-175

asteroid's damage, calculating 199, 200
asteroids, syncing 189-192
bullets, shooting on instances 196-198
client-side authentication, implementing 186, 187
client side of quest system, implementing 201-203
database caching, implementing 286-294
data, storing and retrieving on server 200, 201
game world, initializing 185
HTTPRequest node setup 274
player, logging into server 185
players, authenticating 186
Player scene 169-173
players’ quests, managing 179-181
players, syncing 192-195
quest information, displaying 183, 184
quest, representing as node 175-177
quests, loading and storing with QuestDatabase 177-179
quest system, unraveling 175
scenes and database, setting up 275-283
server and client responsibilities, separating 196
server-side authentication, implementing 188, 189
server side of quest system, implementing 203-205
texture caching, implementing 283-286
World scene 182, 183
World scenes, syncing 189
syncing count, Asteroid
decreasing 241-243

T
throughput 7, 234, 235
Transmission Control Protocol (TCP) 9, 21
Twemoji 271

U
UDP, and ENet approaches
comparing 53, 54
UDP connection 10
UDPServer
used, for listening to packets 30-32
Uniform Resource Locator (URL) 274
unreliable data exchange 75
unreliable packets
dealing with 251, 252
User Datagram Protocol (UDP) 7, 9, 21

W
weapon fire count
reducing 237-241
World Wide Web 274
OceanofPDF.com

Packtpub.com
Subscribe to our online digital library for full access to over 7,000 books and videos, as well as
industry leading tools to help you plan your personal development and advance your career. For more
information, please visit our website.

Why subscribe?
Spend less time learning and more time coding with practical eBooks and Videos from over 4,000 industry professionals
Improve your learning with Skill Plans built especially for you
Get a free eBook or video every month
Fully searchable for easy access to vital information
Copy and paste, print, and bookmark content

Did you know that Packt offers eBook versions of every book published, with PDF and ePub files
available? You can upgrade to the eBook version at packtpub.com and as a print book customer, you
are entitled to a discount on the eBook copy. Get in touch with us at customercare@packtpub.com for
more details.
At www.packtpub.com, you can also read a collection of free technical articles, sign up for a range of
free newsletters, and receive exclusive discounts and offers on Packt books and eBooks.

Other Books You May Enjoy
If you enjoyed this book, you may be interested in these other books by Packt:

Godot 4 Game Development Projects.
Chris Bradfield
ISBN: 978-1-80461-040-4

If you’re new to Godot, get started with the game engine and editor
Learn about the new features of Godot 4.0
Build games in 2D and 3D using design and coding best practices
Use Godot’s node and scene system to design robust, reusable game objects
Use GDScript, Godot’s built-in scripting language, to create complex game systems
Implement user interfaces to display information

Godot 4 Game Development Cookbook
Jeff Johnson
ISBN: 978-1-83882-607-9

Speed up 2D game development with new TileSet and TileMap updates
Improve 2D and 3D rendering with the Vulkan Renderer
Master the new animation editor in Godot 4 for advanced game development
Enhance visuals and performance with visual shaders and the updated shader language
Import Blender blend files into Godot to optimize your workflow
Explore new physics system additions for improved realism and behavior of game objects

Packt is searching for authors like you
If you’re interested in becoming an author for Packt, please visit authors.packtpub.com and apply
today. We have worked with thousands of developers and tech professionals, just like you, to help
them share their insight with the global tech community. You can make a general application, apply
for a specific hot topic that we are recruiting an author for, or submit your own idea.
Hi!
I am Henrique Campos, author of The Essential Guide to Creating Multiplayer Games with Godot
4.0. I really hope you enjoyed reading this book and found it useful for increasing your productivity
and efficiency.
It would really help me (and other potential readers!) if you could leave a review on Amazon sharing
your thoughts on this book.
Go to the link below to leave your review:
https://packt.link/r/1803232617
Your review will help us to understand what’s worked well in this book, and what could be improved
upon for future editions, so it really is appreciated.
Best wishes,

Henrique Campos

Download a free PDF copy of this book
Thanks for purchasing this book!
Do you like to read on the go but are unable to carry your print books everywhere?
Is your eBook purchase not compatible with the device of your choice?
Don’t worry, now with every Packt book you get a DRM-free PDF version of that book at no cost.

Read anywhere, any place, on any device. Search, copy, and paste code from your favorite technical
books directly into your application.
The perks don’t stop there, you can get exclusive access to discounts, newsletters, and great free
content in your inbox daily
Follow these simple steps to get the benefits:
1. Scan the QR code or visit the link below

https://packt.link/free-ebook/9781803232614
2. Submit your proof of purchase
3. That’s it! We’ll send your free PDF and other benefits to your email directly

OceanofPDF.com

