Game Development Patterns
with Godot 4

Create resilient game systems using industry-proven
solutions in Godot

Henrique Campos

Game Development Patterns with Godot 4
Copyright © 2025 Packt Publishing
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted
in any form or by any means, without the prior written permission of the publisher, except in the case
of brief quotations embedded in critical articles or reviews.
Every effort has been made in the preparation of this book to ensure the accuracy of the information
presented. However, the information contained in this book is sold without warranty, either express
or implied. Neither the author, nor Packt Publishing or its dealers and distributors, will be held liable
for any damages caused or alleged to have been caused directly or indirectly by this book.
Packt Publishing has endeavored to provide trademark information about all of the companies and
products mentioned in this book by the appropriate use of capitals. However, Packt Publishing cannot
guarantee the accuracy of this information.
Group Product Manager: Rohit Rajkumar
Publishing Product Manager: Neha Pande
Book Project Manager: Arul Viveaun
Senior Editor: Rakhi Patel
Technical Editor: K Bimala Singha
Copy Editor: Safis Editing
Indexer: Rekha Nair
Production Designer: Nilesh Mohite
DevRel Marketing Coordinator: Nivedita Pandey
First published: January 2025
Production reference: 1061224
Published by Packt Publishing Ltd.
Grosvenor House
11 St Paul’s Square
Birmingham
B3 1RB, UK.
ISBN 978-1-83588-028-9
www.packtpub.com

To my Lord and Savior, Jesus Christ, who gave me the strength and faith to dedicate my efforts to
writing this book, knowing it will be used for great things. And to my family: Sheila, my mother,
Claudio, my father, and Ráisa, my sister, who have always been by my side on my journey in the video
game industry. In memory of my uncle Wemerson, who made great investments in my dream.
With all my heart.
– Henrique Campos

Contributors
About the author
Henrique Campos is an indie game developer and game designer working in the industry for years.
Started as a University teacher in 2015 in the Computer Graphics and Artificial Intelligence chairs
and working in the GDQuest team from 2018 to 2022, Henrique is also an independent consultant
for studios and schools. Under the alias of Pigdev, Henrique creates game development content on his
YouTube channel making games, assets, ebooks, and courses that can be found in his itch.io profile.
Being the author of The Essential Guide to Creating Multiplayer Games with Godot 4.0, Henrique paved
the way for Godot users to make incredible shared online experiences while helping them discover
the engine's bleeding edge features.
I want to thank everyone who is working to create great open source software such as Godot; you
are building a better world. Special thanks to my family and friends, especially Arthur, Luan, and
Tumeo for being by my side and believing in my dream. I also want to thank my supporters, who have
followed every step of this journey, especially Laurence Bannister and Kyle Szklenski. Lastly, thank you
to my brothers in Christ for all the support they’ve given me.

About the reviewers
Jonathan Reeves is a multi-faceted software engineer with more than 6 years of professional experience.
He has a wealth of experience, ranging from full-stack development to video game development,
and he has a passion for technical education. He’s adept at building engaging user interfaces for both
consumer-facing and internal web applications. Beyond the frontend side of things, he has developed a
few games and published them on web and mobile platforms. Previous technical works he has worked
on are React 18 Design Patterns and Best Practices, 4th edition by Carlos Santana Roldánand React and
React Native, 5th edition by Mikhail Sakhniuk and Adam Boduch.

Ryan Hinds is an independent game developer, the founder and CEO of Industrial Llama, and a
teaching assistant for courses such as Godot 4 C# Action Adventure: Build your own 2.5D RPG through
GameDev.tv. He was born in Alberta, Canada, where he resides with his wife and their daughter. He
has recently started reviewing and editing educational books on programming in his free time to
help others learn the trade. Currently, he is a student in Advanced Game Development at Bow Valley
College in Calgary, Alberta.

Table of Contents
Prefacexiii

Part 1: Object-Oriented Design Principles

1
Understanding Object-Oriented Design
Technical requirements
4
Learning the basics of OOP
4
Complying with the principles of OOP 6
Designing games with OOP
8

3

Turning your design into an object in
Godot Engine
10
Summary17

2
Learning the Four Fundamental Pillars
Technical requirements
Simplifying complex systems
with abstraction
Scoping properties and methods
with encapsulation

20

19

22

Extending an object’s behaviors
with inheritance
25
Maintaining compatibility with
polymorphism31
Summary34

Creating SOLID Design Solutions

35

20

3
Unbloating objects with the SRP
Maintaining and extending objects
with the OCP

36
38

Ensuring compatibility with the LSP
Creating components with the ISP

39
40

viii

Table of Contents

Making high-level abstractions with
the DIP

41

Summary43

4
Favoring Composition Over Inheritance

45

Technical requirements
46
Understanding the composition
approach46
Creating complex scenes by
composing with nodes
48

Turning a behavior into a component

49

Making games by composing
with scenes

52

Creating the LootBumpingPig

53

Summary57

Part 2: Basic Design Patterns

5
Maintaining Global States with the Singleton Pattern

61

Technical requirements
62
Understanding the Singleton pattern 62
Spotting use cases of singletons
in games
63

Accessing the engine’s built-in features

66

Implementing the Singleton pattern
in Godot

66

Maintaining players’ data throughout the
game states
63
Playing background music without
interruptions65
Using third-party APIs and plugins
65

Understanding the designer’s request
Creating the score system
Implementing the multi-door
teleporting system

66
68
78

Summary82

6
Decoupling Objects with the Observer Pattern
Technical requirements
Understanding the Observer pattern
Spotting use cases for the
Observer pattern

83

84
84

Implementing the Observer pattern
in Godot

87

Integrating the player’s health interface

89

86

Summary93

Table of Contents

7
Spawning Game Objects with the Factory Pattern
Technical requirements
Understanding the Factory pattern
Spotting use cases for the
Factory pattern

96
96
97

95

Implementing the Factory pattern
in Godot

99

Creating the Node2DFactory class
Using Node2DFactory in our game

100
104

Summary113

8
Changing Object Behavior with the State Pattern
Technical requirements
117
Understanding the State pattern
118
Spotting use cases of the State pattern
in games
119

Implementing the State pattern
in Godot
Understanding the designer’s requirements
Implementing an FSM with animations
Handling state-specific behaviors with the
State pattern

115
121
121
123
136

Summary154

9
Designing Actors with the Command Pattern
Technical requirements
156
Understanding the Command pattern156
Spotting use cases for the
Command pattern
158
Using commands such as undo/redo in
level editors
Queuing commands in real-time
strategy games
Creating strategic encounters in
role-player games
Making template behaviors in RPGs
Backtracking actions in tactical RPG battles

158
159
159
159
160

155

Implementing the Command
pattern in Godot

160

Evaluating the game designer’s changes
Creating the BumpingPig commands
Using commands with buttons
Implementing the concrete commands
Mapping the commands to buttons
Designing the Bumping Pig brain

161
168
169
171
177
181

Summary188

ix

x

Table of Contents

Part 3: Advanced Design Patterns

10
Implementing AI with the Strategy Pattern
Technical requirements
Understanding the Strategy pattern
Spotting use cases for the
Strategy pattern
Implementing the Strategy pattern
in Godot

192
192
194
196

191

Creating the InteractionStrategy family
198
Using the target object to provide a strategy
199
Cleaning up the Brain class with strategy
executions202
Implementing interaction strategies
205

Summary208

11
Creating a Power-Up System with the Decorator Pattern
Technical requirements
212
Understanding the Decorator pattern 212
Spotting use cases for the
Decorator pattern
213
Implementing the Decorator pattern
in Godot Engine
215

211

Turning properties into the Stats class
Creating our StatsDecorator class
Wrapping Stats with the power-ups Singleton
Using Diamond objects to add power-ups

217
224
227
232

Summary237

12
Cross-Fading Transitions with the Service Locator Pattern
Technical requirements
Understanding the Service
Locator pattern
Spotting use cases for the Service
Locator pattern

239

240

Implementing the Service Locator
pattern in Godot Engine

240

Creating the BackgroundMusic Service Locator245
Using the BackgroundMusic Service Locator 250

242

Summary255

243

Table of Contents

13
Improving Game Feel with the Event Queue Pattern
Technical requirements
Understanding the Event
Queue pattern
Spotting use cases for the Event
Queue pattern

257

258

Implementing the Event Queue
pattern in Godot

264

258

Storing input events with an input buffer
Buffering and processing jumps

266
271

260

Summary272

Index275
Other Books You May Enjoy

280

xi

Preface
Hello there! I’m Henrique Campos, also known as Pigdev, and in this book, we will talk about a topic
that always intrigues me: design patterns. Specifically, in this book, we will talk about object-oriented
programming design patterns. The idea behind this is that there are numerous problems regarding
design that are common, so instead of reinventing the wheel, we can stand on the shoulders of giants
and rely on tested, time-proven solutions. But in doing so, we are going to take a non-conventional
path. You will learn the following from this book:
• What is programming, from a philosophy of language perspective?
• What is object-oriented programming, and why does it make sense for game development?
• General principles of making good code such as the SOLID principles and the Composition
Over Inheritance principle
• Critical thinking to abstract problems within the context of a concrete project and understanding
possible solutions to these problems
• What are these patterns, when to use them, why we use them, and how each of the patterns
presented in the book help solve particular game development issues
• Basic and advanced design patterns that will help you create simple and complex features for
your games
We will use our imagination by role-playing a game mechanics engineer who is responsible for
implementing requests from a fictional game designer. This allows us to work in a similar context to
real life, where a designer responsible for the creative direction of a game, comes with game design
requests that a programmer should implement. In this process, we will create a complete platformer
game with a player, an enemy with complex artificial intelligence, interactive objects, multiple levels,
music, and more.
By the end of this book, you will have a solid knowledge of how to create reliable architectures for
your game’s code bases that you can scale and reuse knowing exactly what its points of pressure are
and how to solve potential problems. You will also understand that design patterns should not be
used as an initial approach to implementing features; instead, they are used as solutions for problems
that arise as we develop our games. In this process, you will learn refactoring techniques that will
save you time and energy.

xiv

Preface

As a friend of mine says: an amateur knows how to create new code, and a professional knows how
to fix old code. In that sense, the skills you will learn from this book will help you avoid the urge to
make things from scratch and instead deal with ugly and messy situations, thriving through them
and leaving a trail of elegant and scalable solutions.
Throughout the book, we will use Godot Engine 4.3, by the time of writing, the latest version of the
rising star open source project that has been getting the industry’s eyes. To make the onboarding easy,
we will use the built-in text editor and GDScript as the main tools. Godot has many built-in features
that help us implement the design patterns we are going to see. In some cases, such as the Observer
pattern, Godot provides the implementation and all we have to do is use it, but we must understand
the principles behind it.

Who this book is for
This book is for anyone with sufficient knowledge to understand what variables and methods are. As
we introduce basic programming and object-oriented programming concepts, most of the content in
the book can be used by intermediate to advanced programmers. People who have experience with
GDScript and the Godot Engine editor will take the most out of this book as the main focus is to
present the design patterns themselves. People with no programming background will have trouble
understanding the core concepts and how each pattern helps to solve specific issues.
The three main skills our audience must have in order to make great use of this book are as follows:
• Understanding the nodes and resources philosophy behind Godot Engine’s design
• Basic knowledge of the GDScript language’s syntax
• Experience with programming concepts such as functions, variables, constants, algorithms,
and procedures
To summarize it all, if you have already made one or two games with Godot Engine or similar
applications, you will be able to understand the concepts presented in this book and the problems
that we face throughout the process of making a game. Understanding these problems is fundamental
to understanding the value of using the design patterns we will introduce in this book. But if you
have good abstract thinking and can intuitively understand how one approach can generate issues as
projects scale, then you will also be able to engage with this book’s value proposition.

What this book covers
Chapter 1, Understanding Object-Oriented Design, explains the philosophy behind writing programs
from an object-oriented perspective.
Chapter 2, Learning the Four Fundamental Pillars, discusses the tools object-oriented programming
provides to write object-oriented code.

Preface

Chapter 3, Creating SOLID Design Solutions, guides you through five core principles of writing good,
reusable, and scalable object-oriented code.
Chapter 4, Favoring Composition Over Inheritance, explains that inheritance is a powerful but dangerous
tool in object-oriented programming, so we must use it responsibly. In this chapter, you will explore
the issues behind inheritance and the composition alternative to achieve code reusability.
Chapter 5, Maintaining Global States with the Singleton Pattern, begins implementing the Singleton
pattern for a common issue in game development: global data that multiple objects should have access to.
Chapter 6, Decoupling Objects with the Observer Pattern, discusses coupling, which is a major issue in
programming, but it’s unavoidable. But with the Observer pattern, we can make objects communicate
without coupling them by using a notification system.
Chapter 7, Spawning Game Objects with the Factory Pattern, covers creating new objects in the game
world, which is a skill every game developer needs to master. Using the Factory Pattern can help you
do that in a reliable and reusable fashion.
Chapter 8, Changing Object Behavior with the State Pattern, discusses handling object states, which
can lead to a chaotic monolith code base that handles state machines and multiple states in a single
class. The State pattern is a way to extract this code from the context class with the double benefit of
encapsulating each state as an independent object.
Chapter 9, Designing Actors with the Command Pattern, explains that a method, or function, doesn’t
leave footprints when called, and this can be an issue. By turning requests into objects, we can store
them in memory, store their parameters, pass them around, delay their execution, queue them, execute
them in a specific order, and even undo them, and all that is possible using the Command pattern.
Chapter 10, Implementing AI with the Strategy Pattern, explains that using conditional statements to
alter the behavior of your code based on specific parameters may not be scalable. The Strategy pattern
proposes that, instead, we use objects called strategies that perform different behaviors and adapt the
context in real time by passing these objects.
Chapter 11, Creating a Power-Up System with the Decorator Pattern, explores wrapping objects within
objects, which is a common practice in programming. The Decorator pattern proposes that we can
wrap objects within objects of the same type, allowing us to add new functionalities to them in real
time. With this in mind, we create an interesting power-up system for our project, wrapping objects
with power-ups.
Chapter 12, Cross-Fading Transitions with the Service Locator Pattern, discusses one way to protect our
code from coupling, which is by using a mediator object as an interface to interact with other parts of
the game. The Service Locator pattern allows us to perform procedures, such as changing the game
music, without leaking implementation and maintenance details on user classes.

xv

xvi

Preface

Chapter 13, Improving Game Feel with the Event Queue Pattern, explores situations when we need to
store events such as keystrokes to be handled in the future. An example is checking whether the player
has jumped while in mid-air in the last few milliseconds so that the character performs a jump when
they land on the ground. We can achieve this kind of functionality with the Event Queue Pattern.

To get the most out of this book
In order to fully engage with the exercises and examples provided in this book, you will need to
download and install Godot Engine 4.3. This version of the engine introduces key features and updates
that are essential for understanding and implementing the techniques we cover. Whether you’re new
to Godot or have experience with earlier versions, it’s important to work with version 4.3 to ensure
compatibility with the projects and concepts discussed throughout the book.
You can easily download Godot Engine 4.3 from the official website at godotengine.org. The
installation process is straightforward, and the engine is available for Windows, macOS, and Linux. Be
sure to follow the instructions for your operating system, and once it is installed, familiarize yourself
with the interface. By using the same tools and environment that we explore in this book, you will
have the best learning experience and will be able to follow along with the code examples smoothly.
Software/hardware covered in the book

Operating system requirements

Godot Engine 4.3

Windows, macOS, or Linux

If you are using the digital version of this book, we advise you to type the code yourself or access
the code from the book’s GitHub repository (a link is available in the next section). Doing so will
help you avoid any potential errors related to the copying and pasting of code.

Download the example code files
You can download the example code files for this book from GitHub at https://github.com/
PacktPublishing/Game-Development-Patterns-with-Godot-4. If there’s an update
to the code, it will be updated in the GitHub repository.
We also have other code bundles from our rich catalog of books and videos available at https://
github.com/PacktPublishing/. Check them out!

Conventions used
There are a number of text conventions used throughout this book.
Code in text: Indicates code words in text, database table names, folder names, filenames, file
extensions, pathnames, dummy URLs, user input, and Twitter handles. Here is an example: “Add a
new AudioStreamPlayer node as a child of the BackgroundMusic node.”

Preface

A block of code is set as follows:
extends Area2D
class_name AmbienceArea2D
@export var background_music: AudioStream
var previous_background_music: AudioStream

Any command-line input or output is written as follows:
$ mkdir css
$ cd css

Bold: Indicates a new term, an important word, or words that you see onscreen. For instance, words
in menus or dialog boxes appear in bold. Here is an example: “Then, drag and drop a piece of cool
music to the Background Music property on the Inspector.”
Tips or important notes
Appear like this.

Get in touch
Feedback from our readers is always welcome.
General feedback: If you have questions about any aspect of this book, email us at customercare@
packtpub.com and mention the book title in the subject of your message.
Errata: Although we have taken every care to ensure the accuracy of our content, mistakes do happen.
If you have found a mistake in this book, we would be grateful if you would report this to us. Please
visit www.packtpub.com/support/errata and fill in the form.
Piracy: If you come across any illegal copies of our works in any form on the internet, we would
be grateful if you would provide us with the location address or website name. Please contact us at
copyright@packt.com with a link to the material.
If you are interested in becoming an author: If there is a topic that you have expertise in and you
are interested in either writing or contributing to a book, please visit authors.packtpub.com.

xvii

xviii

Preface

Share Your Thoughts
Once you’ve read Game Development Patterns with Godot 4, we’d love to hear your thoughts! Please
click here to go straight to the Amazon review page for this book and share your feedback.
Your review is important to us and the tech community and will help us make sure we’re delivering
excellent quality content.

Preface

Download a free PDF copy of this book
Thanks for purchasing this book!
Do you like to read on the go but are unable to carry your print books everywhere?
Is your eBook purchase not compatible with the device of your choice?
Don’t worry, now with every Packt book you get a DRM-free PDF version of that book at no cost.
Read anywhere, any place, on any device. Search, copy, and paste code from your favorite technical
books directly into your application.
The perks don’t stop there, you can get exclusive access to discounts, newsletters, and great free content
in your inbox daily
Follow these simple steps to get the benefits:
1.

Scan the QR code or visit the link below

https://packt.link/free-ebook/978-1-83588-028-9
2.

Submit your proof of purchase

3.

That’s it! We’ll send your free PDF and other benefits to your email directly

xix

Part 1:
Object-Oriented
Design Principles

Object-oriented programming is a programming paradigm with its own approach and way of thinking.
To design systems using the tools that object-oriented programming offers, we need to understand what
we have at our disposal and how to take the most out of it by following good principles. In this part,
you will be introduced to the general philosophy behind programming, object-oriented programming,
the four major instruments we use in object-oriented programming, the SOLID principles, and how
to favor composition over inheritance and avoid misusing inheritance, a major critique that this
paradigm receives from professionals across the industry.
This part includes the following chapters:
• Chapter 1, Understanding Object-Oriented Design
• Chapter 2, Learning the Four Fundamental Pillars
• Chapter 3, Creating SOLID Design Solutions
• Chapter 4, Favoring Composition Over Inheritance

1
Understanding
Object-Oriented Design
Let’s commence our journey by learning about what Object-Oriented Programming (OOP) is first
because as we start implementing different patterns throughout the book, they will all approach the
presented problems from an OOP perspective. For example, you will notice that the State pattern turns
an object’s states into other objects. The Command pattern turns an object’s functions into objects. The
Strategy pattern turns an object’s logic branching into objects. So, it’s important to understand what
OOP is and why it is the main programming paradigm for developing games.
In this chapter, we will explore this paradigm from a unique standpoint that will help you understand
it better and even approach programming and coding from a different perspective. We will approach
it from the perspective of the philosophy of language. The reason for this is that as human beings, the
way we solve problems is by structuring them using formal syntax to understand what each step of a
proposed solution tries to achieve.
I am not going to teach the basics of programming as this would take a whole new book. Instead, we
will understand how OOP helps us structure our thoughts.
In this chapter, we will cover the following topics:
• Learning the basics of OOP
• Complying with the principles of OOP
• Designing games with OOP
• Turning your design into an object in Godot Engine

4

Understanding Object-Oriented Design

Technical requirements
Throughout this book, we will use the projects presented in the official repository. Each chapter has
its distinct folder named after the chapter. Inside the chapter’s folder, you will find two sub-folders:
• start/
• final/
To follow along with the chapter’s instructions, use the project files available inside the start
folder. You can use the files presented in the final folder as a reference in case you feel lost or get
errors or bugs through the process of following the instructions. You can download the repository
files at https://github.com/PacktPublishing/Game-Development-Patternswith-Godot-4.
For this book, you will also need, of course, Godot Engine version 4.3 and beyond, which you can
find at https://godotengine.org/download/archive/4.3-stable/.
On top of that, it’s recommended that you have a computer with dedicated video drives due to
Godot Engine’s Vulkan render. All the projects are under the Compatibility render option, so it’s not
absolutely necessary that you have a dedicated GPU. You may follow along with any hardware that
runs Godot Engine.
With that said, you have everything in place to get started with the amazing journey that will lead to
having great tools in your game development toolkit, on top of knowledge about the best practices
regarding game development architectures.

Learning the basics of OOP
When we talk about programming, we are trying to convey the idea of a structured formalization of
a solution to a given problem. This is what an algorithm is, and to program is to be able to formalize
such solutions in such a way that everyone can follow the steps and get the same result. In that sense,
programming is almost a science. However, the philosophical aspect of this craft is that we work with
how each individual approaches the problem. Drawing from their own knowledge and experiences,
they implement a variety of solutions, all of which can achieve the same goal.
The computer comes in to automate the implementation of the solutions that we created. Computers
are pretty standard when it comes to reasoning, so they are perfect for following instructions as
they won’t pollute the solution with subjective matters and will be as accurate as the instructions
allow. Note that we are going to avoid the engineering aspects of computing here. I don’t need you to
understand computers, how they work, how electricity turns into bits, or any of these aspects. I want
you to become an excellent problem solver who can look at a problem, think about a solution, and
formalize it. Nonetheless, to code these solutions, you will need to write them in a language that the
computer can understand, so keep that in mind. First, you must think about a solution from a human
perspective, then translate it into code so the machine can understand and test it for you.

Learning the basics of OOP

The main way to write your solution using a formalized programming language is to abstract everything
as data and procedures that work with and change this data. In that sense, OOP is a paradigm that
allows you to bundle these procedures and the data they work with into a single super data type that
we call a class.
I want you to approach classes in the following way: they are how you describe how you would solve
a given problem. They have the data that you think is necessary to approach the problem and how,
mutating this data, you reach the solution. Mutation is just an OOP term for changing the value of
a variable.
Once you have a class in place, you can test your solution. For that, we have objects that you can
approach as instances of your solution that are put into different contexts. The fact is that each individual
object is called an instance of a class, and to create a concrete instance of a class, you instantiate it.
When you create a class, you are establishing all the terms and conditions for how its data mutates. To
that, we give the name of behavior, and for the data, properties. When objects are instantiated, they
will always have the same behavior and properties, but the idea is that there will be different mutations
depending on how they react to the context they were put into. This is how we put our solutions into
context, test them against different scenarios to see how they will behave, and see whether we will
get the results we desire.
Now, something interesting about OOP is that it allows us to reference these bundles of data and
procedures in run time, which we can use to leverage previous solutions and focus on specific scenarios.
For instance, one trademark of OOP is inheritance, whereby we can create a new class that extends
the behavior and properties of a previous class. This allows you to create specialized solutions as
opposed to generic ones.
More important than referencing a class is being able to reference objects. This allows us to make
multiple solutions work together in some kind of assembly line where each one specializes in a very
specific task and works together with other objects to solve complex problems.
You can think about objects as little robots that pass small and simple data between each other. In that
sense, a program, application, or game is made of millions of robots working together with small, simple
solutions to mutate data in specific ways and pass that data around. However, in the big picture, you
have a complex emergent behavior that is what you would expect from your game. This is one thing
to keep in mind when programming with OOP: it is always better to compose your application with
many tiny solutions instead of big monolithic classes or deep hierarchies of inheritance. Just create
numerous small, specialized robots and have them work together.
This ability to reference objects is especially useful when we start to abstract solutions into objects that
other objects should use. It was through this approach that design patterns started to appear. To this
relationship, we give the name of user class, or just user. It can also be described as when a given class
uses another class in its behavior. For instance, the Mediator pattern is an object that specializes in
turning one data structure into another. Two or more classes use them to mediate their data processing.
It’s usually used when your architecture relies on third-party solutions.

5

6

Understanding Object-Oriented Design

To summarize, OOP is a programming paradigm that helps you abstract your solutions into bundles
of properties and behaviors that mutate data in specific ways and then pass it around, ultimately
creating emergent behaviors. This paradigm is useful because it helps you break problems down into
small solutions and build up complex behaviors by making objects work together.
With the basics of OOP in mind, let’s move on with our journey. In the next section, we are going to
talk about the fundamental principles of the OOP paradigm.

Complying with the principles of OOP
When it comes to OOP, things can get messy quickly. OOP is a powerful paradigm to work with that
allows us to leverage our own code to increase productivity while developing software. As we will see
throughout Part 1, especially in Chapter 2, working with OOP demands that we approach it with the
correct mindset so we don’t get side-tracked and end up with code that is inferior to what we would
achieve with other paradigms.
We are going to see in Chapter 2, that OOP has four main tools to help us build good, reusable, and
scalable code. When we get into Chapter 3, you will also learn that there are design principles to prevent
some common issues that can hurt your code’s base health. These will become second nature to you
as you become more experienced. To be honest, once you understand what they mean and why it’s
important to follow them, you will see that they make a lot of sense and are actually pretty obvious.
However, I want to make sure that from the beginning, you are able to understand the overall approach
to OOP and comply with the principles that we are going to see in the upcoming chapters. So, let’s
talk about how to get into the right mindset to create good code with OOP.
First of all, we are going to get into more detail about this principle in the next chapter, but keep in
mind that abstraction is the mother of great design. Every other principle relies on the ability to
properly abstract a problem into a solution that makes sense for its purpose. When we are designing,
the actual programming, and therefore the coding, is the least significant (and honestly easiest) step.
First, we need to analyze the problem we are trying to solve to understand what we need to get done
and what is expected from the solution. We might even decide, through good analysis, that OOP
might not be the best approach for a given system or part of our game.
Then, after analyzing and understanding the domain in which we are going to implement the solution,
we actually design the solution. At this point, we can assume that we are going to use OOP, so we need
to approach the problem from an OOP perspective. This means abstracting a solution into objects, as
mentioned before. That means that we are going to have little robots that will process data and pass it
around to other objects until we get to the system’s goal. In that sense, it’s of fundamental importance
that we know how to ensure that each part of the system has just one responsibility so we know where
to improve and where to focus when issues related to that problem appear. For that, I recommend
studying responsibility-driven design. It’s a design approach by Rebecca Wirfs-Brock that considers
OOP from the perspective of roles, responsibilities, and collaboration.

Complying with the principles of OOP

Roles are a collection of related responsibilities. We usually approach roles as the “outside view” of what
is expected from a system or the service it provides. A responsibility is an obligation that an object
has to do or know something – in other words, its behavior and data. Finally, collaboration is exactly
that: it describes how objects and roles interact. I highly recommend reading more about this design
approach, as it helps us comply with one of the most important SOLID principles: the single-responsibility
principle. You can find more about responsibility-driven design in the original book, Object Design: Roles,
Responsibilities, and Collaborations, which is available on Amazon at https://www.amazon.com.
br/Object-Design-Roles-Responsibilities-Collaborations/dp/0201379430.
Keep in mind that when we are designing objects, we are not trying to create a digital representation of, or
mimic, a real-world object. I need to make this more evident; an object is simply a class put into context.
In that sense, it is just a concrete instance of your solution to a problem that is fed with data. Don’t try to
create hierarchies of classes that mimic the real world for no reason. The cow/cat/dog→mammal→animal
example, which is often used to explain hierarchies and inheritance, is the worst thing people have been
teaching programmers. Class inheritance is about maintaining a given responsibility while specializing
a class’ behavior, or in other words, extending the class to specific contexts.
As I mentioned before, approach classes as solutions to a problem. Do you need to represent a cow?
Then instead of making a Cow class, what about having a class to emit sounds, one to listen to sounds
and react, one to eat that can be specialized further on into a class that specifically eats grass, one that
ruminates, one that turns water and fat produced by the other classes into milk… and then combining
them? This is also how you can comply with one of the most fundamental principles that we are going
to talk about in Chapter 4.
This approach of breaking big problems into smaller ones is the best approach you can use to create good
code bases. Once you have general small solutions, you can combine them and solve specific problems while
keeping them generic enough to be used in other contexts, even within the same application (or game, in
our case). For instance, look at how many nodes we have available in Godot Engine. We could definitely
have a single class meant to represent a player that moves around and collides with things. However,
isn’t it more intuitive to break this down into a CharacterBody2D node, a CollisionShape2D
node, a Sprite2D node, an AnimationPlayer node, and some AudioStreamPlayer2D nodes,
and then combine these classes to build a class that, using these classes together, represents the player’s
avatar? This also allows us to create other objects with graphics using the same Sprite2D class. To
have sounds in our game’s levels, use the AudioStreamPlayer2D class. To have static and moving
obstacles, use the same CollisionShape2D class to collide with the player, and so on.
See how tackling one problem at a time helps you tackle more problems by combining previous
solutions? This is the power of complying with composition.
In the next section, we will put this to the test and design a new feature for our game. You will see that,
besides being rigid and looking quite demanding, complying with these principles is more natural
than you think, especially because we can rely on Godot Engine’s design and features to help us use
this approach and not get sidetracked unless we deliberately want to break these principles.

7

8

Understanding Object-Oriented Design

Designing games with OOP
It’s time to put our knowledge into practice. In this section, we will design an object based on a prompt
made by a fictional game designer. The goal is to understand the demands of the game designer, as
well as to identify the data and behaviors that an object would need in order to fulfill the request.
OOP is especially useful in game development due to the intricate nature of games. When it comes to
applications, other paradigms can often better fulfill the requirements. Think about it for a second. In
many applications, as long as some data comes from the user’s input and the application provides those
users with the desired output, it’s OK. The idea of maintaining and mutating states is unnecessary in
most cases. Now, in games, it’s important that objects are kept in memory and react to each state of
the application. We can’t simply render a page and wait for players to react to it. Games have a game
loop, where everything is processed 30, 60, or more times per second. Things can react to each other
in unpredictable ways. Games need mutations, in the sense that the same algorithm must react to
different emergent contexts 30, 60, or more times per second. It’s different from most applications,
which can stay on standby without performing any processing while the user isn’t interacting with
them. So, for games, OOP is the most natural way to implement a given game design.
OOP aligns well with the nature of game development, which often involves creating complex, interactive
systems that can evolve over time. The principles of OOP help manage this complexity and foster an
environment where creative and technical requirements can be met more efficiently and effectively.
As we progress through this section, you will notice that most of the requirements are already available
through Godot Engine’s built-in features, but don’t get caught up by the technical details of the solution.
At this point, we will only focus on understanding the design process, especially the abstraction, which
is the most fundamental aspect of any design process.
Now, I want you to imagine that you are the engineer of a game development studio. The lead game
designer comes to you after playtesting the game’s current iteration. They notice that it’s lacking some
visual feedback regarding the scoring when players pick up diamonds. This is their request:
“I see that when players collect diamonds, the diamonds disappear. However, we
need to communicate visually that this is a positive action that leads the player
closer to the level’s goal.”
“Picking up diamonds increases the player’s score, but there is no visual cue to
communicate that. We need to show text on the screen that displays the points a
player gets when they perform an action. The text should pop up on the screen with
a punchy animation at the very position of the object the player picked up, so they
understand that the object and the points are directly correlated. After popping up,
the text fades, disappearing from the screen. I think we can use the same feedback
approach to communicate other messages to the player as well, such as maybe
damage when we set the combat system, so I need to be able to directly change the
text to any word, phrase, or number when I create it.”

Designing games with OOP

Note that this is an experienced designer, so there is a lot of good information in their prompt. First
of all, they talk about something visual. This means that we are going to display something on the
screen, meaning that this will require a position on the screen. The main feature is being able to display
text. Therefore, our object needs a property to store this text so we can render it. They also mention a
punchy pop-up animation, which makes me think that the object should appear on the screen like in
videos where the subtitles appear, scaling up and then down quickly as if the words had appeared from
somewhere deep within the screen. This makes me think that we will need to play with the animation’s
depth, and since we are talking about a 2D environment, this means playing with the object’s scale. So,
our object will need a scale as well. The final requirement is that it fades away at the end. This makes
me think that we are going to play with the object’s color to make it become transparent over time.
So, this is the list of requirements that the object should have:
• It has a position and scale
• It displays text, so it may also need a font
• It has color with alpha
• It animates these properties to perform a pop animation
• User classes should be able to set the object’s text and position
• User classes should be able to tell the object when to pop
Nice, these are the overall requisites of our object. This means that by fulfilling these, we can deliver
them to our team’s game designer and expect them to be satisfied. Now, how do we turn this into an
object design?
Did you notice that we can clearly define that our object has some properties and does some actions?
Everything the object has is its properties, meaning data. Everything the object does is its behavior –
in other words, procedures it performs upon its data.
We start our object design by establishing its responsibility, which is to pop a text on the screen. Note
that it doesn’t need to access where this text comes from. It also doesn’t need to know who is asking
to pop it, or whether the text is positive or negative. It has a simple and single responsibility: it pops
the text on the screen. This helps us keep it simple by establishing its boundaries on the system.
Everything else regarding its behavior that is not related to popping the text on the screen should be
provided by user classes, including the text content itself.

9

10

Understanding Object-Oriented Design

Why is this important? That’s because this way, we can focus only on what matters for the scope of this
object. In that sense, our object simply asks for the text it needs to display and where it should appear.
This means our object has a single method that requires a string that will be the text displayed, and
the position in which it should appear. The method’s signature is the following:
func pop(text: String, position: Vector2) -> void: pass

Note that we didn’t talk about any implementation details here. We don’t know how it animates its
properties, its parent class, or anything else. We just created an interface for user classes to request the
object to perform its responsibility. This is how we usually abstract our classes. We think about how
the user classes will communicate with this object, taking their perspective, or how they see the object
from their point of view, into account. In that sense, they don’t need to know how the popping happens.
Also, notice that this specific class doesn’t return any data from its behavior, so we can simply say
that this is a void method. Remember: here, objects are small robots that process data and pass it
around. When an object’s behavior doesn’t output any data directly, we can say that it is on the tip of
the system, accomplishing a high-level behavior. This is the ultimate abstraction level we expect to
reach in our designs.
You will see, as we get deeper into complex topics, that objects will most commonly pass data around
one to the other in low-level behaviors until they reach the point where the object performs the highlevel behavior expected from the system itself. This is how responsibility-driven design helps us define
and implement roles and collaborations.
Anyway, now that we have a good abstraction of our object, it’s time to implement it in Godot Engine.
We have seen, thus far, its essential properties and behaviors, and we have even created our first
interface. In the next section, we will make the concrete implementation of this design using Godot
Engine’s built-in features.

Turning your design into an object in Godot Engine
After creating an interface for our class, we can dive into the implementation details. In this section,
we will create a PopLabel object, which is an object that pops up on the screen displaying text and
then fades away. If you have some experience with Godot Engine, you may already have some solutions
in mind, right? However, let’s follow the steps in this section to get the following results:

Turning your design into an object in Godot Engine

Figure 1.1 – Text popping up on the screen after the player collects diamonds

With the repository on your computer, open the project in the 01.understanding-objectoriented-programming/start/ folder and then follow these steps:
1.

Create a new scene using a Node2D node as the root node. Remember, our object needs
position, scale, and some way to change its alpha color, which the Node2D’s Modulate
property allows us to do.

2.

Rename it to PopLabel, since ultimately we will use a Label node to display text.
Properly naming your classes, objects, variables, methods, and so on is a fundamental skill we
need to develop as programmers. The more information you can pass through names and the
more accurate this information is, the better. Remember, you are writing down the solution to
a problem, so people should be able to understand it by reading your code. Your code should
be like prose. Readers should naturally read it and understand what’s going on. If necessary,
add comments to explain why you coded something in a given way, not what the code means.

3.

Then, we will add a Marker2D node as a child of the PopLabel node and rename it to
PivotMarker2D. This will work as the pivot for the Label node we are about to add. It
will be through this node that we will animate some properties to perform the pop animation.

4.

Speaking of animation, add an AnimationPlayer node as another child of the PopLabel
node. We will use it to mutate the properties we need to perform the desired animation.
This is an important topic to take notes on. Animations, in general, are a way of programming
as well. So, especially if you don’t need to access properties in run time to perform a behavior,
and especially if the behavior is time-dependent, try to use animations instead of blocks of
deterministic code.

5.

Add a Label node as the child of PivotMarker2D node. This, of course, is the star of the show.
It will be through this node that we will display the text and visually give the desired visual feedback.

11

12

Understanding Object-Oriented Design

6.

Finally, attach a script to the PopLabel node. Save the scene and the script as res://
Interface/PopLabel/PopLabel.tscn and res://Interface/PopLabel/
PopLabel.gd, respectively. After that, your scene’s hierarchy should look like the following:

Figure 1.2 – The PopLabel node’s scene node hierarchy

All right, we have everything we need to implement the requested object. Now, let’s implement its
behavior. For that, we will use AnimationPlayer to create the base animation that will pop the
object on the screen and fade it. For that, let’s follow these steps:
1.

Select AnimationPlayer and create a new animation called pop.

2.

Set the animation’s length, in seconds, to 0.4.

3.

Set the PivotMarker2D’s scale to 0.0 on both the x- and y-axes and then add a key for this property.

4.

Set the key’s Easing option to Ease Out, as shown in the following figure:

Figure 1.3 – PivotMarker2D’s Scale key Easing option set to Ease Out

Turning your design into an object in Godot Engine

5.

Move the animation’s timeline cursor to 0.03 seconds, then set the Scale property of
PivotMarker2D to 1.5 on both axes and add another key to the property’s track.

6.

Move the animation’s timeline cursor to 0.05, then set the scale property of PivotMarker2D
to 1.0 on both axes and add another key to the property’s track.

At this point, we have the pop animation ready! Play the animation and see how this goes. Now, it’s
time to make it fade away and disappear. Let’s continue the animation:
1.

Move the animation’s timeline cursor to 0.2, then set the position of PivotMarker2D to 0.0
on both axes and add a key to this property’s track.

2.

Then, set the Modulate property of PivotMarker2D to fully opaque white, in other words,
255 on all the properties in the RGBA format, or ffffff in hexadecimal format. This is
shown in the following figure:

Figure 1.4 – PivotMarker2D’s Modulate Color settings

3.

Add a new key to the modulate property track of PivotMarker2D.

4.

Move the animation’s timeline cursor to 0.4 seconds.

13

14

Understanding Object-Oriented Design

5.

Set the Position property of PivotMarker2D to -192 in the y-axis and add a new key to this
property’s track.

6.

Set PivotMarker2D’s Modulate property Color value to a completely transparent white. In
other words, set the alpha to 0 or the hexadecimal code to ffffff00, then add a new key
to this property’s track.

7.

Now, add a new Call Method track for the PopLabel node and create a new key calling the
queue_free() method. This will completely free the PopLabel node from memory after
the animation finishes. See how powerful the Godot Engine’s animation system is? We can
even call methods using it, so it allows us to create really complex behaviors for our objects,
all without writing a single line of code, but still programming.
Your animation timeline settings should be like the one in the following figure at this point:

Figure 1.5 – The pop animation’s tracks and keys

Now that we have the main behavior in place, it’s time to allow user classes to pass the PopLabel node
the proper data it needs to display the text at the desired position in the game. Open the res://
Interface/PopLabel/PopLabel.gd script and make the concrete implementation of the
pop() method. For that, follow these instructions:
1.

Create an @onready variable to store a reference to the AnimationPlayer node:
extends Node2D
@onready var animation_player := $AnimationPlayer

Turning your design into an object in Godot Engine

2.

Create another @onready variable to store a reference to the Label node:
extends Node2D
@onready var animation_player := $AnimationPlayer
@onready var label := $PivotMarker2D/Label

3.

Create a function named pop(). As mentioned before, its contract requires that the user class
passes text and pop_position as arguments and it won’t return anything. The function
signature is the following:
func pop(text: String, pop_position: Vector2) -> void:

4.

Then, inside the function, let’s set global_position of PopLabel to pop_position:
func pop(text: String, pop_position: Vector2) -> void:
    global_position = pop_position

5.

After that, we set the label.text property to the text argument that the pop()
method received:
func pop(text: String, pop_position: Vector2) -> void:
    global_position = pop_position
    label.text = text

6.

Finally, we play the pop animation on animation_player:
func pop(text: String, pop_position: Vector2) -> void:
    global_position = pop_position
    label.text = text
    animation_player.play("pop")

With that, our PopLabel class is done! Now, you might be asking yourself whether it does what
it proposes, right? We are confident that it does, so let’s use it! When I say use it, I mean creating a
user class! For that, open the res://Objects/Diamond/Diamond.gd script and make some
changes so it instantiates a PopLabel node when the player interacts with it. For that, we will do
the following:
1.

Create an @export variable that will preload the PopLabel scene file:
extends RigidBody2D
@export var pop_label_scene = preload("res://Interface/PopLabel.
tscn)

15

16

Understanding Object-Oriented Design

2.

Then, create another @export variable to allow us to set the Diamond object’s score amount.
This represents the points the players will get by picking up this Diamond object:
extends RigidBody2D
@export var pop_label_scene = preload("res://Interface/PopLabel.
tscn)
@export var score = 175

3.

Then, inside the _on_interactive_area_2d_interaction_available() callback,
before calling the queue_free() method, we will create an instance of the PopLabel scene:
func _on_interactive_area_2d_interaction_available():
    var pop_label = pop_label_scene.instantiate()

4.

In Godot Engine, nodes are only processed if we add them to the SceneTree object, and to
do that, we need to add the node as a child of another node. Since the Diamond object will
be freed upon interacting with the player, we can’t add the PopLabel node as its child. So,
let’s find the Level node and add a PopLabel instance as its child instead:
func _on_interactive_area_2d_interaction_available():
    var pop_label = pop_label_scene.instantiate()
    find_parent("Level").find_child("PopLabels")
    .add_child(pop_label.pop(str(score), global_position)

5.

Finally, we can call the queue_free() method to free the Diamond object from memory
when the player interacts with it:
func _on_interactive_area_2d_interaction_available():
    var pop_label = pop_label_scene.instantiate()
    find_parent("Level").find_child("PopLabels")
    .add_child(pop_label.pop(str(score), global_position)
    queue_free()

That is it! If you playtest the res://Levels/Level.tscn scene, you will see that when the player
collects the Diamond objects, a PopLabel node pops on the screen right on top of the Diamond
object displaying the amount of points the player got by picking up the Diamond object. So, we have
successfully designed and implemented an object using Godot Engine’s built-in features.
Note that by doing this, we applied the principles of OOP, especially abstraction, inheritance, and
encapsulation. Be proud of yourself.

Summary

Summary
In this chapter, we learned that OOP is foundational to understanding and applying the design patterns
that will be discussed throughout this book. With a unique approach from a philosophy of language
perspective, this paradigm is emphasized as crucial for structuring solutions to problems in a way that
aligns with human problem-solving processes. The essence of OOP allows us to abstract our solutions
into classes, where each class is a blueprint of how to solve a problem, including the necessary data
and the methods to manipulate this data. This abstraction enables us to think about solutions in a
more structured way, making it easier to test these solutions in various contexts by creating instances
(or objects) of these classes.
Furthermore, the chapter delved into the basics of OOP, stressing the importance of understanding
programming as a structured formalization of solutions to problems. By treating classes as super data
types that encapsulate both data and the procedures to operate on this data, OOP allows for a powerful
way of organizing and structuring code, as we learned in this chapter. Then, we also saw how we can
use the concepts of OOP as a framework to abstract the required features that our team may demand
from us. We saw how a designer may communicate a demand, as well as how we can turn this demand
into an abstract set of data and procedures that we can turn into a class, and further, into an object.
With the system rules in place, we saw how to turn our abstraction into an actual class in Godot
Engine using GDScript. We saw how we can implement properties and methods, as well as how we
can instance and reference an object.
In the next chapter, we will delve into the details of each of the four pillars that comprise the core
features of OOP: abstraction, inheritance, polymorphism, and encapsulation. These are the fundamental
principles to keep in mind when designing and implementing OOP solutions. So, get ready to sharpen
your skills!

17

2
Learning the
Four Fundamental Pillars
Now that you understand what object-oriented design and Object-Oriented Programming (OOP)
are, and what the approach we are taking toward them is, it is time to present the four fundamental
pillars that allow us to design and implement OOP solutions to you.
In this chapter, we will understand why abstraction is the very core of design and how to create good
abstractions so you can focus on the class goal instead of wasting time and energy thinking about
implementation details.
We will also see how encapsulation walks hand-in-hand with abstraction by preventing user classes
from accessing implementation details on the designed class. Furthermore, we’ll see why we should
also prevent user classes from directly making mutations on the class.
Then, we will talk about inheritance, a topic that causes the most heated debates about OOP. Inheritance
is both OOP’s core feature and its nemesis unless you understand its underlying principles and learn
how to use it properly.
Finally, we will learn polymorphism, which is, in my opinion, the most powerful of the four pillars.
With polymorphism, you learn how to override class behaviors while maintaining their compatibility
with user classes. It goes hand-in-hand with inheritance, so it’s important to lay the foundation with
inheritance first so we can make the most out of polymorphism.
Throughout this chapter, we will implement each of the four fundamental pillars of OOP to create
the design of a new class for our project. By the end of the chapter, we will have created an extended
version of a crate object that has a chance to drop diamond objects. Let’s get started!

20

Learning the Four Fundamental Pillars

In this chapter, we will be covering the following topics:
• Simplifying complex systems with abstraction
• Scoping properties and method with encapsulation
• Extending an object’s behaviors with inheritance
• Maintaining compatibility with polymorphism

Technical requirements
To follow along with the chapter’s instructions, use the project files available inside the start/ folder
of the 02.learning-the-four-fundamental-pillars/ project. You can use the files
presented in the final/ folder as a reference in case you feel lost or get errors or bugs through the
process of following the instructions. If you didn’t get the repository yet, download the repository files
from the following link: https://github.com/PacktPublishing/Game-DevelopmentPatterns-with-Godot-4.
That said, let’s start with understanding how we can use abstraction to simplify the concepts we are
working with in our projects.

Simplifying complex systems with abstraction
Abstraction is unarguably the most fundamental skill anyone in any design area must develop. It is
through abstraction that you identify the relevant aspects of the application, or in our case, the game.
It’s especially by using good abstractions that we design good classes by understanding what should
be exposed and what should be hidden from user classes and other peers on the team.
For instance, when we are making a game project in Godot Engine, the actual implementation details
in C++ of each feature, node, or class are not relevant. What matters the most is what is exposed to
us by the Godot Engine’s API. Another example is shaders. It’s not important to know how a GPU
works on a hardware level in terms of how electricity turns into graphics, but rather, what is available
through a shaders API so we can create nice-looking visual effects for our games.
Abstraction is about knowing the goal of the class and what people will use it for. Another example
is a remote control that simply turns a TV on and off. Do we need to expose the entire hardware and
how the electronic components work together until a signal is emitted and turns on or off the TV?
Or should we create an interface with a button that, once pressed, toggles the TV on and off? The
answer is clear, right? This is the same with abstraction. We are always thinking about how the class
will be used and how we can create a nice and intuitive interface to allow other classes to interact
with the one we are designing.

Simplifying complex systems with abstraction

That said, let’s put that into practice. Consider the following scenario: your team’s game designer has
discovered that breaking crates lacks positive incentives if players don’t get anything in return. As a
solution, he suggests introducing a new crate type, known as a loot crate, which can contain diamonds.
However, he cautions against always guaranteeing diamond drops, as this may lead to predictable
rewards. Instead, he advocates for an intermittent reinforcement approach, where diamonds may or
may not drop based on chance. He emphasizes the importance of being able to adjust this chance,
particularly for scenarios such as treasure rooms, where crates may have a higher chance of diamond
drops. On top of that, he mentions the possibility of introducing additional rewards beyond diamonds
as the game progresses.
Now, to abstract that, we can point out three main things:
• The proposed object is a Crate
• It drops an item
• It needs a property to define the drop rate
So, in this abstraction, we can say that this object will extend the functionalities of the Crate object. It
will need a method that will be responsible for creating an instance of an item in the game world only
if the player is lucky. So, we can say that this object needs a drop_rate property that determines
the chance of dropping the item. We also need a property to store which item it will drop; we can
call it loot. Finally, we also need a method that we can call to execute this behavior. We can call it
drop(). Our LootCrate object design will look as follows:
extends Crate
@export var loot_scene
@export_range(0.0, 1.0) var drop_rate
func drop():
    pass

Notice that we don’t go into the intricacies of how it will calculate the player’s luck, or how it will
actually instantiate loot_scene. At this point, there’s no technical implementation detail. We just
made a rough sketch of what this class will look like in order to fulfill its purpose. This means that, if
the game designer decides to use this class, they will be able to change loot_scene and instantiate
other items. They will be able to change drop_rate to whatever they want, where 0.0 is no chance
to drop and 1.0 is a 100% chance to drop the item. They can even tell when the drop happens by
calling the drop() method.
This is what is most important when designing a class: to ensure that it fulfills its purpose. The
abstraction helps us understand what is and isn’t important for the fulfillment of the class’ purpose.
Ideally, by doing good abstractions, we would reach out to the person who requested the feature and
ask them whether the abstraction accomplishes the need, as well as whether they will be able to use
it on their own. Then, with their approval, we follow with the actual implementation of the class.

21

22

Learning the Four Fundamental Pillars

Up until now, we have reinforced the most important principle of any programming paradigm, especially
OOP. We saw that abstraction helps us create good interfaces for users so they can accomplish their
goals with the class. We saw that with a good abstraction, we don’t need to care about implementation
details, but rather focus on what matters the most, which is to create a good backbone structure for
the class so that we and others can understand what it does and how to use it.
Now, imagine that the game designer approved the interface you created for the LootCrate object
but requests how they can quickly test the LootCrate object behavior if the only current way to
break a crate is when it gets hit by the player’s avatar. We are going to see how we can use encapsulation
not only as a principle to prevent undesired or unintended mutations in a class but also as a tool to
create good and quick tests in the next section.

Scoping properties and methods with encapsulation
Encapsulation is another fundamental principle that will help us design scalable and easier-tomaintain classes. I prefer to define encapsulation as similar to abstraction but with a greater emphasis
on safeguarding the internal state of the object. Image a medicine capsule. It has a bunch of chemical
components that accomplish a given goal. We take a cup of water and swallow the capsule. The capsule
will do its job once it is inside our body and all its components will perform their purposes. However,
for us, the capsule is a single thing. We just call it a “capsule of ”, followed by its name. We don’t list all
its components. This analogy illustrates a practical approach to encapsulation. However, I’ll provide
a more detailed definition to ensure clarity.
The idea of encapsulation is to protect the object’s internal states from user classes and expose only
the necessary properties and methods to allow the object to do its job. In many languages, several
features allow the programmer to implement levels of access to their object. One of them is the idea
of private properties and methods. Such ability would allow the programmer to implement necessary
variables, auxiliary functions, and other member data that would allow the object to perform its
designed behavior while only exposing the properties and methods established by the abstraction
made earlier. With encapsulation, we are preventing the implementation details from leaking outside
the class and messing with the object’s interface.
Now, in GDScript, the concept of private variables or methods doesn’t exist. I particularly love that,
because it allows us to come up with creative ways to work around this limitation while also maintaining
the freedom to have everything publicly available for other classes to use if the user decides to take
the risk. There is a way to control how mutations will impact a class, though.
GDScript offers the ability to use setter and getter methods to create routines that happen when a
variable is accessed. Previously, in Godot Engine version 3.x.x, this would allow the class to dictate
how interactions from user classes impact its states while allowing the class itself to bypass the setter
and getter routines and manipulate the class mutations freely. This allowed us to create pseudo-private
variables by using the setget features together with the assert features and ultimately prevent
user classes from accessing said variables.

Scoping properties and methods with encapsulation

In Godot Engine 4.x.x, this changed. By using the setter and getter features, the very class itself will
also trigger the setter and getter routines, so we can’t implement private or protected features to our
variables. Nonetheless, the ability to use setters and getters still allows us to create routines for accessing
variables, which gives us control over the mutations expected within the class’ scope. For instance,
let’s say that we want a String variable to only accept String variables that don’t contain numbers
and are eight characters long at most. In that case, we can do the following:
var example_string := "mystring":
    set(value):
        var regex = RegEx.new()
        regex.compile("\\d")
        assert(value.length() < 9 and
        regex.search(value) == null

Note that this is an aggressive approach to prevent your team or anyone using this class from mutating
example_string out of these boundaries. However, you may want to approach it defensively
by throwing a warning message and not assigning the new value to the variable. Yes, when you use
setters, you can control whether the variable will or won’t accept the mutation. In the case of a getter,
you can control how it will handle the access to the variable’s value. For instance, the following code
will throw warning messages and won’t assign the value to the variable if the new value is over eight
characters long or has numbers. Otherwise, it will assign the value to the variable:
var example_string := "test":
     set(value):
           var regex = RegEx.new()
           regex.compile("\\d")
           if value.length() > 8:
                push_warning("Value not assigned to `example_string`.
Avoid values beyond 8 characters long")
           elif not regex.search(value) == null:
                push_warning("Value not assigned to `example_string`.
Avoid using numbers")
           else:
                example_string = value

Personally, I don’t like using setters or getters. They pollute the code and may create unnecessary
restrictions on interactions between objects on top of adding extra layers of complexity to an object.
When I think about people using my solutions, I don’t know what exactly they want to achieve;
restricting them may not be the best way to handle edge cases or unpredictable behaviors. Adding
setter or getter procedures may mislead people. For instance, if I set the value of a variable, I don’t

23

24

Learning the Four Fundamental Pillars

expect that this will trigger anything other than changing the variable’s value. Many people use setters
and getters to emit signals when the value changes. It’s a good use case, but still, I would avoid that.
1.

Encapsulation is all about maintaining boundaries between object interactions, which will lead
to decoupling and further healthy and maintainable code. It’s about making objects interact in
a controlled manner and preventing user classes from knowing more than they need about the
object. A practical example in the Crate class is how other classes assume they should interact
with the Crate.health property. Since there is no method exposed to dictate the designed
interactions with the Crate class, users may assume they can set the health property to
whatever value they want. Not only that but they can assume that Crate class will still behave
properly, for example, shattering when its health value goes below 1. However, this is not
true. So, let’s refactor this class by following these steps. First, you’ve got to open the res://
Objects/Crate/Crate.gd script. Then you can do the following:

2.

Create an interface so user classes can interact with the Crate class’ health property. First of
all, the main interaction is to damage the Crate instance, so let’s create a damage() method
that receives _damage that represents the amount of damage caused to the Crate instance:
func damage(_damage: int) -> void:

3.

Then, let’s extract the logic inside the _on_hurt_box_2d_hurt() callback to the
damage() method and call the damage() method, passing the _damage value passed via
the _on_hurt_box_2d_hurt() callback as argument:
func _on_hurt_box_2d_hurt(_damage: int) -> void:
    damage(_damage)
func damage(_damage: int) -> void:
    health -= _damage
    if health < 1:
        broke.emit()
        animation_player.play("break")
    else:
        animation_player.play("hit")

4.

Note that we may want to shatter an instance of the Crate class without necessarily applying
damage. A use case for that is when a Bomb object explodes, it may deal 1 damage to the
player, but shatter Crate instances. Another use case is in a cutscene if we want a Crate
instance to shatter. So, let’s create a shatter() method and extract this behavior from the
damage() method:
func damage(_damage: int) -> void:
    health -= _damage
    if health < 1:
        shatter()
    else:

Extending an object’s behaviors with inheritance

        animation_player.play("hit")
func shatter():
    broke.emit()
    animation_player.play("break")

Note that now, we have given a name to a procedure that otherwise was just a sequence of steps that
people could assume would perform a shattering behavior. Remember: we are trying to create code
that people will read, understand, and reuse. So, giving names to procedures is one of the best ways
to communicate your solution to your peers. It’s similar to the way that giving names to feelings helps
you communicate them and create strategies to deal with them.
In this section, we saw that encapsulation is a fundamental concept to create good object designs.
Conceptually, encapsulation is like a layer that we create to shield the object’s internal state from
undesired or unintended interactions. Good encapsulation is like a medicine capsule: from the outside
it is simple, and its purpose is obvious. Its insides are hidden behind an intuitive interface. We also
saw how to apply encapsulation using GDScript in Godot Engine. We learned that private properties
and methods are not supported, and that we can apply encapsulation using high-level abstractions
to create clear boundaries that lay out the intended interactions for our object. We also saw how to
use setters and getters to trigger routines when accessing and changing a variable’s value. With that
in mind, let’s learn about one of the most controversial aspects of OOP: inheritance.

Extending an object’s behaviors with inheritance
Here we are at our discussion of one of the core features of OOP. The ability to reference and implement
a class by simply inheriting its behaviors and properties is what we’ll be talking about here. Loved by
few, criticized by many, inheritance is usually what comes to developers’ minds when we talk about
OOP, even though this paradigm is more about bundling data and procedures into the same data
structure. Inheritance is the trademark feature of OOP.
One of the main critiques of inheritance is that, by definition, it creates a hard coupling between
classes, namely the super-class and the subclass (or parent class and child class, or general class and
specialized class). Usually, people are against coupling classes because it makes it harder to maintain
them once the project starts to scale. A simple change in a class may break its user classes’ code. This
can be mitigated with good interfaces. Again, abstraction and encapsulation play a core role in this
process. However, it’s still difficult to have perfectly decoupled classes in any project. Let’s learn about
what inheritance really is so we know when and how to use it.
Inheritance is a mechanism that allows a new class, usually called a subclass or child class, to implement
properties and behaviors from an existing class, usually referred to as a super- or parent class. This means
that the subclass can reuse existing code and functionalities from the superclass by simply extending
it. It doesn’t need to explicitly import or make reference to it as an object instance in order to use its
code. Ultimately, a subclass is a user class of its superclass with one major issue: by inheriting a class,

25

26

Learning the Four Fundamental Pillars

the subclass gains access to all the implementation details of its superclass, completely breaking the
purpose of encapsulation. For instance, in most languages, it can access private and protected variables
and methods and can bypass setter and getter routines. Do you see where all the concerns come from?
The main tip I can give regarding inheritance is to avoid mimicking real-world hierarchies. Things
such as the “cat, dog, cow, mammal, animal” example that people usually abuse to teach inheritance
are to be avoided. The “job, rogue, warrior, mage” or “car, bus, truck, vehicle” examples should also be
avoided. Don’t fall into this trap. It’s very tempting to think that this is a good approach to inheritance.
Instead, think about it from the perspective of generalization and specialization. Think about it this
way: we stand on the shoulders of giants. In order to accomplish specific tasks, we need to solve
generic problems. For instance, in order to render a sprite on the screen, we need to first be able to
tell where it should render, as well as its scale and rotation. Then we can think about how to render
and modulate an image.
Something people usually do wrong when designing classes is to use inheritance as a starting point,
but I want to suggest that you use it as a refactoring technique whenever possible. With that, I mean
that you should create a class solving a specific problem. Then, when you need to solve another specific
problem that can take advantage of some of the solutions you implemented in the first problem, you
create a generic class that both inherit from. This way, only the necessary code is shared between the
subclasses and we can keep their responsibilities self-contained in their own code as much as possible.
When done right, inheritance is a powerful tool to create good interfaces as well, especially when
allied with polymorphism, which we are going to talk about in the next section. In fact, inheritance
is imperative for most design patterns, especially the ones presented in this book. This is true to such
an extent that it’s part of the very definition of some design patterns, such as the Strategy Pattern.
We are going to see, in Chapter 3, that a good superclass is open for extension, or specialization, but
closed for modification. This means that after a class goes into production, the best way to implement
new features is to create subclasses that will extend its behavior. This is exactly what we do in Godot
Engine, for instance, by extending nodes to implement the specific behaviors we need them to perform
in our games while relying on their general implementations offered by the engine’s API.
Another principle related to inheritance and its core to follow, to the point it is enforced in most
languages, is the Liskov Substitution Principle. We will talk more about it in Chapter 3, but know that
this principle is all about avoiding compatibility breaks with the superclass user classes, also known
as client classes. This principle is more related to polymorphism, but since polymorphism is tightly
related to inheritance, it is also important to understand that you should never change the contract
made by the superclass. A contract is essentially what the class demands and offers in its relationships
with other classes, for instance, the class’ function signatures. If the superclass states that it needs a set
of arguments of a specific type in order to perform its behavior and will output data of a specific type,
the subclass cannot change this contract by any means. It can ask for more generic types as arguments
and return more specialized types, but never the other way around. This is important to keep in mind,
especially when creating interfaces for your classes.

Extending an object’s behaviors with inheritance

In Godot Engine, inheritance is natural. The engine’s design itself relies on and leverages objectoriented design. For instance, you can not only inherit, or rather, extend a class in GDScript but you
can also create what are called Inherited Scenes. These are fundamentally sub-scenes of a super-scene,
or specialized scenes from a generic scene. Conceptually, it’s the same thing as inheriting a class with
code. This is exactly what we are going to use to create LootCrate class, so get ready and follow
these steps:
1.

From the editor’s top menu, go to Scene | New Inherited Scene. From the open base scene
menu, choose the res://Objects/Crate/Crate.tscn scene. A new scene will be
created with the same structure as the Crate scene.

Figure 2.1 – The scene hierarchy of the new scene inherited from the Crate scene

2.

Save this new scene as res://Objects/Crate/LootCrate/LootCrate.tscn.

27

28

Learning the Four Fundamental Pillars

3.

Right-click on the root node. From the drop-down menu, select the Extend Script… option.

Figure 2.2 – The Extend Script option from the node’s drop-down menu

4.

Now, it’s time to implement our abstraction. So, let’s create an exported variable that represents the
scene of the loot item. We will call it loot_scene; by default, it will preload the Diamond scene:
extends "res://Objects/Crate/Crate.gd"
@export var loot_scene := preload("res://Objects/Diamond/
Diamond.tscn")

Extending an object’s behaviors with inheritance

5.

We will also export a variable to represent the drop rate. Here, we will use a special version
of the @export annotation so that we can limit the variable’s value range between 0.0 and
1.0. By default, it will be 0.3:
extends "res://Objects/Crate/Crate.gd"
@export var loot_scene := preload("res://Objects/Diamond/
Diamond.tscn")
@export_range(0.0, 1.0) var drop_rate := 0.3

6.

Now, it’s time to implement its main behavior: to drop loot. Let’s implement the drop()
method we’ve established in the abstraction stage. The first thing we are going to do inside this
method is randomize a number between 0.0 and 1.0 to represent the player’s luck with this
specific LootCrate instance:
func drop() -> void:
  var luck := randf()

7.

Then, we need to check whether the luck is enough to trigger the loot. So, if the player’s luck is
greater than the drop_rate value, we will create an instance of the Diamond scene and add
it as a child of the level’s Diamond nodes. Here, we set global_position of Diamond
node to match global_position of LootCrate node so Diamond object looks like it
was inside LootCrate object:
func drop() -> void:
    var luck := randf()
    if luck >= drop_rate:
      var loot: Node2D = loot_scene.instantiate()
      loot.global_position = global_position
      find_parent("Level").find_child("Diamonds")
        .add_child(loot)

8.

With that, it’s done. The final step is to save this script as res://Objects/Crate/
LootCrate/LootCrate.gd.
The complete LootCrate class’ script should look like this by the end of these steps:
extends "res://Objects/Crate/Crate.gd"
@export var loot_scene := preload("res://Objects/Diamond/
Diamond.tscn")
@export_range(0.0, 1.0) var drop_rate := 0.3
func drop() -> void:
    var luck := randf()

29

30

Learning the Four Fundamental Pillars

    if luck >= drop_rate:
        var loot: Node2D = loot_scene.instantiate()
        loot.global_position = global_position
        find_parent("Level").find_child("Diamonds")
         .add_child(loot)
func shatter():
    drop()
    super()

Notice that, at the top of the script, we have the extends keyword followed by a string
containing the path to the Crate object’s script file. This is one way that GDScript implements
inheritance. You just need to use the extends keyword, followed by a string with a path
pointing to the file of the class you want this new class to inherit from. An alternative for that
is to use the extends keyword followed by the class’ name. For that, in the referred class,
you need to use the class_name keyword followed by a unique name. Just as an example,
we could do the following in the Crate class:
class_name Crate
extends Node2D

Then, in the LootCrate script, we could do the following:
extends Crate

In this section, we learned that inheritance is another fundamental concept in OOP. It allows subclasses
to inherit properties and behaviors from superclasses, promoting code reuse and hierarchy in class
relationships. Although there are critics for creating tight coupling between classes using inheritance,
inheritance remains fundamental for extending and specializing classes.
With inheritance, subclasses can access and expand on the functionalities of superclasses without
explicit object references. However, it can also lead to challenges such as breaking encapsulation,
whereby subclasses gain access to superclass implementation details. It’s essential to use inheritance
wisely, avoiding mirroring real-world hierarchies and focusing on abstraction and specialization. By
employing inheritance as a refactoring tool and creating subclasses when needed, we can maintain
flexible and self-contained class structures. Additionally, inheritance is integral to design patterns and
ensures compatibility with superclass clients.
With that, we have our LootCrate class main behavior implemented and ready to be used. Any
user class that wants LootCrate nodes to drop its loot just needs to call the drop () method. It’s
a very simple interface. However, there’s a small problem. Ideally, LootCrate node drops its loot on
its own when its shatter behavior occurs. The LootCrate node shatters, and then it drops its loot.
So, what are we going to do about that? Will there be a user class that will be constantly monitoring
LootCrate class so that when it shatters, that class will also call its method? That makes no sense,
right? The LootCrate class inherits the Crate class, which is the one that has the shatter()
method, so the very LootCrate class itself has everything it needs to perform its behavior. However,
how are we going to trigger the drop() method together with the shatter() method?

Maintaining compatibility with polymorphism

Here comes one of those instances where we need to maintain the superclass’ contract with its user
classes in the subclass. Every user class of Crate class should only call the shatter() method in
order for Crate class to perform its intended behavior. So, the LootCrate class should only need its
drop() method to be called in order for it to also perform its intended behavior to keep its contract
with the Crate class user classes. Well, this is a typical problem that we can solve with polymorphism!
In the next section, we will explore how we can maintain subclasses’ compatibility with their superclass’
clients while adding or overriding the superclass’ behavior.

Maintaining compatibility with polymorphism
As we saw in the previous section, we need to design subclasses such that they maintain the superclass’
contract with its clients. For that, the subclasses must maintain the superclass interface, not only
explicitly through the function signature and other technical details but also conceptually. A subclass
must specialize its superclass. This means that it should do the same behavior as its superclass but for
more specific contexts.
Polymorphism, in that sense, comes as a way to extend and even change superclass behavior while
maintaining its interface. We usually do that through method overriding. Method overriding is a
trademark of polymorphism. It simply means that the subclass can change the implementation details
of its superclass methods. To do that, the subclass just needs to declare the method again, of course,
maintaining the method’s signature. After that, it needs to change the implementation completely.
We do that all the time in Godot Engine, for instance, overriding the virtual methods and callbacks.
Examples include the _ready(), _process(), and _input() callbacks. It’s a phenomenal feature
if you think about it. The whole engine works using the node’s interfaces to process their behavior,
feeding them with a delta time, in the case of the _process() callback, or with InputEvents
in the case of the _input() callback. All we have to do, as users of this interface, is override these
methods and declare what will happen when the engine calls these methods, which it will since it was
designed to do so. The engine itself has many user classes interacting with the node’s interface and we
can plug our own classes into these intricate interactions.
Ideally, we would use polymorphism with subclasses to leverage the superclass behaviors and user
classes. However, as a side note, polymorphism is also the core of duck typing. Duck typing is a
programming technique that avoids looking for specific objects or data types and instead focuses on
features. It presumes that as long as an object has the methods and properties required, the program
should run without any problems. In other words, “if it quacks like a duck and talks like a duck, then
we can treat it like a duck,” so to speak. Whether or not it is a duck is not relevant. Duck typing looks
for what an object can do, especially in terms of its methods and interface, instead of what the object
is in terms of its type or inheritance. This allows us to create objects that are from different types and
inheritance hierarchies but still use them interchangeably in client classes. This is fundamental to
understand when we start to apply the concepts of composition over inheritance. The idea is that we
can dynamically change a component by changing the object’s instance reference and make it point
to a different component with a similar interface. By doing so, we can completely change an object’s

31

32

Learning the Four Fundamental Pillars

behavior at run time by simply mixing and matching new components. It’s a programming technique
that not many people experiment with, but it’s at the core of some design patterns.
Since GDScript is a scripting language that has dynamic typing features at its core, we can do duck
typing by using the has_*() methods. For instance, has_method() can be used to pass the name
of the method we need. The following code is an example of duck typing:
func damage(object):
    if object.has_method("apply_damage")
        object.apply_damage(5)

With this approach, it doesn’t matter what type the object is. As long as it has a method called
apply_damage() that accepts an integer number as an argument, this will work. Another duck
typing feature that is especially good to know about is the has_node() method. Since in Godot
Engine, we are always composing objects with both built-in and custom nodes, it can be handy to
check whether a given node has a specific composition so we can treat it properly. For instance, let’s
say that you have a menu. Some buttons of the menu emit particles when interacted with, some emit
sounds, and some do both:
func button_interacted(button):
    if button.has_node("SoundEffect"):
        button.get_node("SoundEffect").play()
    if button.has_node("ParticleEffect"):
        button.get_node("ParticleEffect").emit()

Then, you just need to attach these components to the buttons based on what you want them to do.
As you can see, polymorphism essentially allows us to treat a range of objects using the same interface
but getting different outcomes. This is especially useful for our LootCrate class since we want it to
extend the Crate class behavior while also maintaining its interface. Well, let’s see how we can do
that. Open res://Objects/Crate/LootCrate/LootCrate.gd and follow these steps:
1.

Declare the shatter() method from the Crate class in the LootCrate script:
func shatter():

2.

Now, instead of emitting the broke signal and playing the break animation, we will just call
the drop() method. With that, when user classes call the shatter() method, it will trigger
the drop() behavior:
func shatter():
  drop()

Maintaining compatibility with polymorphism

3.

However, we don’t want to change the Crate class shatter behavior. Instead, we want to extend
it. So, for that, we need to also perform its procedure. We can implement its behavior manually
again, but here, I want to present you with the super() keyword. By calling super(), we
can perform the superclass’ implementation of the method being overridden. Keep that in
mind because the super() keyword is a fundamental polymorphism feature in GDScript:
func shatter():
    drop()
    super()

With that, we have our LootCrate class ready to be put to the test. For that, go to the res://
Levels/Level.tscn scene and add some LootCrate instances as children of the Crates
node. Then hit the Run Current Scene button and hit them with the player avatar’s attack.

Figure 2.3 – LootCrate nodes dropping their loot after the player’s avatar hits them until they shatter

In this section, we learned that maintaining compatibility with polymorphism is fundamental for
subclasses to honor the agreements made by their superclasses with client classes. Polymorphism
enables subclasses to adjust or expand superclass behaviors while keeping their interface intact, mainly

33

34

Learning the Four Fundamental Pillars

through method overriding. This ability provides versatility in coding, allowing us to implement distinct
behaviors while maintaining a unified interface. Making games with Godot Engine relies heavily on
polymorphism, especially when it comes to overriding virtual methods and callbacks.
On top of that, polymorphism intersects with duck typing, whereby an object’s suitability is assessed
based on its behavior rather than its explicit type or inheritance. Duck typing promotes flexible and
adaptable code structures, permitting objects of different types or hierarchies to be treated interchangeably
if they fulfill necessary methods or behaviors. This approach aligns with the principles of composition
over inheritance, enabling objects to dynamically alter behavior at runtime by swapping components.
Through practical examples and code snippets, we saw how polymorphism and duck typing shape
the design of classes such as LootCrate class, ensuring both compatibility and adaptability in
object interactions.

Summary
In this chapter, we explored the four foundational pillars of OOP: abstraction, encapsulation, inheritance,
and polymorphism. We illustrated their application through the development of a LootCrate
class in a game project. Abstraction was highlighted as the essential process of simplifying complex
systems, enabling us to focus on the relevant aspects of a class while hiding unnecessary details. By
abstracting a new LootCrate class, we identified its main features and behaviors, such as the ability
to drop items with a specified drop rate. This helps in making the game more engaging for players.
This abstraction clarified not only the class’s purpose but also how it should interact with other parts
of the game, providing a clear roadmap for its implementation.
Following abstraction, we talked about encapsulation, which protects the internal state of objects and
ensures that only necessary interfaces are exposed to other parts of the application. This principle
was applied to control how the LootCrate and Crate properties, such as health and drop rate,
could be manipulated, enhancing the classes’ maintainability and scalability. Inheritance was then
explored as a method for extending and reusing existing functionalities, allowing LootCrate class
to inherit from the base Crate class while adding unique behaviors such as dropping loot. Lastly,
we examined polymorphism, which permits us to override inherited methods and alter behaviors
in subclasses without changing their interface. This concept was vital in enabling LootCrate class
to perform additional actions, such as dropping loot upon being shattered, while maintaining the
established behaviors of its superclass. Through practical examples, this chapter demonstrated how
these four pillars support the development of robust and flexible OOP designs, ultimately facilitating
the creation of a more dynamic and interactive game environment code base.
In the upcoming chapter, we will talk about one of the most important acronyms in the whole
programming and development world: the SOLID principles. People have very polarized opinions
about them and sometimes even say that these principles slow down the development process and
should be banned. However, we will learn that complying with these principles is pretty natural. We
will learn that by following one, you naturally comply with the others and get clean, readable, and
maintainable code.

3
Creating SOLID
Design Solutions
In the previous chapters, we discussed the foundations of Object-Oriented Programming (OOP) and
explored its four fundamental pillars: abstraction, encapsulation, inheritance, and polymorphism. These
concepts are essential for crafting well-structured, flexible, and maintainable code, particularly within
game development projects, where the complexity of systems and the need for extensible architectures
are essential. Building upon this foundation, this chapter transitions into an equally important yet
more nuanced set of principles that further refine our approach to OOP: the SOLID principles.
The SOLID principles, coined by Robert C. Martin (often referred to as Uncle Bob), represent a set of
guidelines designed to improve the robustness and scalability of software, and developer productivity.
These principles address common design flaws, promote code reusability, and simplify the maintenance
process. As we dive into game development, which is a field where projects rapidly evolve, feature
sets expand, and code bases can become unwieldy, adhering to these principles becomes not just
beneficial, but essential.
This chapter is structured around the five principles of SOLID, with each section dedicated to addressing
specific aspects of each principle:
• Single Responsibility Principle (SRP): We start by dissecting the SRP, emphasizing the
importance of creating classes that are focused and unambiguous in their purpose. This principle
advocates for a design where a class should have only one reason to change.
• Open-Closed Principle (OCP): Next, we explore the OCP, which dictates that software entities
should be open for extension but closed for modification. This principle encourages us to design
components that can grow through the addition of new features without altering existing code,
preventing unintended consequences.

36

Creating SOLID Design Solutions

• Liskov Substitution Principle (LSP): Then, we look at the LSP, highlighting the importance of
ensuring that subclasses can be substituted for their base classes without altering the desirable
properties of the program. This principle is crucial for maintaining the integrity of the code
base’s behavior as it evolves.
• Interface Segregation Principle (ISP): The ISP states that clients should not be forced to
depend on interfaces they do not use. By decomposing “bloated” interfaces into smaller, more
specific ones, we can ensure that classes only need to concern themselves with the methods
that are relevant to them, enhancing modularity and flexibility.
• Dependency Inversion Principle (DIP): Then, we talk about the DIP, which involves inverting
the direction of dependencies to reduce coupling between high-level components and low-level
components. This principle encourages a design where components remain as independent as
possible, facilitating easier testing and modification.
By integrating these SOLID principles into our game development practices, we can create systems
that are not only robust and scalable but also easy to understand, extend, and maintain. Throughout
this chapter, we are going to see each of these principles and apply them to a new class in our game
so you understand that besides being conceptually complex, the SOLID principles are intuitive and
almost natural if you know the four fundamental pillars of OOP.

Unbloating objects with the SRP
When we talk about making good code bases, the SRP is the main principle for designing cohesive
and focused classes. It helps us create classes that are cleaner but also easier to manage and extend.
At its core, the SRP states that a class should have one, and only one reason, to change. This means
that when adding or removing functionalities to this class, you should always ask yourself: Does this
deviate from this class’ purpose? Does this help it perform its core function? In that sense, the SRP helps
us encapsulate a single responsibility or functionality.
This principle challenges the common inclination to create bloated classes with “jack-of-all-trades”
purposes that handle multiple aspects of a game. A bloated class is a class that has become overly
large and complex, often containing too many responsibilities, methods, or properties. This can lead
to difficult maintenance and testing, and potential bugs, as the class tries to manage too many aspects
of the game. You have probably heard of, or even made yourself, a Game Manager, or something like
that, right? A class that handles game logic, user interface, mechanics, and player data management,
among other functions. By subscribing to the SRP, we can untangle the complex web of dependencies
often found in such classes, creating the environment for modular, maintainable architectures.
Note that applying good code principles rarely comes as a consequence of the first implementation of
the code. Rather, these principles are applied throughout the process; they are an iterative process of
polishing and improving the code base. In that sense, the journey towards unbloating classes begins
with identifying and segregating the distinct functionalities embedded within a monolithic class.

Unbloating objects with the SRP

Consider, for instance, the GameManager class, which may manage player data, handle input,
control game state transitions, and manage the Graphics User Interface (GUI). By applying SRP,
we can break down this multifunctional class into smaller, purpose-specific classes: PlayerData,
Input, GameState, and UserInterface. Each of these classes has its own set of methods and
performs one specific responsibility, but together they achieve the same functionality as the original
monolithic class.
This is incredibly powerful when communicating with the team about a specific feature or issue as well.
You can simply point out where the problem or feature is likely to be implemented or fixed, instead
of trying to figure out a way to explain that somewhere in the GameManager class right above a
method that handles input you will fix the issue regarding the player’s data. And oh, be careful not to
mess with the user interface code!!
This decomposition has immediate and palpable benefits. First, it simplifies understanding the code,
as each class now has a clear and narrow focus. Other developers can easily pinpoint where specific
functionalities are implemented, reducing the cognitive load and accelerating the development process.
On top of that, testing becomes more straightforward. Isolated classes with a single responsibility are
easier to test since the test cases are more focused and there are fewer potential interactions to account
for. The scalability of the project is enhanced as well. When new features or changes are required,
the team can pinpoint the exact class that needs extension or modification without worrying about
unintended side effects spilling over into unrelated functionalities tangled into a single class.
But, for me, the main advantage of applying the SRP is how it facilitates code reuse. By isolating
functionalities into distinct classes, it’s more likely that we can reuse these classes in different parts of
the game or even in other projects since they become more generic and modular. This not only saves
time but also promotes a more consistent and bug-free implementation across the board.
However, the application of the SRP is not without its challenges, especially in complex game development
environments. It demands a thoughtful analysis of the system’s architecture and a disciplined approach
to class design. Developers must resist the temptation to take shortcuts by lumping together unrelated
functionalities for the sake of expediency. This discipline requires a paradigm shift in how classes are
conceptualized, emphasizing modularity and responsibility segregation from the outset.
We can find the SRP all over the Godot Engine’s API. For instance, we have the PhysicsBody2D
class, which is a generic abstract class that handles objects that can interact with physical forces. Then
we have three subclasses specializing in this responsibility, each with its own responsibility:
• CharacterBody2D, which is a specialized class for physics bodies that are meant to be
user controlled.
• RigidBody2D, which is a specialized class for simulating 2D physics and cannot be directly
controlled, but we can apply forces to it and allow the physics engine to simulate its movement.

37

38

Creating SOLID Design Solutions

• StaticBody2D, which, as the name implies, can’t be moved by external forces and when
moved manually, it won’t affect other bodies. But there’s a specialized StaticBody2D class
called AnimatableBody2D whose sole responsibility is to affect other physical bodies when
moved manually, usually through code or animations.
Those were just a few examples of nodes that follow the Single Responsibility Principle, but in fact,
most nodes do. It’s no coincidence that the Godot Engine’s API contains so many nodes.
The SRP is a cornerstone of good game development code bases, offering a path to clearer, more
manageable, and scalable code. By ensuring that each class in our project encapsulates a single
responsibility, we lay the groundwork for a code base that is easy to understand, extend, and maintain.
As we transition to the section on the OCP, we’ll build on the foundation laid by the SRP, exploring
how we can maintain and extend our now well-organized classes without modifying their source code,
thereby preserving their integrity while accommodating new features and behaviors. This progression
from one principle to the other is natural as they are complementary to each other, and by adhering
to one, you are highly likely to subscribe to the next one as well. The coolest thing is that this usually
happens following the SOLID acronym: applying the Single Responsibility leads to Open/Closed,
which leads to Liskov Substitution, and so on.

Maintaining and extending objects with the OCP
Building on the groundwork laid by the SRP, we will now dive into the OCP. The OCP advocates
that software entities (classes, modules, functions, etc.) should be open for extension but closed
for modification.
This principle propels us toward a design where the behavior of a class can be extended without altering
its existing code base, thus mitigating the risk of introducing bugs into a stable system. Applying
the OCP enables us to add new functionalities or respond to changing requirements with minimal
disruption to the existing code, a common necessity in the dynamic environment of game development.
Understanding how to apply the OCP in practice involves recognizing the mechanisms available for
extending a class’s behavior without modifying its source. Polymorphism stands out as a key strategy
in that sense. We do that all the time in Godot Engine by extending nodes’ behavior. The code base
is already set and, supposedly, stable on each release. Godot Engine developers create the code base
using C++ and provide an API so we can extend the classes to use in our games, but we can’t directly
modify the node’s code. This is a perfect example of the OCP.
Another practical application of the OCP is the use of event-driven programming. Events allow
dynamic behavior extensions by enabling objects to subscribe to and react to various signals or actions
occurring within the game world. This approach aligns with the OCP by allowing new reactions or
behaviors to be added as responses to events without modifying the emitting or handling mechanisms.
In Godot Engine, we apply this approach by overriding the engine’s callbacks, such as the _ready(),
_process(), and _input() and callbacks. This way, we inject our game logic in the engine’s code
base at predetermined places without messing with the engine’s internal code base.

Ensuring compatibility with the LSP

The OCP also encourages modularity and reusability, as well-designed modules or classes that adhere
to this principle can be easily reused across different parts of a game or even across projects. This
not only accelerates development time but also enhances the overall quality and consistency of the
game’s code base.
However, applying the OCP requires foresight and a deep understanding of the game’s architecture
and future requirements. Over-abstracting in anticipation of changes that may never come can lead
to unnecessary complexity. Thus, striking a balance between flexibility for future extensions and the
simplicity of the design is crucial.
The OCP provides a strategic blueprint for developing game systems that are robust against change and
evolution. By designing our classes to be extensible through mechanisms such as polymorphism, we
can introduce new features and adapt to changing game requirements without the risk of destabilizing
our existing code. As we proceed to the next section, we’ll explore how to maintain and extend class
hierarchies in a manner that ensures interoperability and consistency, further fortifying the flexibility
and reliability of our game architecture. This progression from the OCP to the LSP seamlessly integrates
the concepts of safe extension and behavioral consistency, ensuring that our game’s foundation remains
SOLID while it grows and evolves.

Ensuring compatibility with the LSP
The LSP is yet another fundamental aspect of robust object-oriented design. It advocates for the
interchangeability of subclasses without affecting the superclass’ methods contracts, or, in other words,
its interface. This principle, named after computer scientist Barbara Liskov, stipulates that objects of a
superclass can be replaced by objects of its subclasses without altering any of the desirable properties
of the application.
To implement the LSP effectively, subclasses must maintain the behavioral expectations set by their
superclasses. For instance, if a superclass has a method that accepts an input range and guarantees an
output, any subclass should honor these operational boundaries. Consider a weapon class in a game
that calculates damage based on certain attributes. If a subclass overrides this method but introduces
new, unexpected side effects or constraints (such as ignoring input parameters or altering unrelated
state), it could lead to runtime errors or logic bugs when the subclass is used in place of the superclass.
One practical approach to adhering to the LSP in game development is through the use of comprehensive
unit tests that verify the behavior of subclasses against the expected behavior defined by the superclass.
This method ensures that subclasses behave as intended when they replace their superclasses, whether
it’s in combat systems, AI behaviors, or interactive game elements. These tests can serve as a contract
that cements the expected behaviors and interfaces, making the game’s components more predictable
and reliable.

39

40

Creating SOLID Design Solutions

Another important aspect of the LSP is the design of subclass methods that do not strengthen
pre-conditions or weaken post-conditions. This means that a subclass should not require more
restrictive input conditions, nor should it produce less precise results than its superclass. By diligently
observing these constraints, developers can ensure that their game components are interchangeable
and can interact seamlessly, thereby enhancing modularity and flexibility in the game’s architecture.
In Godot Engine, the editor prevents us from breaking these contracts. For instance, if you create a
subclass and use polymorphism to override one of its methods, you can’t request incompatible types
as the method’s arguments and you can’t return an incompatible type as well. Essentially, you can
think of the LSP as a two-way checklist for overriding any method:
• Does this method ask for more generic types as arguments?
• Does this method return a more specialized type than the original method’s return type?
This makes sense, right? To maintain the contracts of superclass, the subclass needs to be interchangeable
with the superclass. So, it can’t ask for a more specialized type when overriding a function, because
this would prevent its superclass’ users from passing the correct types. It should also return the same
or more specialized types as the user classes expect to have access to some methods and properties
from the returned type. If you return a more generic type, it may not have all the requirements that
the user class was asking.
A practical example would be to create a class that has a method called get_sprite() which returns
a Sprite2D. Then, extending this class, the subclass overrides this method but instead, it returns
a Node2D. Now, every user class that was using this method to change Sprite2D.texture will
throw an error since Node2D nodes don’t have such a property.
The LSP is crucial for creating a stable, reliable architecture that supports safe extensions and
modifications through subclassing. By ensuring that subclasses fulfill the contracts established by
their superclasses, we can prevent a wide range of bugs and maintain system integrity. As we progress
to the next section, we will explore how designing lean, targeted classes can enhance component
compatibility and maintainability, providing a more focused and efficient way to manage game system
interactions. This shift from ensuring behavioral compatibility to optimizing interface design allows
more granular and effective control over how components communicate and operate within the game.

Creating components with the ISP
The ISP advocates for creating lean and specialized interfaces rather than general-purpose, bloated
ones. This principle ensures that a class should not be forced to implement interfaces it does not use,
thereby preventing code pollution. The ISP is particularly crucial in game development, where multiple
game components might interact differently with the same entity. By segregating interfaces according
to the specific needs of different classes, we can create modular and clean architectures, reducing the
overhead and potential errors associated with unnecessary dependencies.

Making high-level abstractions with the DIP

Implementing the ISP begins with a careful analysis and understanding of the functionalities required
by each component or class. For example, in a game that features both airborne and ground-based
enemy types, rather than having a single movement class that includes methods for flying and walking,
the ISP would suggest creating two distinct classes: one for flying and another for walking. This way, an
airborne enemy would implement the flying interface, and a ground-based enemy would implement
the walking interface. Each class would only need to know about the methods pertinent to its specific
type of movement, thus adhering to the ISP.
This principle not only simplifies the implementation of classes but also enhances code maintainability.
When changes are made to a particular action or behavior, they are confined to the specific interface
that governs that behavior, minimizing the impact on other parts of the system. On top of that,
testing becomes more focused and easier to manage because each interface has fewer methods and,
consequently, fewer test cases to consider, which directly improves the clarity and efficiency of the
test documentation and debugging processes.
Moreover, the ISP facilitates the reuse of code. By designing interfaces that are highly specialized, they
can be more easily reused across various parts of a game or even in different projects without dragging
along unnecessary functionality. This reuse promotes a clean separation of concerns, a fundamental
aspect of a maintainable and scalable system architecture.
We can see the ISP principle all over Godot Engine’s code base, but, for instance, check out all the
AudioEffect subclasses. We could, for instance, bloat the AudioEffect class with all the
alternative effects and simply select from a menu which specific effect this AudioEffect should
perform. Instead, each effect has its own class with lean and clean code. This allows us to extend
specific effect functionalities as well, instead of extending a bloated class just to override a method.
The ISP plays a fundamental role in crafting well-defined, maintainable, and scalable game architectures
by advocating for specialized and segregated interfaces. This approach not only streamlines the
development process by reducing dependency complexities but also enhances system robustness.
Moving forward, we will talk about how these cleanly segregated interfaces tie into the DIP, which
focuses on decoupling high-level modules from low-level modules through high-level abstractions.

Making high-level abstractions with the DIP
The DIP is a sophisticated and profoundly impactful principle within the suite of SOLID design
principles. It advocates for high-level modules not to depend on low-level modules; instead, both should
depend on abstractions, one of the reasons why I emphasize that abstraction is a fundamental skill
to develop as a programmer. This principle effectively inverts the typical dependency relationship in
programming, shifting the reliance from concrete implementations to abstract interfaces or base classes.

41

42

Creating SOLID Design Solutions

Implementing the DIP typically involves defining an abstraction that encapsulates the high-level
logic of a module. This abstraction then becomes the cornerstone of both high-level and low-level
modules. For example, in a game scenario where different types of characters might have various
weapon behaviors, instead of character classes directly instantiating specific weapon classes, we could
introduce a Weapon interface. Both the character classes (high-level modules) and weapon classes
(low-level modules) would depend on this Weapon interface.
Characters would use weapons through this interface, allowing the addition of new weapon types
or changing existing ones without altering the character code. This approach has the dual benefit of
promoting a system that is both more testable and more maintainable. Since high-level modules depend
only on abstractions, testing can be conducted using mock implementations of these abstractions,
thereby focusing tests on the behavior of the high-level modules without interference from the details
of the low-level modules.
Additionally, it enables the system to adapt more fluidly to new requirements or changes in the game’s
design, as new modules that implement these interfaces can be introduced without modifying the
existing high-level modules.
On top of that, the DIP promotes a scalable system architecture. As games grow in complexity and
feature sets, having a flexible system where new functionalities can be added as discrete modules
reduces the overall integration overhead. It allows developers to plug and play different functionalities
as needed, facilitating a modular approach to game development.
This concept is something we don’t see directly when making games with Godot Engine. Usually, we
use direct implementations of the API without wrapping it in interface classes. Doing that would allow
us to migrate projects to new versions of the engine a bit safer since we would use an interface class
that would be under our control throughout the whole code base, so if something changes between
versions, we will just need to change the code in the specific implementation of our interface, and
no other places.
The DIP is highly dependent on dependency injection, which makes it so that an object’s dependencies are
provided externally, by an user class, rather than being hardcoded within the object’s class. Dependency
injection promotes loose coupling and makes the code more modular, testable, and maintainable. Since
we couple our classes to abstract interfaces, we should provide the concrete classes we will actually
use in the user class. This also helps us keep the code flexible, favoring composition over inheritance,
since the user class can tell which concrete class it couples with. With that, we can change the game’s
system behavior during run time instead of only during compile time. For instance, the same class can
couple to two different concrete Weapon subclasses depending on the current game context simply
injecting a new instance of a different subclass of the Weapon interface class. It sounds very abstract,
but as you practice, you will notice that this is very intuitive. For instance, whole patterns rely on this
principle alone, such as the Mediator and the Facade patterns. The Mediator design pattern, which
centralizes communication between objects by using a mediator object, reducing direct dependencies,
is usually used when we have two objects from distinct APIs that we want to wire together. The Facade
design pattern provides a simple, unified interface to a complex subsystem, making it easy to use and

Summary

understand while hiding the subsystem’s underlying complexity. We won’t go into the details of these
patterns in this book as they are more relevant to other types of applications. But it is definitely worth
your time to research them after you read this book so that you can use them if you find them necessary.
The DIP encourages a resilient, adaptable architecture by ensuring that both high-level and low-level
modules depend on shared abstractions rather than concrete implementations.

Summary
In this chapter, we delved into the SOLID design principles, which are fundamental for creating robust,
scalable, and maintainable software, especially in game development projects.
We started by exploring the SRP, emphasizing the importance of each class having a singular focus.
This approach reduces complexity and enhances modularity by ensuring that a class has only one
reason to change, thereby simplifying both maintenance and scaling of the code base.
Following the SRP, we talked about the OCP. This principle teaches us that software entities should
be open for extension but closed for modification. It highlights the necessity of designing systems
that can evolve without altering existing code, which helps prevent potential issues and enhances the
durability of software.
Next, we covered the LSP. This principle underscores the importance of subclass interchangeability
without affecting the application’s desired properties. Ensuring that subclasses can effectively replace
their base classes without side effects is essential for a reliable and robust design.
We then learned that the ISP advocates for creating specific and targeted interfaces, which prevent
classes from being burdened by unnecessary methods. By adhering to the ISP, we achieve cleaner,
more efficient code that is easier to manage and extend.
Finally, we explored the DIP. We learned that high-level modules should not rely on low-level modules
but on abstractions. This principle facilitates a decoupled architecture that is easier to compose and
modify, thus promoting flexibility across the software life cycle.
By integrating these SOLID principles into our game development practices, we create systems that
are not only easy to understand and extend but also maintainable over time. This chapter provided
examples, demonstrating the application of these principles in real-world game development scenarios,
particularly in the Godot Engine, helping us understand that these principles are accessible and besides
their abstract description, they are all over the place in good software.
In the next chapter, we are going to learn how we can implement the idea of favoring composition
over inheritance.

43

4
Favoring Composition
Over Inheritance
Throughout the past chapters, we have seen a recurrent topic: the idea that we should favor composition
over inheritance is a fundamental idea to keep in mind when developing a good reusable code base.
Weirdly, we have a fundamental object-oriented programming (OOP) pillar for inheritance, but we
don’t have one for composition, right?
In OOP, one effective design strategy is to favor composition over inheritance. This approach suggests
building objects using combinations of smaller, reusable components instead of forming rigid class
hierarchies through inheritance. Composition offers a range of benefits, such as increased flexibility,
simpler code maintenance, and dynamic adaptability during runtime. This chapter will explore why
composition often provides a more modular and adaptable framework, especially useful in scenarios
where requirements might evolve during production.
Inheritance has been a fundamental aspect of OOP, but it can lead to a brittle architecture as applications
expand. It tends to establish fixed relationships that may complicate modifications and extensions
in the future. Composition, in contrast, allows for constructing objects with distinct functionalities
encapsulated within other objects, promoting reusability and reducing interdependencies. This
structure supports a more decentralized and flexible system architecture.
The advantage of composition shines when you need to modify or extend functionalities. In game
development, where iterative design and frequent updates are the norm, being able to switch out
components easily without extensive refactoring is invaluable. Throughout this chapter, I will use a
practical example from game development to show how you can quickly adapt to changes in game
mechanics or design elements using composition.

46

Favoring Composition Over Inheritance

We’ll wrap up the chapter by putting theory into practice by turning the loot of the LootCrate
functionality into a component we can reuse on other objects. Rather than embedding this directly
within a class structure, we’ll design it as a Loot2D component. This method not only eases the
integration of LootCrate into different areas of the game but also keeps our options open for future
updates or changes. Through this implementation, the aim is to highlight the real-world benefits of a
compositional approach, underlining how it leads to software that’s both scalable and easier to manage.
In this chapter, we will cover the following topics:
• Understanding the composition approach
• Creating complex scenes by composing with nodes
• Making games by composing with scenes

Technical requirements
To follow along with the chapter’s instructions, use the project files available inside the 04.favoringcomposition-over-inheritance/01.start/ project. You can use the files present in the
04.favoring-composition-over-inheritance/02.final/ folder as a reference in
case you feel lost or get errors or bugs through the process of following the instructions.
Download the repository files through the following link: https://github.com/
PacktPublishing/Game-Development-Patterns-with-Godot-4.
That said, let’s start with understanding what it means to favor composition over inheritance, what
the composition approach is, and when to apply it.

Understanding the composition approach
The composition approach emphasizes constructing complex objects by assembling simpler, independent
components. You will see that composition effectively adheres naturally to all the SOLID principles.
This method facilitates development by allowing each piece to be crafted and tested separately, then
integrated as needed. This modular setup not only simplifies modifications but also enhances the
system’s adaptability. Components can be swapped or updated with minimal impact on the overall
system, making it particularly useful in environments where requirements can evolve rapidly or where
functionality needs to be reused in various parts of an application.
Composition’s strength lies in its flexibility and the ease with which developers can extend and adapt
application features. Unlike a fixed inheritance structure that might constrain objects to predefined
behaviors and relationships, composition empowers developers to dynamically mix and match capabilities
in runtime. This flexibility is crucial for managing complex software applications, especially games,
that must adapt to changing requirements without extensive rewrites or debugging.

Understanding the composition approach

In comparison, inheritance structures objects in a strict hierarchy, which can simplify understanding
and implementing relationships in the object model. However, this can lead to a rigid system where
changes to base classes cascade through the hierarchy, potentially causing widespread disruptions.
Composition offers a more flexible alternative, enabling developers to build systems with interchangeable
parts that mitigate such risks. While inheritance has its place, particularly in cases where we extend
functionalities already validated, composition often provides a more resilient and adaptable framework
for software development.
This method aligns beautifully with how the Godot Engine handles game development through its
scene and node architecture, making it a practical example of composition in action.
In Godot, a scene is essentially a composition of various nodes, where each node represents a distinct
functional element, such as sprites, sounds, scripts, or collision areas. Think of a scene as a container
that organizes and groups these nodes into a coherent unit representing a game entity or environment.
This structure allows us to build complex game features from simple, interchangeable parts. The real
power of this approach is evident in how easily these components can be modified or reassembled.
For instance, if a developer wants to change how a character interacts with its environment, they can
simply swap out or adjust the relevant nodes without the need to overhaul the entire character or
scene. Out of curiosity, this composition approach that Godot Engine uses is a design pattern called
Composition Tree.
On top of that, this modular structure extends beyond mere convenience. It promotes a clear organization
paradigm where each component maintains its independence, reducing the dependencies commonly
seen in inheritance-based architectures. This modularity ensures that changes in one part of a system
have minimal impact on others, simplifying both debugging and development processes. In game
development, where iterative changes and refinements happen daily, the ability to adjust components
without side effects is priceless. Godot’s approach also enhances reusability. Nodes developed for one
project can be easily reused for another, or even shared with the community, thanks to their selfcontained nature. This reusability not only accelerates development cycles but also promotes a more
robust and tested code base.
In essence, the composition approach in Godot exemplifies how a flexible and maintainable game
architecture can be achieved. By treating scenes as compositions of nodes, developers gain the ability
to construct, experiment, and iterate with efficiency and clarity. This methodology not only streamlines
game development but also empowers developers to explore creative solutions without the constraints
typically imposed by more rigid programming structures. In the next section, we will understand how
this applies to how we make games with Godot Engine.

47

48

Favoring Composition Over Inheritance

Creating complex scenes by composing with nodes
Godot Engine almost equally emphasizes the importance of both approaches, inheritance and
composition. By default, you need to compose your scenes using the available default nodes. Then,
you specialize, in other words, extend or inherit, them. For example, let’s understand how the player’s
avatar scene was built up by a mix of these techniques. Usually, it all starts by laying down the general
features using a composition of nodes, and then you extend their behaviors with scripts:

Figure 4.1 – The KingPigPlayer2D scene’s hierarchy composed of fifteen nodes

Notice that there are certain nodes and compositions that may not make sense at first glance, even the
default ones. For instance, why don’t the Area2D nodes allow us to set a Shape2D directly? Why do
we need to make a composition together with the CollisionShape2D node? The simple answer is
that this way the CollisionObject2D nodes, such as CharacterBody2D, StaticBody2D,
and Area2D, can focus on handling their collision and overlapping logic instead of having shape
logic polluting their code.

Creating complex scenes by composing with nodes

On top of that, with a specialized class to handle shapes, we can make changes to collision logic
and shape logic without these changes impacting each other. Also, with this composition approach,
every class that needs to calculate shapes to handle their collision or overlapping logic can rely on
the CollisionShape2D node as a component instead of having to inherit a general class that
implements the CollisionShape2D logic and making these classes unnecessarily coupled to each
other. With a component, we decouple them and make their code comply with the single responsibility
principle, which in turn makes their code more maintainable and reusable.
Also, as we saw in Chapter 3, as you comply with one of the SOLID principles, you naturally comply
with the others if you manage to do it right. In good APIs, it’s common to see classes that are similar
with slightly different changes that could be merged into a single class with an option to set the
desired behavior. For instance, we have CharacterBody2D, RigidBody2D, StaticBody2D,
PhysicalBone2D, AnimatableBody2D, and Area2D, which are all CollisionBody2D
nodes, and except for the Area2D nodes; they are all PhysicalBody2D nodes as well.
Godot Engine developers could have done what Unity developers did with their RigidBody2D, where
a single class has three distinct physical behaviors and you need to choose which one you want at any
given time: dynamic, kinematic, and static. As for the equivalent of Area2D, they use Collider2D,
which is equivalent to CollisionShape2D. But Unity’s Collider2D is where the actual collision
is handled; so, if you want an object to simulate physics behaviors and collide, you compose it using
RigidBody2D and Collider2D. Collider2D has a property called Is Trigger, which allows
the Collider2D to detect overlapping objects without physically interacting with them; in other
words, without colliding with them and changing their movement and other physical properties.
Well, we don’t have access to the code that implements these classes in the Unity core code base, but I
think is safe to imagine that it is tricky to maintain these two classes in opposition to Godot Engine’s
approach where we naturally have compliance with the interface segregation principle, having
multiple classes each with its distinct responsibility. So, if we ever need to find a bug related to physicssimulated motion, the first stop would be on the RigiBody2D node. If we have an issue regarding
custom movement, we can look at CharacterBody2D, and so on and so forward. With Unity’s
approach, everything is in the same place and we would need to pray to God to pinpoint the issue.
Now that you have a grasp of the importance of favoring composition, it’s time to fix a small error we
committed! In the next section, we will take the LootCrate loot logic and turn it into a Loot node!

Turning a behavior into a component
The importance of understanding the concepts we’ve been through since Chapter 1 is that we can make
good design decisions from the beginning and prevent future problems and reworks. For instance,
the designer who asked us to make LootCrate now wants to add looting to enemies as well so
that players have the incentive to face and defeat the enemies. He realized that players were mostly
avoiding enemies and came out with this as a solution.

49

50

Favoring Composition Over Inheritance

Now, a novice programmer would think that since the LootCrate and BumpingPig classes will
share common behavior, it would be necessary to create a superclass, maybe called LootObject,
and make both Crate and BumpingPig inherit from this class. But apart from that, these classes
have nothing else in common and it makes no sense to couple them to the same common superclass
just to implement this behavior. Instead, we can extract the loot behavior from LootCrate into a
Loot class and use it as a component in both the Crate and the BumpingPig classes. We also have
the extra advantage that we can use this with any other thing in our game if we want to implement
loot to them. To achieve this, let’s follow these steps:
1.

Open the project inside the 04.favoring-composition-over-inheritance/
start/ folder.

2.

With the project opened in Godot Engine, open the res://Objects/Crate/LootCrate/
LootCrate.tscn scene and let’s start the surgery to extract this loot behavior!

3.

First of all, we will cut everything from line 4 to line 14 and keep it in our Pastebin.

4.

Then, create a new scene. Use Marker2D as the root node, rename it Loot2D, and save it
as res://Objects/Loot2D/Loot2D.tscn.

5.

Attach a script to Loot2D and paste the extracted code. It should look like this at this point:
extends Marker2D
@export varloot_scene :=
  preload("res://Objects/Diamond/Diamond.tscn")
@export_range(0.0, 1.0) var drop_rate := 0.3
func drop() -> void:
    var luck := randf()
    if luck >= drop_rate:
        var loot: Node2D = loot_scene.instantiate()
        loot.global_position = global_position
        find_parent("Level").find_child("Diamonds")
          .add_child(loot)

6.

Save the Loot2D scene and switch to the LootCrate2D scene instead. Inside the LootCrate2D
scene, add an instance of the Loot2D scene as CharacterBody2D of the Crate child, as
shown in the following figure:

Creating complex scenes by composing with nodes

Figure 4.2 – The LootCrate scene node hierarchy showcasing the Loot2D scene instance

7.

Open the res://Objects/Crate/LootCrate/LootCrate.gd again and let’s start
by making a reference to the Loot2D node:
extends "res://Objects/Crate/Crate.gd"
@onready var loot = $CharacterBody2D/Loot2D

8.

Then, inside the shatter() method, we will remove the direct drop() call, since
this class doesn’t have this method anymore, and instead, we will make a call to the loot.
drop() method:
extends "res://Objects/Crate/Crate.gd"
@onready var loot = $CharacterBody2D/Loot2D
func shatter():
    loot.drop()
    super()

51

52

Favoring Composition Over Inheritance

With that, if you test the res://Levels/Level.tscn scene and destroy the crates, we will get
the same behavior as we had before! In the following figure, you can see two crates being shattered
and one of them dropped a diamond:

Figure 4.3 – The crates on the level scene shattered and one of them dropped a diamond

Our loot component is working as it should and now we can use it with the BumpingPig class to
create LootBumpingPig as requested by the designer. Throughout this section, we’ve seen how we
use composition to create scenes by combining nodes and creating complex hierarchies of nodes. I really
wish Godot Engine could call them compositions instead of scenes; it would make way more sense.
In the next section, we will take this concept even further and make complex compositions of scenes!

Making games by composing with scenes
Godot Engine in its very core is an implementation of the Composition Tree design pattern. Composition
Tree is a structural design pattern that lets you compose objects with other objects and then work
with these compositions as if they were also objects; in other words, compositing with compositions
as well. This is exactly how the node and scene system works. You create a scene (i.e., a composition)
using nodes, and then you can use scenes to compose other scenes as if they were nodes as well.
Note that when you instantiate a scene into another scene, Godot Engine ensures that the details of its
implementation are hidden; in other words, it encapsulates the scene’s node composition. This makes
it so that the scene behaves exactly like a node, with the addition that you can toggle the Editable
Children option to get access to the implementation details. The following image showcases the
PlayerCharacter2D instance before and after toggling on the Editable Children option.

Making games by composing with scenes

Figure 4.4 – The PlayerCharacter2D before and after toggling the Editable Children option

The Editable Children option exposes the implementation details of this specific instance of the scene,
allowing you to change the children’s properties, but effectively breaking its encapsulation.
Well, now that we understand how Godot Engine naturally allows us to use the composition approach
when making our games, it’s time to implement the requested looting feature to BumpingPig and
use it in our testing level scene to create more complex compositions and ultimately compose our
whole game! In the next section, we will use the Loot2D component together with the BumpingPig
scene and then use these in the level scene to compose a scene where we can play with these basic
game features and get a feel of our design.

Creating the LootBumpingPig
Now that we have the Loot2D component, we can use it anywhere we like. So, let’s follow the designer’s
request and create the LootBumpingPig enemy so players can drop some diamonds by fighting
enemies in the game. For that, follow these steps:
1.

Use the FileSystem dock to search for the BumpingPig scene; right-click it and from the
drop-down menu, choose the New Inherited Scene option, as shown in the following figure:

53

54

Favoring Composition Over Inheritance

Figure 4.5 – Creating a new inherited scene using the FileSystem dock drop-down menu

Note that we are following the SOLID principles here as well, since the BumpingPig scene
is, technically, on production, following the open-closed principle, we will extend it to add the
new behavior, also complying with the interface segregation principle by having both classes
segregated but with the same interface. See how things naturally flow without us realizing it?
Usually, when people struggle to follow SOLID principles, it is because their design has some
fundamental flaws from the beginning.
2.

With the new scene opened, select the BumpingEnemy2D node and use the FileSystem dock
to search for the Loot2D.tscn file.

3.

From there, right-click it and from the drop-down menu, select Instantiate to create an instance
of this scene as a direct child of the BumpingEnemy2D node.

4.

Next, let’s extend the script of the BumpingPig node by right-clicking on it and from the
drop-down menu, picking the Extend Script… option, as shown in the following figure:

Making games by composing with scenes

Figure 4.6 – Extending the BumpingPig script using the Scene dock drop-down menu

5.

You can save the script as res://Actors/BumpingPig/LootBumpingPig.gd and do
the same with the scene, saving it as res://Actors/BumpingPig/LootBumpingPig.
tscn.

6.

With the script open, let’s do the same thing we did with the LootCrate script, but instead of
overriding the shatter() method, we will override the die() method. The script should
look like this at the end of the process:
extends "res://Actors/BumpingPig/BumpingPig.gd"
@onready var loot = $BumpingEnemy2D/Loot2D
func die():
    loot.drop()
    super()

55

56

Favoring Composition Over Inheritance

7.

Now, open the res://Levels/Level.tscn scene, add an instance of the LootBumpingPig
scene as a child of the Enemies node, and position it somewhere in the level so we can test
it and see if it is working.
Remember that there’s a chance that defeating the enemy won’t drop anything as well, so we
may either play with the Loot’s Drop Rate property or test it multiple times. But if everything
goes well, at some point, we will get a diamond drop by defeating the enemy, as shown in the
following figure:

Figure 4.7 – The Bumping Pig dropping a diamond after being defeated by the player

Note that, with this approach, we also complied with the single responsibility principle, since the new
class maintains a single responsibility of dropping loot when the Bumping Pig dies, the Liskov substitution
principle, as we kept the contracts from all the functions in the parent class of LootBumpingPig.
As I said, complying with the SOLID principles flows naturally. You don’t need a checklist to try to
force compliance on your classes. If you understand the principle fundamentally, you apply it without
forcing it into your code.

Summary

Summary
Throughout this chapter, we learned that favoring composition over inheritance is a powerful strategy
in OOP to create more flexible, maintainable, and adaptable code. Inheritance, while fundamental
to OOP, can lead to rigid and brittle architectures as applications grow. Composition, on the other
hand, promotes the construction of objects using smaller, reusable components, allowing for easier
modifications and dynamic adaptability.
We explored the technical requirements and advantages of the composition approach, which adheres to
the SOLID principles. This method allows for each component to be developed and tested independently,
enhancing the system’s adaptability and making it easier to swap or update parts without significant
impact on the overall system.
The chapter detailed how Godot Engine naturally implements composition through its scene and
node architecture. Scenes in Godot are compositions of various nodes, each representing a distinct
functional element. This modular structure promotes clear organization and reusability, simplifying
both development and debugging processes.
Inheritance, although a fundamental aspect of OOP, often leads to brittle architectures that complicate
modifications and extensions. In contrast, composition allows us to construct objects with distinct
functionalities encapsulated within other objects. This promotes reusability and reduces interdependencies,
promoting a decentralized and flexible system architecture. In this chapter, we explored how composition
can be more modular and adaptable, using practical examples from our game project.
One of the main advantages of composition is the ease with which functionalities can be modified or
extended. Iterative changes are what usually happens in game development projects and being able to
switch out components without extensive refactoring is invaluable. We saw how composition allows for
rapid adaptation to changes in game mechanics or design elements, highlighting its practical application.
Practical steps were provided for transforming behaviors into components. For example, we converted
the loot functionality from the LootCrate class into a separate Loot2D component, demonstrating
how this can be reused across different objects in the game as we did by adding loot functionality to
the BumpingPig class. This not only makes the code more maintainable but also aligns with the
single responsibility principle, ensuring each class has a single responsibility.
Finally, the chapter covered how to create complex scenes by composing with nodes, further
exemplifying Godot’s strength in using the Composition Tree design pattern. We implemented the
LootBumpingPig enemy by inheriting from the BumpingPig scene and adding the Loot
component, showcasing how composition allows for easy extensions and modifications.
As we move forward, we will dive deeper into implementing design patterns in the Godot Engine. In
the next chapter, specifically, we will learn how to maintain game states using the singleton pattern.

57

Part 2:
Basic Design Patterns

After getting introduced to the programming paradigm that we will use throughout the book, it’s time
to understand what design patterns are, when we should use them, why we use patterns, and how to
implement them in our project.
We will start with patterns that are used the most and we can implement them to achieve basic
functionalities in our game projects. These design patterns will help us get used to refactoring bad
code and implementing scalable solutions in the form of design patterns.
This part includes the following chapters:
• Chapter 5, Maintaining Global States with the Singleton Pattern
• Chapter 6, Decoupling Objects with the Observer Pattern
• Chapter 7, Spawning Game Objects with the Factory Pattern
• Chapter 8, Changing Object Behavior with the State Pattern
• Chapter 9, Designing Actors with the Command Pattern

5
Maintaining Global States
with the Singleton Pattern
Games are complex dynamic systems with an infinite amount of different internal states and it is
common to lose track of data when we do clean-ups from one major state to another. For instance,
in most game engines, it’s a common practice, built into the engine, to get rid of all objects before
adding new ones when we load a new level – in Godot’s case, a new scene. This causes some issues
when we need to maintain some data or even the object itself processing.
If you played with background music in Godot, it’s likely that you noticed that it suddenly stops
playing when you switch to another scene using get_tree().change_scene_to_file()
or get_tree().change_scene_to_packed(). This is because Godot frees the current
scene’s node hierarchy from the SceneTree before adding the new scene’s node hierarchy. If you
don’t manage to have your node outside of the current scene’s hierarchy, you will lose it during the
scene dump. But, there’s a way around this. Godot offers us the powerful Autoload feature, which
allows us to have nodes being processed parallel to the current scene. Autoload nodes also allow us
to have a global reference to said nodes if we want. Ultimately, this gives us the necessary features to
implement the Singleton pattern, allowing us to maintain a global reference to a single instance of a
node throughout the whole game run.
In this chapter, we will learn what the Singleton pattern is, its advantages, and when we should use it.
Then, we will implement it in our game to create a node that will carry the player’s score throughout
the whole game run so that the player feels that they are making cumulative progress, instead of
progress that is lost when they move on to the next level.
In this chapter, we are going to cover the following topics:
• Understanding the Singleton pattern
• Spotting use cases of singletons in games
• Implementing the Singleton pattern in Godot

62

Maintaining Global States with the Singleton Pattern

Technical requirements
To follow the instructions in this chapter, utilize the project files located in the 05.maintainingglobal-states-with-the-singleton-pattern/01.start/ directory. If you encounter any
confusion, errors, or bugs while following the instructions, refer to the files in the 05.maintainingglobal-states-with-the-singleton-pattern/02.final/ folder, and don’t forget to
report them to our support team!
If you haven’t downloaded the repository yet, you can get it from the following link: https://
github.com/PacktPublishing/Game-Development-Patterns-with-Godot-4.
With that said, we will start by exploring the Singleton pattern, its core functionalities, and what it
fundamentally solves.

Understanding the Singleton pattern
The Singleton pattern is a creational pattern that allows developers to ensure that there will only be a
single instance of a class throughout the application and this class is globally accessible to all other classes.
The way that developers usually implement the Singleton pattern is by making the constructor
method private. They then provide an alternative static method that will act as a constructor
method. Instead of returning a new instance of the class every time, this method always returns the
same instance, ultimately allowing the existence of only one instance.
Well, this is the technical approach in which most programming languages implement the Singleton
pattern, but something that I want you to keep in mind is that there is no unique way to implement
design patterns. They are solutions to problems and, ultimately, when we implement them, we are
looking more into getting their benefits than being strictly technical and rigid regarding the way to
implement them. If you find yourself needing a single instance of a class that every class can access,
you are talking about implementing a singleton. On the other hand, if you manage to implement a
class that only has one instance running and that every class can access, you have a singleton. The
way you implement it is not absolutely relevant.
I know you are smart and, at this point, you already understand that using the Autoload feature doesn’t
necessarily implement a singleton. First of all, nothing is preventing us from creating new instances
of a class that is also being used as an Autoload object. According to the Godot documentation itself,
“The Singleton pattern is a useful tool for solving the common use case where you
need to store persistent information between scenes. In our case, it’s possible to
reuse the same scene or class for multiple singletons as long as they have different
names.”
I highly recommend you read the complete Autoload documentation so you understand its little
caveats. To do that, check out the following link: https://docs.godotengine.org/en/
stable/tutorials/scripting/singletons_autoload.html.

Spotting use cases of singletons in games

This is how Godot deals with this specific issue. You can have multiple instances of a scene or class
but the global reference will be unique for each one of these instances. This ultimately means that all
classes will be accessing the same cached instance when they use any given Autoload object name.
Most of the time, when we use Autoload objects, the very nature of the class itself doesn’t need more
than one instance. So, we naturally, but without any rigid constraint, keep only one instance running.
We don’t have to, but with that, we comply with the usual Singleton implementation by keeping only
one instance running and globally accessible to all classes.
In the next section, we will spot some use cases for the Singleton pattern in games, and for that, we will
research some real-world case problems that we can solve using the Singleton pattern and understand
why it became a pattern.

Spotting use cases of singletons in games
Now that you understand what a singleton is, let’s research some real-world use cases that are very likely
to happen in any game project. In these use cases, we will note that they will present a problem that we
can solve by applying the Singleton pattern. As we saw, the problem that the Singleton pattern solves
is that you require all classes to access the same instance of a given class. We do that by turning this
instance globally accessible and ensuring that its reference will always point out to the same instance.
I want to make sure that you understand this; the Singleton pattern is not about having a static
method that returns an instance of a class and prevents the creation of other instances. This is how
programmers typically implement it.
However, the goal of the Singleton pattern itself is to provide a globally accessible instance of a class
that all other classes can access. The reason why we typically prevent other instances from existing
is so that we don’t get confused by multiple instances’ states. Instead, we maintain a single coherent
state within a single instance.
In the next section, we will talk about the usefulness of the Singleton pattern to allow us to maintain the
player’s data when we need to clear the current game state, but we want to maintain the player’s data so
we can use it in future states and convey the feeling that the player is living within a continuous world.

Maintaining players’ data throughout the game states
One of the main challenges game developers face is that a game can’t be expressed as a single screen
or a single state. So, when transitioning from one state to the next, they lack a strategy to maintain
the player’s data between these states, hindering the sense of continuity and progress.
A less efficient way to achieve that is by serializing the data and outputting it into a file. Then, you
load the file, deserialize it, and use the data again. Although this is a good way to maintain this data,
especially between play sessions (in other words, when the application closes and opens again), this
method is usually slow and the fact that you have to serialize and deserialize adds a layer of complexity
that you shouldn’t be wasting time and process power with on every change of the game state.

63

64

Maintaining Global States with the Singleton Pattern

Instead, an effective way to achieve this is by implementing a singleton that can be used to store and
provide this data whenever necessary. And since the Singleton pattern maintains a single instance of
the class alive and available, we are safe to clear the game state knowing we will be able to access it
again on the next clean state.
One concrete example of this use case is the player’s score. Since many entities will need to access this
data, it needs to be globally accessible to them, and since the score is a convergence of all the player’s
actions, both positive and negative, it needs to be a single instance. All these entities and actions must
culminate in the same expression of the player’s performance.
In most game engines, when we switch from one scene to the next, the engine performs a state cleanse,
getting rid of everything that is in the current scene and loading the next. For instance, this is what
happens in Godot Engine when we call the SceneTree.change_scene_to_*() methods: the
engine removes the current scene node and all its children nodes and then loads the next scene and
its nodes hierarchy. But when you use an Autoload node, Godot will add it as a sibling of the current
scene. So, when Godot performs the cleanse to load the next scene, the Autoload nodes are not removed
and we maintain their current state. In the following figure, you can see the Score node as a direct
child of the root node alongside the Level node, which is the current scene’s node.

Figure 5.1 – The Remote SceneTree showcasing the root node’s hierarchy
with the Score node as a sibling of the Level node

Spotting use cases of singletons in games

By doing that, we prevent losing the relevant data when we need to change the scene. This allows us
to carry on this data throughout the whole game run and use it whenever we need it—for instance, if
we want to make a high-score leaderboard. In the next section, we will see another useful application
of the Singleton pattern in games: background music.

Playing background music without interruptions
Another issue that usually happens due to the scene cleanse that most game engines do when we
change between scenes is that if the object responsible for playing the music is part of the current
scene’s hierarchy, it will be removed during the cleanse. This makes it so that the music will stop
playing, ending up in a bad player experience.
Since singleton objects keep their instance always available, this means that they don’t get affected by
these cleanses. So, it’s a common practice to apply the Singleton pattern to take care of the background
music, especially if you want to implement some kind of dynamic background music that can be
affected by various objects in the game. An example is when you want a piece of stealth music when
your character enters into sneaky mode or a piece of high-beat music when your character enters
into combat. These would need different objects to access and alter the current playing music, and
with the Singleton pattern, they would have global access to the same object instance responsible for
playing the music.
Just imagine the chaos of having multiple objects playing different music! It’s a clear use case for the
Singleton pattern. In the next section, we will see yet another, among many others, use case for the
Singleton pattern: when we implement third-party plugins.

Using third-party APIs and plugins
One of the most common ways that developers and companies make their APIs available is by creating
a class that exposes relevant methods and communicates with lower-level classes. These classes usually
take quite some space in memory because they serve as mediators, or rather, interfaces, between our
current project code base and their services’ code base. In most cases, there’s no need to have multiple
instances of these classes running, and since most of these services include generic features that can be
useful for various classes in a game, they also need to be globally available. Well, you already guessed,
right? Another perfect use case for the Singleton pattern.
Still in the same idea of using third-party services, when developers create plugins that their peers
can tweak through code, it’s a common practice to turn the main plugin’s class into a singleton object
so that it behaves as an interface as well, allowing us to use the plugin’s features easier. Since there’s
usually no need to have multiple instances of a plugin’s interface class, the Singleton pattern comes
as a good solution. In the next section, we will talk about another use case for the Singleton pattern,
the last example in this chapter, but you will notice that there are many more that we can think of.

65

66

Maintaining Global States with the Singleton Pattern

Accessing the engine’s built-in features
It’s common to have singleton objects in the engine’s API itself as well. Since game engines provide a
framework to create games with a common premade code base, most of the time, the game engines
also implement the Singleton pattern, especially to objects that naturally don’t need more than one
instance running and must be globally available.
One example of this kind of object in the Godot Engine’s API is the OS singleton, which provides access
to common functionalities directly related to the operating system, such as getting the processor’s
name, memory usage, executing commands, and opening files, among other features. Another
example is the Input singleton, which is responsible for handling inputs such as the accelerometer,
mouse, keyboard, gyroscope, and others. As a final example, we also have the Engine singleton,
which provides access to the very engine properties such as time scale, frames per second, and even
a list of available singletons! It’s a meta singleton! It’s through the Engine singleton that we can easily
implement slow motion, for instance.
Well, with all these examples giving us context about the usefulness of the Singleton pattern, it’s time to
put this knowledge to work! In the next section, we will implement a score system and a door system
in our game. Yet another request from the game designer!

Implementing the Singleton pattern in Godot
As you can see from the previous examples, the use cases for the Singleton pattern are many. With this
new power in your hands, you must be careful and use it responsibly. As we know: with great power
comes great responsibility. It’s time to put our knowledge into practice.
In this section, we will assess two use cases for the Singleton pattern and implement solutions for them.
You will see the process of pointing out accurately whether the Singleton pattern fits the presented
requests properly and will understand when to implement it and when to use alternatives. Remember,
as a design pattern, the usage of singletons should come naturally as a solution for specific issues.
You shouldn’t just jump right into it as soon as you note that some data should be globally accessible
or as soon as you want to mediate various classes through a global central hub. That said, in the next
section, we will see our designer’s request and assess it to understand how to solve the issue presented.

Understanding the designer’s request
Throughout the book, we are working on our problem-solving skills, specifically, using programming
tools. In our practical studies, we will receive requests from a fictional designer. We are working on a
game project together and our job is to understand and create the desired outcome presented by the
designer. In this section, we will understand the request and break it down into problems that we can
solve. Then, we will note whether any specific pattern emerges from this assessment.

Implementing the Singleton pattern in Godot

Now, let’s begin. The designer of our team came to us with some features that they think will help
improve the game as a whole. They noticed that players currently can’t add up the score they are
making by collecting the diamonds. Players also don’t understand when and where these points will
be useful and don’t even know whether their score is per level, per play session, or kept until the end
of the game. So, the designer presents you with the following request:
I made an interface to express the internal state of the player’s current score. Since players pick up
diamonds and a score pops, I want them to be aware of how many points they made. But we don’t have
this score stored and available anywhere. So, I need something that I can easily access from this interface
to access the player’s current score.
I also want to provide more positive incentives to players to reward them for other actions than picking
up diamonds. For that, I need the ability to quickly turn any object into something that the player can
score. For instance, I want to reward players with some points for punching enemies.
Now that we have multiple levels in our game, I need to be able to keep the player score when we change
from one level to another. This will help players have a sense of progress and understand that they carry
the impact of their actions throughout the whole game. For instance, players who explore more will have
higher scores as they progress through the game and will be able to compare their high-scores with their
peers, which will help players engage more in the game and spend more time playing it.
Talking about levels, I need an upgrade to the door system. Currently, our door system only leads to the
next level door. But I’m thinking about having some hidden rooms that can only be accessed through
other levels’ doors. This will give players a sense that the world is interconnected and not as linear as it
seems. So, I need the ability to discriminate which door the player will be led to by entering any other door.
Alright, we have some interesting requirements here. First of all, we need an interface to visually
express the current internal state of the player’s score. The problem is that we don’t have a class that
maintains such a state, and we will need to create one for that—we can call it Score. Note that
Score must be easily accessible to the interface, but since we also have other objects that will modify
the state of Score, this class must be easily available for all of these classes. Maybe we even create a
leaderboard, or a high-score screen in the future, so Score must be a hub that all these classes can
access and modify as they need.
Now, the other request is about being able to add the ability to any object to increase the player’s score.
This sounds more like an instance where we will implement a composition approach. We can extract
the scoring logic from the Diamond class into a new class that will be responsible for handling scores.
We can call this class ScorePoints, and it will have a property for the number of points it should
increase and it will also pop ScoreLabel.
As you can see, the designer wants to maintain the player’s score throughout multiple game state
cleanses, so the Score object should remain in memory and maintain its state. This means that it’s not
viable to create multiple instances of the Score class. This is a perfect use case for the implementation
of the Singleton pattern since there’s no need for multiple objects storing the player’s score. We met
all conditions for a singleton.

67

68

Maintaining Global States with the Singleton Pattern

Finally, the designer also wants to be able to maintain the target door in which the player’s avatar
should appear at any given level. This means that both the Door class and the Level class should
communicate somehow. But they can’t communicate directly, since Level node itself is subject to
the game state cleanses when we load the next level. This means that if we manage to send the target
door from Door node to Level node, this data will be lost when we load the next level, ultimately
having no effect. Since there’s no reason for having multiple object instances with different values for
the target door, it’s safe to assume we only need one instance of a class to maintain this data throughout
the game state cleanse.
And since both the Level and Door classes need to have access to it, it’s a good opportunity to
implement the Singleton pattern as well. We can call this new class TeleportData as it will carry
on the data related to the player’s teleport position.
Enough abstraction! It’s time to make some concrete work and see how this will turn out. In the next
sections, we will implement these abstractions into the project, starting with the Score singleton.

Creating the score system
As the designer pointed out, the game needs a score system. Currently, we just display a bunch of
numbers on the screen, but they don’t mean anything since we are not storing them anywhere. So, our
first task is to create a class that will handle the storing of the player’s score. For that, open the project
located in the 05.maintaining-global-states-with-the-singleton-pattern/01.
start/ folder and follow these steps:
1.

Create a new scene, use a Node node as the scene’s root node, and rename it Score.

2.

Save the scene as res://Game/Score/Score.tscn. The res://Game/ folder represents
all the meta classes in our code base that represent the actual game itself. Here, we are talking
about the systems and incentives related to the game, which includes the score system.

3.

Attach a new script to the ScorePoint node, save it as res://Game/Score/Score.
gd, and open it.

4.

Let’s start by creating a variable to store the current player’s score. Let’s call it current, which
has a default value of 0:
extends Node2D
var current = 0

Implementing the Singleton pattern in Godot

5.

Next up, let’s create a variable to store the player’s high score in case we need to use this later.
Let’s call this variable high and its default value will also be 0:
extends Node2D
var current = 0
var high = 0

6.

Then, we will encapsulate a setter procedure so that every time the current score changes, this
class will compare it with the high score, and if it’s greater, the high score will update its value:
extends Node2D
var current = 0:
    set(value):
        current = value
        if value > high:
            high = value
var high = 0

7.

Finally, we will add a method to reset the score to zero in case we have a hard game-over
condition that resets the player’s score. This is how the complete Score class should look:
extends Node2D
var current = 0:
    set(value):
        current = value
        if value > high:
            high = value
var high = 0
func reset():
    current = 0

69

70

Maintaining Global States with the Singleton Pattern

8.

After finishing the script, we need to turn it into an Autoload object to use it as a singleton in
Godot. For that, from the Project Settings menu, choose the Autoload tab. You will see the
following menu:

Figure 5.2 – The Project Settings’ Autoload menu

Implementing the Singleton pattern in Godot

9.

From there, click on the small folder icon to the left of the Node Name field and select the
Score.tscn file:

Figure 5.3 – Selecting the Score.tscn file from the Open (a file) menu

71

72

Maintaining Global States with the Singleton Pattern

10. After that, you will be prompted to choose a name for the node. This is how you will refer to
this Autoload instance globally. Usually, we keep the original class’s name, which is Score
in this case:

Figure 5.4 – Naming the Autoload node after selecting its file

11. With that, you can click on the Add button and you will see it now appears on the list of
currently available Autoload nodes.
Note that there are some options to enable or disable its Global Variable. This can be useful
if you just want to keep it running in the background and maintain it through game cleanses,
but you don’t want it to be globally available. Turning this off effectively breaks one of the
Singleton pattern’s core features, so we couldn’t call it a singleton any more. This is just a jargon
technicality, so don’t bother with that too much. It’s just so you can express yourself accurately
if you need to talk about an Autoload object that is or isn’t globally accessible.

Implementing the Singleton pattern in Godot

Figure 5.5 – The Score node appearing in the Autoload list

Following these steps, we have successfully implemented our first singleton on Godot! It wasn’t hard,
was it? Technically, you don’t even need a single line of code. Now, let’s move on to the next feature
of the scoring system: scoring!

Removing the diamond’s scoring responsibility
To implement the ability to score, we will need to tweak the Diamond class. It currently has the
responsibility of handling scoring. However, the designer wants the ability to reward the player with
various items in ways other than just the diamonds. This means this capability needs to be a separate
responsibility from the Diamond class itself. This is a good signal to turn this responsibility into a
reusable component. So, this is our next task. Follow these steps:
1.

Create a new scene and use a Node2D node as the scene’s root node. This is because we will
need a position in the game space to instantiate PopLabels and, since this will become a
responsibility of this new class, it is the one that will need such a position.

73

74

Maintaining Global States with the Singleton Pattern

2.

Rename the Node2D root node as ScorePoint; this is the name of the class that will
represent scoring in our game. Save the scene as res://Game/Score/ScorePoint/
ScorePoint.tscn. The res://Game/ folder represents all the meta classes in our code
base that represent the actual game itself. Here, we are talking about the systems and incentives
related to the game, which includes the score system.

3.

Attach a new script to the ScorePoint node, save it as res://Game/Score/ScorePoint/
ScorePoint.gd, and open it.

4.

Let’s start by exporting a variable that will represent the number of points that the player will
score; we can call it amount. The designer will use this to change the number of points each
object or action will provide to the player:
extends Node2D
@export var amount = 100

5.

Then, since this class will also handle the instancing of PopLabel, let’s export a variable so
we can point out to the scene file of PopLabel:
extends Node2D
@export var amount = 100
@export var pop_label_scene = preload("res://Interface/PopLabel/
PopLabel.tscn")

6.

After that, create a new function that will be responsible for increasing the player’s score. For
that, it will receive two optional arguments—one for the amount it should increase in the player’s
current score points and another to tell whether it should or shouldn’t pop PopLabel. By
default, it will increase Score.current by the same amount as its amount property and
it will instance a PopLabel:
func increase_score(_score = amount, _pop_score = true):

7.

Here’s where the magic happens. We will access the Score singleton and increase its current
property without having to create any class reference to its instance!
func increase_score(_score = amount, _pop_score = true):
    Score.current += _score

Implementing the Singleton pattern in Godot

8.

Then, we will find the Game node and tell it to update the score label the designer created. The
Game node could become a singleton as well to facilitate access to it, but in this case, we want
it to be affected by game cleanses:
func increase_score(_score = amount, _pop_score = true):
    Score.current += _score
    var game = find_parent("Game")
    if game:
        game.update_score_label()

9.

The next thing to do is to check whether the class needs to instance a PopLabel and, if it does,
instance it. For that, we will call a method that we will create in the next step:
func increase_score(_score = amount, _pop_score = true):
    Score.current += _score
    var game = find_parent("Game")
    if game:
        game.update_score_label()
    if _pop_score:
        pop_label()

10. Finally, let’s create the pop_label() method. Here, we will extract the logic directly from
the Diamond class’s script, but use the amount property instead of the Diamond score
property. It should look like this:
func pop_label():
    var pop_label = pop_label_scene.instantiate()
    find_parent("Level").find_child("PopLabels")
      .add_child
    pop_label.pop(str(amount), global_position)

11. Before we call this task done, let’s open the res://Game/Game.gd script and, in the
update_score_label() method, we will format the placeholder string to display the
Score.current value, like so:
func update_score_label():
    score_label.text = "%s" % Score.current

75

76

Maintaining Global States with the Singleton Pattern

With that, we completed our ScorePoint component and the designer can make anything give points
to the player. All they have to do is to instance ScorePoint in the scene and call the ScorePoint.
increase_score() method. After implementing all the preceding steps, the ScorePoint script
should look like the following script:
extends Node2D
@export var amount = 100
@export var pop_label_scene = preload("res://Interface/PopLabel/
PopLabel.tscn")
func increase_score(_score = amount, _pop_score = true):
    Score.current += _score
    var game = find_parent("Game")
    if game:
        game.update_score_label()
    if _pop_score:
           pop_label()

func pop_label():
    var pop_label = pop_label_scene.instantiate()
    find_parent("Level").find_child("PopLabels")
      .add_child(pop_label)
    pop_label.pop(str(amount), global_position)

To test whether this component is working, let’s fix the Diamond class so it maintains its previous
behavior. Open the res://Objects/Diamond/Diamond.tscn scene and follow these steps:
1.

Add a new instance of the ScorePoint scene as a child of the Diamond node.

2.

Open the res://Objects/Diamond/Diamond.tscn script and implement the following
changes. Here, I’m presuming you extracted the code from the class, meaning the lines in the
ScorePoint class were removed from the Diamond class:
I.

Create a reference for the ScorePoint node; we can call it score_points:
extends RigidBody2D
@onready var score_points = $ScorePoint

Implementing the Singleton pattern in Godot

II.

In the _on_interactive_area_2d_interaction_available() method,
before calling the queue_free() method, call increase_score() on the
score_points node. The whole Diamond class script should look like this:
extends RigidBody2D
@onready var score_points = $ScorePoint
func _on_interactive_area_2d_interaction_available():
    score_points.increase_score()
    queue_free()

With that, the Diamond class is able to increase the player’s score! You can test res://Game/
Game.tscn, collect some diamonds, and see the score increasing in the top-right corner of the screen.
You can also play a bit with this system by adding the ScorePoint component to other classes as
well. For instance, in the 05.maintaining-global-states-with-the-singletonpattern/02.finished/ project, I added the ability for Crate Pig and Bumping Pig
nodes to increase the player’s score upon getting hit or defeated.

Figure 5.6 – The player hits a Bumping Pig, which increases the player’s score and instances Pop Label

77

78

Maintaining Global States with the Singleton Pattern

With the score system in place, there’s another request from the designer that we must take care of.
The door system currently only moves the player to the next level’s initial door, but the designer wants
to have multiple doors and be able to tell where each door leads. In the next section, we will see how
we can implement such a system, taking into account that there is some data that we need to preserve
and must be accessible for multiple classes from the same source.

Implementing the multi-door teleporting system
The next system that the designer requested an upgrade to is the door system. This is a fairly simple
system that currently ensures that once the player interacts with the door, the Level node will fade
out the current scene. Then, the door tells the SceneTree to change the current scene to the next
one, and once the new scene loads, the Level node will position the PlayerCharacter2D node
at the Door node’s position.
This gives the idea that the player entered through the door to the next level. But our designer wants
to improve the game world by allowing players to explore multiple doors that will lead to secret rooms
or other entrances in the next level.
The major issue is that, as it is, the system doesn’t support that by itself. Since the Door and the Level
nodes are removed from memory once we change the scene, we need to maintain this data throughout
game cleanses so that we know which Door node should be used in the next level to reposition the
player’s avatar. This system has two, or potentially more, classes involved. TheDoor class is the one
that will define its target door, in other words, where the player should appear in the next level. But
it’s theLevel class that repositions the player. So, this data must be available for both to access and
modify. Due to that, it is safe to say that there’s no need to have multiple instances of a class that will
hold this data; it’s the very opposite of that: the Level node must have access to the same object the
Door node mutated. So, this is a good case for the implementation of another singleton class! For
that, let’s follow these steps:
1.

Create a new scene using a Node node as the scene’s root.

2.

Rename it TeleportData and save it as res://Objects/Door/TeleportData/
TeleportData.tscn.

3.

Attach a new GDScript to it and save it as res://Objects/Door/TeleportData/
TeleportData.gd.

4.

Inside the script, we will just create a new variable to store the target portal name. The script
should look like this:
extends Node2D
var target_portal_name = "Door"

Implementing the Singleton pattern in Godot

5.

Then, we will turn this scene into an Autoload node. Go to Project | Project Settings |
Autoload and repeat the process we did in the previous section to add the Score scene as an
Autoload node. Your Autoload list should look like this at this point:

Figure 5.7 – The Autoload list is updated and now displays the TeleportData node as an Autoload

6.

Now, let’s make some updates to the user classes so they take advantage of these new features.
We will start with the Door class. Open the res://Objects/Door/Door.gd script and
do the following:
I.

Right below the line declaring target_scene, create an exported variable to hold the
name of the target door as well. We can call it target_door:
extends Node2D
signal opened
signal closed

79

80

Maintaining Global States with the Singleton Pattern

@export_file("*.tscn") var target_scene = "res://Levels/Level.
tscn"
@export var target_door = "Door"

II.

Then, at the beginning of the load_next_scene() method, we will set the
TeleportData.target_portal_name value to be the same as target_door:
func load_next_scene(next_scene = target_scene):
  TeleportData.target_portal_name = target_door

Note that the terminology here is slightly different. This is because I’m using one of my own
game programming design patterns called Portal2D. You can find more about it, along with
13 other recipes, in my book, Platformer Essentials Cookbook.
7.

With that, we made the necessary adjustments to the Door class. Now, let’s move on to the
Level class. Open the res://Levels/Level.gd script and follow these steps:
I.

Inside the _ready() callback, let’s change the player’s target position in the player.
global_position = door.global_position line. Instead of accessing the
door variable, we will use the find_child() method passing TeleportData.
target_portal_name instead:
func _ready():
    player.global_position = find_child(TeleportData.target_
portal_name)
      .global_position
    player.fade_in()
    fade.play("fade_in")

II.

Then, to prevent confusion, let’s remove the door variable declaration since we don’t
use it anywhere in the class anymore. This will keep the class clean. It should look like
this at the end:
class_name Level
extends Node2D
@onready var player = $PlayerCharacter2D
@onready var fade = $CanvasLayer/ColorRect/AnimationPlayer
func _ready():
    player.global_position = find_child(TeleportData.target_
portal_name)
      .global_position
    player.fade_in()

Implementing the Singleton pattern in Godot

    fade.play("fade_in")

func _on_player_character_2d_died():
    get_tree().reload_current_scene()
func _on_door_opened() -> void:
    player.fade_out()
    fade.play("fade_out")

This is all we need to do to achieve the designer’s requirements! Go ahead and play a bit with this new
ability. Add multiple doors to your levels and see how you can connect one to the other. For instance,
in the 05.maintaining-global-states-with-the-singleton-pattern/02.
finished/project, we have a secret door on the first level that leads the player to a secret room in
the second level, and vice versa:

Figure 5.8 – The Level 1 and Level 2 secret doors

With this, we finished up our tasks and I’m sure the designer will be more than happy with the additions
we implemented. Now, let’s see a summary of what we learned throughout this chapter!

81

82

Maintaining Global States with the Singleton Pattern

Summary
In this chapter, we explored how to maintain global states in a game using the Singleton pattern. We
began by discussing the importance of preserving essential data and object states across different levels
or scenes, addressing the problem that such data can be lost during transitions. The Singleton pattern
provides an effective solution for keeping this data accessible and persistent throughout the game.
Our game designer tasked us with creating a global scoring system and enhancing the door system to
allow teleportation between multiple doors across levels. To achieve this, we implemented a Score
class designed as a singleton, ensuring that a single instance manages the player’s score. This class
included features such as storing both the current score and a high score. We made the Score class
globally accessible by setting it as an Autoload node in Godot and updated the relevant classes,
especially when we turned the diamond scoring behavior into the ScorePoint class, which allowed
us to use it as a component in other classes.
To facilitate teleportation between different doors, we introduced the TeleportData class as another
singleton. This class manages target door information, ensuring the player’s position is accurately
maintained across scenes. We modified the Door and Level classes to utilize TeleportData,
enabling the multi-door teleportation feature.
Throughout the chapter, we implemented these features step by step, starting with the setup of the
Score singleton and then integrating the door teleportation logic. We tested the new features by
updating the Diamond class to interact with the scoring system and ensured the Level class handles
player positioning correctly.
By the end of this chapter, we had successfully created a robust system for maintaining global states using
the Singleton pattern with the Godot Autoload feature. This approach ensures that critical game data
remains persistent and accessible within a single instance, thereby, subscribing to the Singleton pattern!
In the next chapter, we will keep on improving our project together with our team’s designer. This
time around, we will talk about one of the most flexible patterns, the Observer pattern. With this
one, we are capable of easily decoupling classes and orchestrating event-driven systems for our game!

6
Decoupling Objects
with the Observer Pattern
In this chapter, we will explore the Observer pattern, a powerful design pattern used to decouple
objects. This pattern is especially useful for creating flexible and maintainable code, allowing objects
to communicate without being tightly coupled. By the end of this chapter, you will understand the
Observer pattern, identify its use cases in game projects, and learn how to implement it using Godot
Engine 4.0’s built-in signal system.
The idea behind the Observer pattern is that objects can have a loose reference if they manage to
create a common interface with a method that they can call to get updated about state changes from
another object. This helps us decouple direct (or hard) references between user classes and user classes.
Imagine that a co-worker reaches out to you in the morning and asks you to let them know when
you’ll leave for lunch. It doesn’t matter what they will do with this information.
They ask you to send a message on their phone when you leave saying “Going to lunch.” You agree
to that, and as soon as you get up from your chair to go for lunch, you send them the message; they
receive it and do what they planned with this information.
This is how the Observer pattern works: an object subscribes to another object’s events through a
common interface. The subscribing object is called the observer and the other object is called the
subject. When the subject’s event happens, it calls a method on all its observers, triggering their behavior.
We will see some interesting use cases for this pattern and, after that, we will take our project and improve
upon previous features by using Godot Engine’s signals system, which is a built-in implementation of
the Observer pattern. By using signals, we can rely on Godot’s editor interface to subscribe nodes to
other nodes’ events, or rather, signals. In this chapter, we will cover the following topics:
• Understanding the Observer pattern
• Spotting use cases for the Observer pattern
• Implementing the Observer pattern in Godot

84

Decoupling Objects with the Observer Pattern

Without further ado, let’s get started!

Technical requirements
To follow the instructions in this chapter, use the project located in the 06.decoupling-objectswith-the-observer-pattern/01.start/ directory. If you encounter any confusion, errors,
or bugs while following the instructions, refer to the files in the 06.decoupling-objectswith-the-observer-pattern/02.finished/ folder. Don’t forget to report any issues on
the repository’s issue tracker through this link: https://github.com/PacktPublishing/
Game-Development-Patterns-with-Godot-4/issues.
If you haven’t downloaded the repository yet, you can get it from the following link: https://
github.com/PacktPublishing/Game-Development-Patterns-with-Godot-4.
With that said, let’s start exploring the Observer pattern, its core functionalities, what it fundamentally
solves, and how people usually implement it. It’s important to understand its usual implementation
so that we understand what’s happening behind Godot’s built-in implementation as well.

Understanding the Observer pattern
The Observer pattern is a behavioral pattern that allows us to subscribe to multiple objects to define
a one-to-many relationship between observer objects and a subject. It allows one object, known as
the subject, to notify multiple observer objects about state changes without knowing who or what
those observers are.
Imagine that there are a multitude of enemies in a top-down shooter and they all need to know
whether the player entered an invulnerable state, so they flee from the player instead of trying to
fight them. They can access the player’s object state every single frame to determine whether the
player is in an invulnerable state or not. But this would be costly performance-wise. Not only that but
now these enemies will also be hard-coupled to the player’s object, so maintaining them means we
need to keep the enemies’ class up with changes in the player’s class. What if we decide to change the
state-changing logic? What if it doesn’t have a clear invulnerable state anymore? What if we decide
to use an enumerator approach to have more control over the available states? What if we decide to
implement the State pattern at some point? How will the enemies’ class adapt to these? And how many
other classes will be impacted by these changes? How will the enemies even know about the existence
of the player’s object if they don’t have any direct relationship?
Well, the Observer pattern comes as an excellent solution for this kind of hard coupling, especially
when there’s no direct relationship between the classes. The subject object maintains a list of observer
objects and the method the subject calls when the desired event occurs. This allows the subject to
remain unaware of the observers’ specific implementation details.

Understanding the Observer pattern

The way this is typically implemented is through a subscription system that both the subject and the
observer implement, so they share the same interface and don’t need to be aware of any implementation
details from other classes. For instance, in Godot Engine, we have the base Object class. It provides
several methods regarding the implementation of an Observer pattern: mainly, Object.add_user_
signal() (which allows us to create new signals in runtime for Object), Object.connect()
(which allows us to connect a signal to a method, or rather, a Callable object). Note that Callable
is a class that represents an Object method or a standalone function. Object.connect() is
effectively the subscription mechanism of Godot’s Observer pattern implementation. Since signals
are also first-class citizens in Godot Engine 4.0, we can also directly subscribe Callable objects to
them by using Signal.connect(). Just to make it clear, a Callable object can be a reference to
an object’s method, this allows us to bind a signal to an object’s method directly. Previously, in Godot
Engine 3.x, we needed to pass the object instance followed by the function’s name as a String. Another
interesting method in Godot’s Observer pattern implementation is Object.emit_signal(),
where we can use a String to tell which signal we want to emit. This fundamentally updates observers
about changes in the state of the subject, in other words, effectively updates observers about an event
in the subject. Talking about observers, Object.get_signal_connection_list() allows us
to access all the Callable objects subscribed to the Object’s signals. Again, note that since signals
are first-class citizens in Godot Engine 4.0, there are equivalent methods to allow us to access signals
more specifically. Using the Signal.emit() method, we can trigger a signal, and using Signal.
get_connections(), we can get a list of Callable objects bonded to this signal. There are other
interesting methods, such as Object.disconnect() and Signal.disconnect(), that make
Godot’s signals feature an excellent implementation of the Observer pattern. Note that, as stated by Godot
Engine’s documentation, the Object class is the class from where all classes in the engine inherit from:
“An advanced Variant type. All classes in the engine inherit from Object. Each
class may define new properties, methods or signals, which are available to all
inheriting classes.”
This makes it so that they all share these signal-related methods. In other words, they all share the
interface where the Observer pattern is implemented. This ultimately gives us some safe ground to
use these methods knowing that, since our classes will inherit the same superclass, they all share this
interface already, allowing us to move forward without being concerned about unnecessary coupling.
A small note on that is that the classes are already coupled to the Object class through inheritance,
so there’s coupling at some level. The advantage is that they are not coupled with each other but with a
class provided by the framework we are working with. Because of this, the built-in classes are unlikely
to change once we get into production. That’s why is important to choose a version and stick to it
during the game’s production cycle.
After all this abstract explanation about what the Observer pattern is, what it solves, how it’s typically
implemented, and how Godot implements it, in the next section, let’s see some common use cases to
help us understand where we can find problems that can be solved by this pattern.

85

86

Decoupling Objects with the Observer Pattern

Spotting use cases for the Observer pattern
The Observer pattern is a versatile behavioral pattern. Since its core intent is to promote loose
coupling, or total decoupling, of classes, we can implement it in a variety of systems in our games. In
this section, we will see some applications of this pattern, but they are not the only places where we
can use the Observer pattern. Keep in mind its core features and you can see that it can be used in
different cases, especially when you want to communicate between two indirectly related objects or
if you want objects to be notified about changes in the state of another object.
A good use case for the Observer pattern is the Graphical User Interface (GUI) and especially
Heads-Up Display (HUD) elements. Usually, when we create games, the HUD elements are
implemented separately from the game world’s elements. For instance, in Godot Engine, it’s common
to have a CanvasLayer node holding the HUD and other GUI elements as its children, as shown
in the following figure:

Figure 6.1 – A node hierarchy with a CanvasLayer node dedicated to the interface elements

In that sense, score systems, health, energy, and other resource systems typically benefit from
implementing the Observer pattern. Let’s say you want to display the player’s health on the HUD.
You can implement a signal on the player’s object that emits a health_changed signal passing the
new value argument for its subscribed Callable objects. Then, you can use a common ancestor
object (in other words, a node that can be found in both node hierarchies) to connect them. The
way I usually approach this is by using the Game node itself, which usually is the parent node of
InterfaceCanvasLayer and WorldCanvasLayer, so it mediates the interactions between
the game world and the game interface.
Another good use case for the implementation of the Observer pattern is an inventory system, especially
when you have some database representing the player’s inventory. In games such as Ragnarök Online
where monsters drop some items and the player has to manually pick them, the object that represents

Implementing the Observer pattern in Godot

the loot in the game world is likely just a data container with the item’s ID. So, when the player picks
the item, it emits a signal to the player’s inventory passing the item’s ID, and using this item ID, the
inventory adds the item to the player’s inventory.
Enemies with AI is another good example of implementing the Observer pattern. One common mistake
people make when trying to integrate enemy behavior with the player’s object internal state is that
they add a reference to the player’s object instance in the enemy class, hard-coupling these classes. In
some cases, it’s inevitable to hard-couple these classes; for instance, if you need to access the player’s
position every frame, it’s better to just have a direct reference to the object and check it every frame
than emit a signal every frame updating enemies about the player’s current position. Remember, the
Observer pattern itself is meant to only update interested objects (namely, subscribers) about relevant
changes in the observed object. So, whenever you have data that needs constant updates or is not
directly interpreted as an event, it’s likely not a good use case for the Observer pattern.
On the other hand, let’s say you want an object to know when the player’s life reaches a critical amount,
for instance, 10%, so they can perform a risky attack that will kill the enemy. We could connect a
player’s health_changed signal to the enemy once the player entered the enemy’s sight area;
we can use an Area2D node for that and connect the Area2D.body_entered signal to the
enemy’s node responsible for decision-making. Then, when the player’s health changes, the enemy
will be notified and can make the proper movement. When the player leaves the enemy’s sight area,
we can disconnect its health_changed signal to prevent the enemy from taking any action if it
can’t reach the player anymore. For that, we can use the Area2D.body_exited signal and then
we can call health_changed.disconnect() to disconnect the signal from the Callable
object we connected it to the enemy’s object. Well, now that you get some concrete examples of how
to use the Observer pattern to improve the interactions of the objects in your game while maintaining
them loosely coupled, it’s time to do some practice! In the next section, we will get another brief from
our game designer asking us to improve our project’s GUI. And for that, we will use the Observer
pattern, of course!

Implementing the Observer pattern in Godot
As we saw in the Understanding the Observer pattern section, Godot Engine has its own built-in
implementation of the Observer pattern called signals, which is a core functionality of the Object
class, the base class for Godot’s framework.
Ever since signals became first-class citizens in GDScript, we also have the Signal class offering the
functionalities in a standalone manner. This allows us to implement the Observer pattern in classes
that don’t inherit from Object; usually, these are custom classes we create. But it’s very rare that we
need to do that.
Nonetheless, in this section, we will use the standalone implementation instead of the Object
class implementation.

87

88

Decoupling Objects with the Observer Pattern

Well, our game designer has yet another demand for us. Let’s see the request and assess it so we can
elaborate a good solution for the issue:
Hey there, game designer here.
I figured that we needed more interface elements for the game. The player is playing it blindly without
having any cues about the game’s internal states. So, I decided to make a HUD element to display how
many lives the player has. I called it LivesTextureRect because we are using a TextureRect as the root node.
I also made some nice animated hearts that animate when they disappear. Everything is set up already,
but I can’t manage to find a good way to access the player’s health, so it’s currently useless.
I need this object to be aware of changes in the player’s health, both if it increases so it plays an animation
restoring a heart, and decreases when the player takes damage. Keep in mind that this is an interface
element, so it’s currently outside of the player’s node hierarchy since we use a CanvasLayer node to draw
the interface on top of the game world’s elements.
Let’s assess this request. First of all, it’s good that the designer took the initiative to make some
implementations on their own. It seems like they made a simple object with two main functions,
hit_hearts() and recover_hearts(), which remove and add hearts to the HUD element that
represents the player’s current lives. There’s also a class named HeartTextureRect, which is the
HUD element that represents each heart individually. It has two methods, hit() and recover(),
which basically play animations. Apart from that, there’s nothing really connecting this to the in-game
element that it represents, namely, the player’s health points.
Based on the designer’s request, we will need to call the hit_hearts() method every time the
player loses a health point. Thinking about it for a second, if the player loses two or more points in
an enemy hit, the interface will need to know so it calls the hit_hearts() method accordingly.
Let’s keep that in mind.
Now, the other requirement is that the interface is not supposed to know about the player. This means
they are supposed to be completely decoupled from each other. In other words, they should not hold
a reference to an instance of each other. This means we will need to use another object that is aware
of the existence of both of them so it can behave as a mediator in their communication.
Note that we have all the requirements to implement the Observer pattern in this case. We have an
object that needs to react to changes in another object’s state but must not be coupled to this object.
In this case, LivesTextureRect is the observer class while KingPigPlayer2D is the subject
class. In that sense, we will need to implement signals in KingPigPlayer2D and connect them
to Callable objects in LivesTextureRect. But these Callable objects can’t be the current
methods, since they lack an argument to tell the amount of hearts to be hit or recovered. We will need
to create two callback methods to wrap up an argument telling how many lives were lost or recovered.
In the next section, we will put this into practice by implementing the requirements for this task!

Implementing the Observer pattern in Godot

Integrating the player’s health interface
Our game needs a HUD element to display the player’s current health points, and for that, the
designer implemented some basic methods to perform the desired behavior. But the major issue is
that it currently can’t communicate with the player object so it gathers the data it needs to express the
current amount of lives in the player visually. To solve that, we will implement the Observer pattern
and integrate the HUD element and the player’s object.
Now that we understand the game designer’s request, it’s time to work. Open the project inside the
06.decoupling-objects-with-the-observer-pattern/01.start/ folder and
let’s follow these steps:
1.

The first thing we will need to do is to create and properly emit the necessary signals in the
KingPigPlayer2D class. Open the res://Actors/KingPig/KingPigPlayer2D.
gd file and create two signals right below the dead signal, lives_increased and lives_
decreased. Both of them will pass an argument communicating the number of lives that
were increased or decreased:
extends Player2D
signal died
signal lives_increased(amount)
signal lives_decreased(amount)
@export var lives = 3

2.

Then, in the _on_hurt_area_2d_hurt() method, right below the line where we decrease
current_lives, let’s emit the lives_decreased signal passing the damage variable
as the number of lives decreased:
func _on_hurt_area_2d_hurt(damage):
    set_physics_process(false)
    set_process_unhandled_input(false)
    direction = 0
    current_lives -= damage
    lives_decreased.emit(damage)

The next step is to create the callback methods that we will use as Callable objects to
connect these signals.

89

90

Decoupling Objects with the Observer Pattern

3.

For that, open res://Interface/LivesBar/LivesTextureRect.gd, the class
our designer prepared for us. At the bottom of the class, create two methods that receive an
argument for the lives lost or recovered. Let’s call these methods _on_player_lives_
increased() and _on_player_lives_decreased(). It’s a common practice to use
the _on_[object_name]_[signal_name]() structure for functions that work as signal
callbacks so we know that they are meant to react to a specific event from a specific object:
func _on_player_lives_increased(amount):
    pass
func _on_player_lives_decreased(amount):
    pass

4.

Then, inside the _on_player_lives_increased() and _on_player_lives_
decreased() methods, we will call the respective LivesTextureRect methods based
on the amount argument received:
func _on_player_lives_increased(amount):
    for i in amount:
        recover_hearts()
func _on_player_lives_decreased(amount):
    for i in amount:
        hit_hearts()

With that we have our in-points, the callback methods that will trigger the LivesTextureRect
behavior, and the out-points, the signals on the KingPigPlayer2D class. But they are currently
completely unrelated and unaware of the existence of one another, which is ideal. This is how we keep
them decoupled. Now, we need to find a common ancestor to connect them. In our case, this common
ancestor is the Game class. If you open the res://Game/Game.tscn scene, you will notice that
Level, the parent of the PlayerCharacter2D node, is a child of WorldCanvasLayer, whereas
LivesTextureRect is a child of the InterfaceCanvasLayer node.
Both these CanvasLayer nodes are children of the Game node, so the Game node is the common
ancestor between the LivesTextureRect and PlayerCharacter2D nodes. This is important
to keep in mind because this helps us create good abstractions for our high-level game logic. Since the
Game node is the one aware of required classes, it is already coupled to them, so we are not adding any
layer of coupling by using this class to mediate the communication. That said, let’s open the res://
Game/Game.gd script and follow these steps:
1.

First of all, we need to create references for the nodes we will use, namely, PlayerCharacter2D
and the LivesTextureRect, so, right below the score_label variable declaration. For
that, we need to penetrate the Level node hierarchy to access the PlayerCharacter2D node.
extends Node
@onready var score_label = $InterfaceCanvasLayer/ScoreLabel

Implementing the Observer pattern in Godot

@onready var player = $WorldCanvasLayer/Level/PlayerCharacter
@onready var lives_interface = $InterfaceCanvasLayer/LivesTex

Note that this breaks the encapsulation principle. And here is where we develop some maturity
in programming. Principles are guidelines to achieve better code, but they are not mandatory.
As long as we are aware of this approach, we will be able to develop strategies to compensate
for this violation if it causes any issues.
2.

The next step is to create a method to mediate the signal connections. Something interesting
that I want to highlight here is that the SOLID principles don’t necessarily apply only to classes,
so a note you should take is that methods and variables should subscribe to these principles.
In this case, this method has the single responsibility of connecting the player’s lives to the
respective lives HUD element. So, let’s call it setup_lives_interface():
func setup_lives_interface():

3.

Inside this method, we will connect player.lives_decreased and player.lives_
increased to their respective callbacks in lives_interface:
func setup_lives_interface():
    player.lives_decreased.connect(lives_interface
      ._on_player
    player.lives_increased.connect(lives_interface
      ._on_player

4.

Now, in the _ready() callback, we will call the setup_lives_interface() method
right below the update_score_label() method call. This will effectively glue the
PlayerCharacter2D class with the LivesTextureRect class without coupling them:
func _ready():
    update_score_label()
    setup_lives_interface()

With that, we implemented custom signals in our player class, allowing the player class to communicate
to the interface class its internal state only when it changes. We effectively used Godot’s implementation
of the Observer pattern to solve an issue properly. I want to keep reminding you that design patterns
are solutions to specific, but common, problems. In this case, the Observer pattern was a perfect
match for the problem we needed to solve. But don’t get stuck trying to build code bases based on
design patterns. Evaluate the issue and try to assess whether there’s a known solution that can provide
a predictable result. This is what design patterns are. That said, if you test res://Game/Game.
tscn, you can play-test the game and take some damage to see whether the solution works. In the
following figure, we have the interface before and after the player takes some damage. This effectively
validates our solution!

91

92

Decoupling Objects with the Observer Pattern

Figure 6.2 – The lives bar before and after the player took damage

You can go on and test the implementation on other use cases. For instance, try to increase the bomb
damage and see whether LivesTextureRect properly sets the hearts displayed. With this in place,
we can safely call it a day and move on to the next task!

Summary

Summary
In this chapter, we saw the usefulness of the Observer pattern, a fundamental design pattern for
decoupling objects and enhancing the flexibility and maintainability of code. We began by exploring the
core concept of the Observer pattern, which allows objects, referred to as observers, to be notified and
updated automatically when the state of another object, known as the subject, changes. This pattern is
particularly useful in scenarios where multiple objects need to be aware of state changes without being
tightly coupled to the subject. This allows us to create a more modular and loosely coupled design.
We then examined a practical implementation of the Observer pattern in the context of game
development using Godot Engine. By implementing this pattern, we created a system where various
game elements, such as UI components and game entities, can react to changes in the game state
seamlessly. This decoupling ensures that modifications to one part of the game do not necessitate
changes in other parts, thus adhering to the Open/Closed principle and making the code base more
robust and easier to maintain.
Next, we looked into the specific roles of the subject and observer interfaces in our implementation.
The subject interface manages a list of observers and provides methods to add, remove, and notify them
of state changes. The observer interface defines the update method, which is called by the subject to
notify observers of any changes. This separation of concerns allows each class to focus on its specific
responsibilities, further enhancing code clarity and reusability.
We also discussed the advantages and potential drawbacks of the Observer pattern. On the positive
side, it significantly reduces the dependencies between subjects and observers, making the system
more modular and flexible. However, we also acknowledged that improper use of this pattern could
lead to performance issues, especially if the number of observers grows significantly or if the update
process becomes too frequent, for instance, updating observers in the _process() callback.
Therefore, it’s essential to carefully design and optimize the observer notification process to avoid
potential bottlenecks.
In the end, we used Godot Engine’s signals, a built-in implementation of the Observer pattern, to
connect the GUI element that displays the player’s health points to the player object, allowing it to
properly display the game’s internal state to the player.
Throughout this chapter, we saw a comprehensive understanding of the Observer pattern and its
practical application in games using Godot Engine. We learned how to implement this pattern to
create a more decoupled and maintainable code base, especially regarding the user interface.
In the next chapter, we will explore the Factory pattern, which will help us create a robust system for
spawning objects dynamically and efficiently!

93

7
Spawning Game Objects with
the Factory Pattern
In this chapter, we will explore the Factory pattern, a creational design pattern that allows us to
establish a default interface in a superclass, which will allow it to create new objects. Subclasses can
then change the type or the way these objects are created, allowing us to use a common interface to
create a range of different objects.
By using the Factory pattern, we can decouple an object’s creational responsibility and delegate it
to the factory object, which will take care of all the procedures necessary to create this object in the
application. Generally speaking, the Factory pattern can create any type of object. Keep in mind our
definition of an object: the concrete instance of a class. This means that it does not necessarily create
game objects, in other words, objects that are part of the game world. In this chapter, we will create
a specialization of the Factory pattern known as Spawner, which is specifically designed for creating
objects in the game world.
We already saw in Chapter 1 how we can create instances of scenes using the PackedScene.
instantiate() method. Throughout this chapter, we will see that this may not be enough to
insert an object into the game world properly and we may need to do some procedures in the object
so it appears in the right place. At the end of the chapter, we will turn the diamond-dropping behavior
from the LootCrate class into a component that we can attach to other objects and allow them to
drop Diamond objects and other items.
In this chapter, we will cover the following topics:
• Understanding the Factory pattern
• Spotting use cases for the Factory pattern
• Implementing the Factory pattern in Godot
Are you curious about how this will unfold? Well, let’s get started!

96

Spawning Game Objects with the Factory Pattern

Technical requirements
To follow along in this chapter, use the project files in the 07.spawning-game-objectswith-factory/01.start/ folder. If you encounter any confusion, errors, or bugs while
following the instructions in the Implementing the Factory pattern in Godot section, refer to the files
in the 07.spawning-game-objects-with-factory/02.finished/ folder. Report any
issues you find to Packt’s support team so we can address them! To report any issues you’ve found,
use the following link: https://github.com/PacktPublishing/Game-DevelopmentPatterns-with-Godot-4/issues.
If you don’t have the repository files yet, you can get them from the following link: https://
github.com/PacktPublishing/Game-Development-Patterns-with-Godot-4.
With that said, let’s start with understanding the fundamental principles of the Factory pattern.
Understanding the pattern’s function, features, the problem it solves, and how it is usually implemented
will help us find good use cases for it and implement it in Godot, taking the best out of Godot’s built-in
features and avoiding getting into technicality traps.

Understanding the Factory pattern
The Factory pattern is a creational design pattern. This means that it solves a particular problem
related to how we will create objects in our application, or in our case, in our games. The singleton
pattern is another creational design pattern, for reference, as it addresses how to create a given object.
In the Singleton pattern’s case, it ensures that a given variable always points to only one instance of
the same object. This variable is made static, allowing any object to access it. In the case of the Factory
pattern, it allows us to instance a family of objects without specifying their types, and these objects are
known as products. It does it so that we can centralize common procedures and prevent duplication of
these procedures in multiple classes; instead, these classes become user classes of the Factory classes.
One of the most fundamental aspects of the Factory pattern is that it is not supposed to be a single class
that handles all types of object instancing. Instead, it provides a generic interface so that user classes can
communicate with all subclasses of the Factory. A good example so you can envision this is to think about
a class that represents a firearm. It can shoot a range of different bullets, for instance, an explosive bullet,
a piercing bullet, and an impact bullet. We can create a BulletFactory class and make the FireArm
class a user class of it. BulletFactory has a method called create(), which returns the product.
Now, let’s say we create three subclasses based on BulletFactory: ExplosiveBulletFactory,
PiercingBulletFactory, and ImpactBulletFactory. In the FireArm class, we only need
a variable to hold a reference to the current BulletFactory instance and we can mutate it when the
player changes the bullet type. The code will look something like this:
var bullet_factory: BulletFactory = BulletFactory.new()
func shoot() -> void:
    var bullet: Bullet = bullet_factory.create()

Spotting use cases for the Factory pattern

func change_ammo(new_bullet_factory: BulletFactory) ->
  void:
    # Plays an animation changing the ammo
    bullet_factory = new_bullet_factory

One usual approach to implementing the Factory pattern is to have multiple methods, or a method
with multiple arguments, to indicate what type of products the Factory should create. This allows
the Factory to execute the right procedures for the product depending on its type. On top of that, by
providing information about the product, the Factory can adjust it accordingly, changing the necessary
properties to make the desired product.
In Godot Engine, we can embed all these aspects by serializing this data into a PackedScene
resource, which makes the implementation of the Factory pattern way simpler since we can essentially
use PackedScene resources as a reference for our products. The products themselves will be
the nodes created based on the PackedScene resource, so we should take care of the type of
nodes we are instantiating in the process. According to the Godot Engine’s official documentation
(https://docs.godotengine.org/en/stable/classes/class_packedscene.
html) about PackedScene:
PackedScene, one of the most common Objects in a Godot project, is also a
resource, uniquely capable of storing and instantiating the Nodes it contains as
many times as desired.
With that, we have the perfect data structure to provide as an argument for the creation of a Factory
pattern creation method in order to produce any product we need. Keep in mind that, depending on
the type of node we are creating through the Factory, it may require different procedures to handle it
and achieve the desired result. For instance, Node2D is likely to need some procedures to properly
position it in the game.
Now that we have a sense of what is the Factory pattern, in the next section, we will see some common
use cases that can benefit from this design pattern, especially in the realm of games.

Spotting use cases for the Factory pattern
Due to the dynamic nature of games, creating objects is very common. I’d risk saying that understanding
how to properly create and delete objects together with the ability to make them interact with each
other is the bread and butter of game development. In that sense, mastering the Factory pattern can
help you implement the features you want in your game. In this section, we will see some use cases
that can benefit from the implementation of the Factory pattern so we can understand when to use
it in our game’s code base.

97

98

Spawning Game Objects with the Factory Pattern

A common use case for the Factory pattern is regarding monster spawners. Spawners are objects that
create instances of monsters around a given area. This term comes from role-playing games (RPGs),
where we have an invisible or visible object whose main responsibility is to maintain a flow of monsters
in a map or area. In that sense, spawners are a clear implementation of a Factory pattern, as we can
create a generic interface for instancing monsters and simply change the type of monster that the
spawner should create. We can also extend the behavior to implement more specialized instancing.
For instance, we can create a timed spawner that creates monsters based on a time tic.

Figure 7.1 – Creeps dynamically spawned around an area in the game. Image taken from the
Official Godot Engine. “CC-BY 3.0 Juan Linietsky, Ariel Manzur, and the Godot community”

Another good use case for the Factory pattern is the creation of magic spells. We can create a class
in which products are magic spells that will be created in the game world, such as fireballs, ice bolts,
and earth spikes. We can implement an interface that allows the player to select a target area or enemy
and use a SpellFactory class to create the instances of the magic spell upon confirmation of a
valid target.
As mentioned earlier in the previous section, instancing bullets is another use case for the Factory
pattern as well. In a sense, firearms can be abstracted as factories of bullets that can create a limited
amount of products at a time to represent the magazine size. Then, changing the firearm is essentially
changing the bullet factory subclass to create different products, in other words, different bullets:

Implementing the Factory pattern in Godot

Figure 7.2 – The player casting fireballs in the GDQuest’s 2D Gunner
project. “CC-BY 4.0 - GDQuest and contributors”

Finally, and this is where we will connect it to our game, another good use case for the Factory pattern
in games is when we need to create items, especially as loot from enemies or other objects in the game.
In the next section, we will see how we can implement the Factory pattern as a component in our
game to allow us to create loot in the game.

Implementing the Factory pattern in Godot
Alright, now that we have an idea of what the Factory pattern is, it’s time to put it into practice. In
this section, we will have another round of role-playing with our fictional studio’s game designer. This
time around, we will create a class in which we can set PackedScene and a container node found
in the Level node hierarchy and it will create the object in the game world.
So, our game designer implemented a cool new object called Heart, which recovers one life of the
player, but they want to be able to make this object appear in the game as a drop from the LootCrate
objects. They also want to be able to make Diamond objects drop from the Bumping Pig enemy as
well as the Heart objects. Here’s their briefing:
Hello there,
I noticed that the game is currently lacking some incentives to make the players more aggressive toward
the enemies. If we don’t give anything in return for defeating an enemy, the player will just avoid them
as much as they can. This makes the combat system pointless.

99

100

Spawning Game Objects with the Factory Pattern

So, I want to come up with a way to allow the enemies to also drop diamonds. Now that the players are
going to take more risks to defeat the enemies, I also thought about balancing this out by creating an item
to recover the player’s health points, so I created the Heart node. I already made the proper adjustments
on the player’s class using a setter method to emit the signals you’ve created to update the LivesTextureRect
I made; thank you for that.
Now, I want you to create a class that will allow me to create and insert objects in the game world, so
it should create the objects at its own position. This will allow me to design some specific points where
some things will appear. On top of that, since I also want to place some heart objects manually, I created
a container class for them in the Level scene. It would be good if the class that creates and inserts objects
in the game used this container as the parent of its creations. This way, we can keep things organized, so
I would appreciate it if I could indicate the parent’s name in a field in that class.
Thank you in advance.
Game Designer.
Our designer is getting clever! Thanks to the way we implemented our signals in the previous chapter,
the designer managed to create a new item that recovers the player’s health points and updates the life
bar interface. This is the power of making a good, simple, and elegant code base. This time around,
the designer needs us to create an object that creates objects in the game world. Note that since these
objects need to appear directly on screen, in other words, in the game world, they will have a position,
so they will likely be instances of Node2D or subclasses of the Node2D class.
Whenever we talk about an object that creates objects, it’s very likely that we are talking about a
Factory. In this specific case, a Factory of Node2D objects, or using the right terminology, a Factory
with Node2D products. Since we will need the Factory to also have a position so the designer can
place it according to where they want the objects to appear, the Factory will also need to be Node2D.
For visual reference, we can use Marker2D for the Factory node as this will allow the designer to
have a visual cue about the position, rotation, and scale of the Factory node.
Another thing the designer asked for is the ability to indicate the name of a parent node to which the
products will be parented. Essentially, what we are going to do is extract the LootCrate class’ diamond
creation behavior into a new class. But instead of instantiating Diamond nodes, it will accept any
Node2D object in the form of a PackedScene object. Well, let’s get it started. In the next section,
we will create the Factory class responsible for creating and inserting objects in the game world.

Creating the Node2DFactory class
With our abstraction of the problem done and potential solutions in place, we can get our hands dirty.
Open the 07.spawning-game-objects-with-factory/01.start/project.godot file
using Godot Engine and let’s follow these steps to implement our Factory class of Node2D nodes:
1.

Create a new scene and use Marker2D as the root node.

2.

Rename it as Node2DFactory to make it clear through its name what it does.

Implementing the Factory pattern in Godot

3.

Save the scene as res://Objects/Node2DFactory/Node2DFactory.tscn.

4.

Attach a new GDScript to the Node2DFactory node and save it along the scene file using the same
name. Its full path should be res://Objects/Node2DFactory/Node2DFactory.gd.

5.

In the script, we will start by creating a new signal that will be emitted when the Factory class
creates a new product. This signal will pass the product as an argument so that other classes
access it and perform further procedures on it:
extends Marker2D
class_name Node2DFactory
signal created(product)

6.

Then, declare a new exported variable to hold a reference to PackedScene, which will be
used by the Factory to create its product.
extends Marker2D
class_name Node2DFactory
signal created(product)
@export var product_packed_scene: PackedScene

7.

After that, we will export yet another variable. This time around, it will hold a reference to
the name of the node that will be used as a container for the products created by the Factory:
extends Marker2D
class_name Node2DFactory
signal created(product)
@export var product_packed_scene: PackedScene
@export var target_container_name: StringName

8.

Now, it’s time for what is known as the Factory Method ; this is yet another design pattern
and it’s the core of our Factory Method. Note that our Factory is very similar to the Abstract
Factory pattern but different from the Abstract Factory. It is a concrete implementation instead
of an abstract interface that subclasses need to implement the concrete logic for its Factory
method. Anyway, our method will be called create() and it will receive an optional argument
that by default will be the product_packed_scene. We do that in case we want to use
Node2DFactory to create other products without losing reference to its original product. This
method will also return its product in case the user class needs to do further procedures on it.
func create(_product_packed_scene :=
  product_packed_scene) ->

101

102

Spawning Game Objects with the Factory Pattern

9.

Inside the create() method, we will declare a variable that must be of a Node2D type. Its
value will be the returning value of calling the instantiate() method on the _product_
packed_scene argument. This will effectively deserialize PackedScene and turn it into
an actual node, ideally Node2D:
func create(_product_packed_scene :=
  product_packed_scene) ->
    var product: Node2D =
      _product_packed_scene.instantiate()

10. Now that we have the reference to the recently instantiated product, we will now treat it as
necessary. This is the whole point of making a Factory; it’s not just the instantiation of an object,
but encapsulating all the necessary procedures to achieve the desired concrete instance of the
product. In this case, we will first position the instance relative to the Node2DFactory.
global_position variable:
func create(_product_packed_scene :=
  product_packed_scene) ->
    var product: Node2D =
      _product_packed_scene.instantiate()
    product.global_position = global_position

11. Another necessary procedure concerning these specific products is adding them as children of
a container node. For that, we will first need to find this node. So, let’s create a variable called
container, which will be the returning value of using the find_parent() method,
looking for the Level node, and then finding target_container_name in its children:
func create(_product_packed_scene :=
  product_packed_scene) ->
    var product: Node2D =
      _product_packed_scene.instantiate()
    product.global_position = global_position
    var container = find_parent("Level")
      .find_child(target_cotainer_name)

12. After finding the proper container, we can add the product as its child using the add_
child() method:
func create(_product_packed_scene :=
  product_packed_scene) ->
    var product: Node2D =
      _product_packed_scene.instantiate()
    product.global_position = global_position

Implementing the Factory pattern in Godot

    var container = find_parent("Level")
      .find_child(target_cotainer_name)
    container.add_child(product)

13. Finally, after properly treating the product, we need to emit the created signal and return it so
that any interested class can do any fine-tuning procedure on it:
func create(_product_packed_scene :=
  product_packed_scene) ->
    var product: Node2D =
      _product_packed_scene.instantiate()
    product.global_position = global_position
    var container = find_parent("Level")
      .find_child(target_cotainer_name)
    container.add_child(product)
    created.emit(product)
    return product

Congratulations! We just finished one of the most useful and powerful classes someone can have in
their game code base. By having a Factory that creates products in the game world, we just achieved
= the bread and butter of any game, which is to dynamically create objects. I sometimes play with
my students and clients saying that game development is about mastering the three I’s: instancing,
inputs, and interactions. By implementing this Factory class, we just checked instancing off of this
list. After all the preceding steps, the Node2DFactory class should look like this:
extends Marker2D
class_name Node2DFactory
signal created(product)
@export var product_packed_scene: PackedScene
@export var target_container_name: StringName
func create(_product_packed_scene :=
  product_packed_scene)
  -> No
    var product: Node2D = _product_packed_scene
      .instantiate()
    product.global_position = global_position
    var container = find_parent("Level")
      .find_child(target_conta

103

104

Spawning Game Objects with the Factory Pattern

    container.add_child(product)
    created.emit(product)
    return product

With this new power in our hands, it’s time to use it responsibly. In the next section, we will create
some inherited scenes and use Node2DFactory to create instances of Diamond, Heart, and
PopLabel nodes! Let’s go!

Using Node2DFactory in our game
TheNode2DFactory class allows us to centralize the responsibility of inserting new objects in the
game world. We have two main cases in which this happens already and we need to adapt them to
this new approach before we move on to the actual game designer’s request. So, get yourself ready for
some refactoring work! In the following steps, we will start by refactoring the ScorePoint class to
use the Node2DFactory class to create new PopLabel nodes as its products. So, open res://
Game/Score/ScorePoint/ScorePoint.tscn scene and let’s get started:
1.

Start by adding a new instance of the Node2DFactory scene as a child of the ScorePoint class.

2.

Drag and drop the PopLabel scene file to the Node2DFactory’s Product Packed
Scene property:

Figure 7.3 – The PopLabel scene set in the Node2DFactory’s Product
Packed Scene property in the Inspector window

Implementing the Factory pattern in Godot

3.

The Node2DFactory class also asks for the container’s name, and for this one, we will use
an already existent container node in the Level scene and the PopLabel nodes, which is
the one we are using in the ScorePoint script. So, in the Target Container Name property,
write PopLabels.

Figure 7.4 – The Target Container Name property set to PopLabels

Now, open the ScorePoint script and let’s start the refactoring work.
4.

Since theNode2DFactory class is the one responsible for instancing the PopLabel scene
now, we can remove the pop_label_scene exported variable declaration. Instead, we will
create a new @onready variable to store a reference to Node2Dfactory; let’s call it factory:
extends Node2D
@export var amount = 100
@onready var factory = $Node2DFactory

5.

Then, in the pop_label() method, instead of using the returning value of PackedScene.
instantiate(), we will use the returning value of the Node2DFactory.create() method:
func pop_label():
    var pop_label = factory.create()

6.

Since the Node2DFactory class already positions the PopLabel instance and inserts it in
SceneTree by adding it as a child of its container node, we can remove the next line entirely.
The complete implementation of the pop_label() method is as follows:
func pop_label():
    var pop_label = factory.create()
    pop_label.pop(str(amount), global_position)

105

106

Spawning Game Objects with the Factory Pattern

That’s pretty much all we need to do in the ScorePoint scene. Note that the ScorePoint class
does some extra treatment to the PopLabel instance after theNode2DFactory class creates
it. This is the power of having a Factory; it does the repeated work, and the user class can do the
specifics. This is yet another excellent example of favoring composition over inheritance. Imagine if
the ScorePoint class inherited from Node2DFactory just to implement the creation behavior;
what a mess our codebase would become.
Now, with the same composition mindset, we will create a new class that will use Node2DFactory
together with the looting logic from the LootCrate class to create a loot behavior, where it processes
the drop rate of a given item and the player’s luck, and depending on the player’s luck, it will tell
Node2DFactory to create a new instance of the item. With the following steps, we will implement
this behavior:
1.

Create a new scene and use a Marker2D as the root node.

2.

Rename it as Loot and save the scene as res://Objects/Loot/Loot.tscn.

3.

Add an instance of Node2DFactory as its child.

4.

Attach a new GDScript to the Loot node and save it as res://Objects/Loot/Loot.gd.

5.

Open the script and follow these steps:
I.

Using @export_range(0.0, 1.0), create a variable to represent the drop rate of
this loot’s item. Let’s call this variable drop_rate:
extends Marker2D
class_name Loot
@export_range(0.0, 1.0) var drop_rate = 0.3

II.

Then, declare a new variable to hold a reference to Node2DFactory, again. Let’s call
it factory:
extends Marker2D
class_name Loot
@export_range(0.0, 1.0) var drop_rate = 0.3
@onready var factory = $Node2DFactory

III.

After that, we will create a new method called drop(). This method will calculate the
player’s luck and create the product if the player obtains success:
extends Marker2D
class_name Loot
@export_range(0.0, 1.0) var drop_rate = 0.3

Implementing the Factory pattern in Godot

@onready var factory = $Node2DFactory

func drop():

IV.

Inside the drop() method, create a variable, let’s call it luck, that represents the player’s
luck. It will store the result of a random number generated between 0.0 and 1.0 using
the randf_range() method:
func drop():
    var luck = randf_range(0.0, 1.0)

V.

Then, we will check if the luck is within the drop rate threshold. If this is the case, we will
call the factory.create() method, effectively creating the new item and inserting
it in the game world:
func drop():
    var luck = randf_range(0.0, 1.0)
    if luck <= drop_rate:
        factory.create()

That is pretty much it. With that, we have a scene we can use to represent items that can drop
based on a chance. The complete Loot class’ script implementation should look something
like this:
extends Marker2D
class_name Loot
@export_range(0.0, 1.0) var drop_rate = 0.3
@onready var factory = $Node2DFactory

func drop():
    var luck = randf_range(0.0, 1.0)
    if luck <= drop_rate:
        factory.create()

It’s simple and elegant, don’t you think? Note that the way we are creating new classes in our game
implements the SOLID principles naturally. For instance, small and simple scripts, such as the ones
we’ve been creating, reflect the principles of the interface segregation principle, on top of the single
responsibility principle, and so on and so forth. As mentioned in Chapter 3, implementing one of the
SOLID principles usually leads you to implement all other four naturally.

107

108

Spawning Game Objects with the Factory Pattern

Now that we have this basic Loot scene, we can create new inherited scenes to define which items it
will drop. Currently, we only have two possible droppable items: the Diamond and the Heart objects
created by our game designer. So, to create the looting behavior for these items, let’s follow these steps:
1.

Right-click on the res://Objects/Loot/Loot.tscn file in the FileSystem dock and
from the drop-down menu, click on the New Inherited Scene option:

Figure 7.5 – The FileSystem dock New Inherited Scene option from in the dropdown menu that appears after right-clicking the Loot.tscn file

2.

In the new scene created, rename the root node as DiamondLoot.

3.

Then, drag and drop the res://Objects/Diamond/Diamond.tscn file on
Node2DFactory’s Product Packet Scene property. You can also approach this by clicking
on the Product Packet Scene slot on the Inspector window and from the drop-down menu,

Implementing the Factory pattern in Godot

click on the Load option and select the res://Objects/Diamond/Diamond.tscn
scene from the popup file explorer menu.

Figure 7.6 – Selecting the Diamond.tscn scene file from the file explorer popup menu

4.

In the Target Container Name property, write Diamonds.

Figure 7.7 – The DiamondLoot’s Node2DFactory settings in the Inspector window

109

110

Spawning Game Objects with the Factory Pattern

After that, you can save the scene. This is all we need to do in order to create new versions of the
Loot scene with specific details about what they will create. You can consider that the Loot scene
itself is an abstract scene while the DiamondLoot scene is a concrete implementation. We can
repeat these steps to create the HeartLoot scene, adjusting the necessary variables. HeartLoot’s
Node2DFactory node settings should look like this:

Figure 7.8 – HeartLoot’s Node2DFactory settings in the Inspector window

Now, with these in place, we can implement and reimplement the LootCrate class’s original
behavior using the Loot components instead. This will allow us to have multiple item drops, each
with its own drop rate. Open res://Objects/Crate/LootCrate/LootCrate.tscn and
follow along with me:
1.

First of all, add a new Node2D as a child of the Crate node and call it Loots.

2.

As children of the Loots node, we will create one instance of the DiamondLoot scene and
another one for the HeartLoot scene.

Implementing the Factory pattern in Godot

Figure 7.9 – Crate’s DiamondLoot and HeartLoot scene instances

3.

Open the res://Objects/Crate/LootCrate/LootCrate.gd script and remove
the variable declared in the class. These are in the Loot class now, so there is no reason to
have them here.

4.

Remove the drop() method as well, since the item-dropping logic is now on the Loot class
and we don’t need this method anymore.
Note that this is by far not advised if this class was part of a consolidated code base, as this would
break the open-closed principle, changing the class’s interface. But since we are still in production
in this role-playing, we are safe to make these kinds of adjustments as this will improve the
class’s interface by applying the interface segregation principle, removing unnecessary methods
from the class, and moving them to other classes’ interfaces.

5.

Then, in the shatter() method before calling super(), we will make a for loop running
through all the children in the Loots node:
func shatter() -> void:
    for loot in $Loots.get_children():
    super()

111

112

Spawning Game Objects with the Factory Pattern

6.

Finally, we will call the loot.drop() method on them, effectively checking for the possibility
of dropping the items when the LootCrate objects shatter. The complete LootCrate class
script follows:
extends Crate

func shatter():
    for loot in $Loots.get_children():
        loot.drop()
    super()

Now, our game designer can rest assured that he can play with looting and item drops as much as they
want to. This is the power of having components that do small tasks. We can just add them to our
game and create new interesting behaviors without getting stuck with new bloated classes that would
only cause issues further in production. Go ahead and play a bit with this new power. For instance, in
the project available in 07.spawning-game-objects-with-factory/02.finished, the
Bumping Pig enemy has a chance to drop Diamond and Heart objects when defeated. The structure
is essentially the same as used in the LootCrate scene:

Figure 7.10 – The Bumping Pig enemy dying and creating PopLabel,
Diamond, and Heart nodes in the process

With that, we finished up this fundamental chapter and we are one step closer to a nicer, reusable, and
scalable code base for our game. Before we move on to the next chapter, let’s recap the fundamental
concepts we learned about throughout this chapter.

Summary

Summary
In this chapter, we learned about the fundamental concepts and practical applications of the Factory
pattern in game development using Godot Engine. The Factory pattern allows for the creation of
objects through a common interface, which can be especially useful in dynamically generating game
elements such as monsters, items, bullets, or magic spells. This approach enhances the modularity and
scalability of game projects, enabling us to easily manage and instantiate different types of game objects.
We can implement the Factory pattern in Godot using the PackedScene resource, which can store
and instantiate nodes as needed. By serializing the data into PackedScene resources, the process
of creating objects becomes streamlined and efficient. This method allows us to adjust and fine-tune
the properties of the objects being created, ensuring they meet the specific requirements of the game.
We also explored some use cases where the Factory pattern can be beneficial. For example, monster
spawners in RPGs can utilize the Factory pattern to maintain a continuous flow of enemies in a map
or area. Similarly, the creation of magic spells or different types of bullets can be managed through
specialized factories, allowing for easy customization and extension of game mechanics.
In addition to these use cases, we saw a practical implementation of the Factory pattern in Godot.
By using methods such as Node2DFactory.create() to instantiate objects and adjust their
properties, we can ensure that the game elements are correctly positioned and integrated into the
game world. This encapsulation of object creation procedures not only simplifies the development
process but also enhances code maintainability and readability.
As we conclude this chapter, we can see that mastering the Factory pattern is crucial for efficient game
development. In the next chapter, we will talk about the state pattern, exploring how state management
can help us optimize the creation and dynamically change object behavior in run time.

113

8
Changing Object Behavior
with the State Pattern
The State pattern is usually associated with the idea of Finite State Machines (FSMs), a mathematical
model of computation, but these are two different terms. While the FSM is a set of abstractions that
help us create models for possible states in which a given machine can be, the State pattern is an
Object-Oriented Programming (OOP) approach to abstract object states as objects. After these
abstractions, you can implement an FSM to integrate these states and add transitions between one
another. But just take note that the State pattern, besides being closely related to the FSM, is just the
idea of encapsulating an object’s state into a new class and, with that, being able to change the object’s
behavior in runtime.
Remember, an object’s state is just the set of values of the object’s properties, and by applying the
State pattern, we explicitly give name and meaning to specific states in which an object can be. This
allows us to immediately change one object’s state to another by making a single mutation instead of
a sequence of mutations that may be hard to keep track of.
In this chapter, we will use Godot Engine’s AnimationPlayer and AnimationTree nodes
to implement some possible states in which we want our Bumping Pig enemy to be. Before we
jump into action, I want to state my caveats about the State pattern. Personally, I am not a huge fan
of this pattern as it is widely misused as a tool to limit state overlapping of game entities. Games are
intrinsically emergent systems and, usually, it is not a good idea to apply an FSM in game entities.
This will lead you to many classes with duplicated code to maintain some overlapping behaviors and
tend to not scale well. For instance, if you have a platformer character that has three features (idle,
move, and attack), it may have some directly correlated states:
• Idling
• Moving
• Attacking

116

Changing Object Behavior with the State Pattern

Everything is fine and you can perform maintainable transitions of these states and scale the game
knowing how the character will behave in each of these states, what triggers transitions between them,
and distinct code between each state. For instance, while attacking, the character doesn’t move; while
moving, the character can’t attack; and while idling, the character is not moving. But if we add one
simple feature to our character, this all scales badly. For instance, if the character is supposed to jump,
now we have some overlapping:
• Jumping without moving, or Idle Jumping
• Jumping and moving horizontally, or Move Jumping
• Jumping and attacking, or Attack Jumping
• Idling
• Moving
• Attacking
• Jumping in the middle of an attack, or Jump Attacking
• Jumping while moving, or Jump Moving
• Jumping while idling, or Jump Idling
And if we add the ability to perform a dash and an airdash, you can see how things will scale up badly,
but just for the sake of exposing this issue, here is a brief list of potential states:
• Idle Jumping
• Move Jumping
• Attack Jumping
• Dash Idle Jumping
• Dash Move Jumping
• Dash Attack Jumping
• Jump Dashing
• Jump Attack Dashing
• Jump Idle Dashing
• Jump Move Dashing
• Idle Dashing
• Move Dashing
• Attack Dashing
• Dash Idling

Technical requirements

• Dash Moving
• Dash Attacking
• Idling
• Moving
• Attacking
Now, let’s say that when the character gets hurt, it enters a hurt state where it can’t perform any actions
for a brief moment and is immune to enemies’ attacks. Well, we won’t spend any more precious space
here, but you can imagine this doesn’t scale nicely.
Note that this is an absurd implementation of an FSM, but this is what we would have to do if we took
it seriously as it is usually implemented in other programming fields, for instance, on traffic lights
where there are minimal possible states, or document writing statuses where they can go from draft
to review to approved to published and so on.
My point with this is to take this design pattern with a bit of care and not use it in places where you
may need more freedom to expand the scope, especially during production. Take note that you don’t
have to implement the State pattern for all the possible object states; ideally, as we are going to do in
this chapter, you can pick one aspect of your object and turn the related properties into individual
states and allow other properties and behaviors to be open for overlapping with those strict states
we will create. Properties that are usually necessary for the intrinsic emergence of your game, such
as position, health, and animation frames, are typically not interesting to be abstracted as states. But
you can abstract animations instead of individual animation frames, for instance, as we typically
don’t want to have overlapping animations in our object, unless we want to apply blending and other
animation techniques.
Well, after this ramble, let’s try to understand the State pattern better so we can identify good use cases
for it and how to integrate it with FSMs.
In this chapter, we are going to cover the following topics:
• Understanding the State pattern
• Spotting use cases of the State pattern in games
• Implementing the State pattern

Technical requirements
To follow along with this chapter, use the project files located in the 08.changing-objectbehavior-with-states/01.start/ folder. If you encounter any confusion, errors, or bugs
while working through the Implementing the State pattern in Godot section, refer to the files placed
in the 08.changing-object-behavior-with-states/02.finished/ folder. Report
any issues to our support team for prompt resolution.

117

118

Changing Object Behavior with the State Pattern

If you do not have the repository files yet, download them from the following link: https://
github.com/PacktPublishing/Game-Development-Patterns-with-Godot-4/
tree/main.
Now, let’s delve into the State pattern to understand its description, technical aspects, the problems
it addresses, and how it provides solutions for said problems. With this knowledge in our hands, we
will be able to make more informed decisions and implement this solution when it fits.

Understanding the State pattern
The State pattern is a behavioral pattern, which means it solves problems related to an object’s behaviors.
It aims to provide a reliable way to alter an object’s behavior in run-time based on changes in the
object’s internal state.
The main idea is that, given a finite number of possible states, the object will behave differently in
each unique state and will be able to switch between states instantaneously. Depending on each state,
the object may or may not switch to certain other states. For instance, if our character has three
states to describe where it currently stands (landing, jumping, and falling), then our character can’t
switch from jumping to landing without falling first. There may be any given set of rules to define
how these states mutate from one to another. These rules are called transitions, which must also be
finite and pre-determined.
Even if you never heard about state machines, you are likely to have already implemented one. This
is the beauty of design patterns: they were not normalized, they were noticed and documented.
Typically, when we implement state machines, we use switch statements or sequences of if and
elif statements. Inside each one of these, we implement a different behavior that the object should
perform depending on the values tested in the statements. The idea of implementing the State pattern
is to turn these blocks of conditionals into transitions and the behaviors in State objects.
By turning an object’s state into a State object, we are able to store it into a variable and instantaneously
mutate it to another State object as soon as a transition is triggered. This helps us have a clear scope
of possible states we want a given object to be in and limit our range of issues, bugs, and even features.
For instance, let’s say we want an object to either emit a red, blue, or green light. We may have an
emission_color variable. Well, last time I checked, there were 4,294,967,296 colors in the RGBA
system. Technically, this object could be in 4,294,967,296 possible states accounting only for the
possible colors; if we add other parameters such as visible or invisible, which could be represented by
a Boolean variable, then we multiply this by 2. Of course, we are going into extremes here, and unless
you give the user the ability to pick a color, the amount of possible colors is limited. One way to limit
these possibilities by design is to create three distinct State classes to represent these states (we could
call them RedState, GreenState, and BlueState) and create the transitions to dictate how
exactly one transitions to the other. This would help us debug better and have more maintainable code.

Spotting use cases of the State pattern in games

We do this “objectificationˮ by transforming all the possible states we want an object to be into distinct
classes and extracting the state-specific behaviors into these classes. By the way, “objectificationˮ is
what most OOP design patterns do. They take programming concepts (such as methods, algorithms,
and even data structures such as arrays and dictionaries) and encapsulate them into objects. We do
that because this allows us to store these objects in memory and perform further procedures with
them in real time. We will see this clearly happening in Chapter 9, where we will essentially turn
objects’ methods into classes that we can instantiate as objects. This will allow us to store them into
variables and change an object’s behavior in real time. In the specific case of the Command pattern,
this will also allow us to store these objects in a chronological list and go back and forward undoing
or redoing these behaviors. This is how programs typically implement undo/redo features, by the way.
But notice that, in this case, we are turning an object’s state into a class, also called State. By the way, the
object in which we are implementing the State pattern, turning its states into classes, is called context.
Keep this in mind as we are going to use these terms moving forward: context, state, and transition.
By applying the State pattern to the context object, we now can store it into a variable and delegate
state-specific behaviors to the object in this variable. Since all states of a context object share the same
interface, we are able to mutate this variable during run-time while keeping the context’s code intact.
This is one of the advantages of encapsulating these state-specific behaviors. Since the state-specific
behavior can change throughout production, this could impact the whole context’s class code, breaking
the Open-Closed principle. By isolating this code into a State class, we prevent changes in one statespecific code spills into other classes. This is another general principle to follow in OOP: encapsulate
what changes. The states of an object change, so we encapsulate it into other classes so we can minimize
the impacts of the changes that we may need to do in each individual state.
As I have stated throughout previous chapters, abstraction is the most important skill a programmer
can develop, right? After all this abstract talking, I think is time to see some real-world examples of
implementations of the State pattern. In the next section, we will spot some use cases for the State
pattern in games. This will help us have a better understanding of how all these abstract concepts
turn out as practical solutions.

Spotting use cases of the State pattern in games
Now that we have a gist of what the State pattern is, the problems it solves, and how it typically solves
them, in this section, we will talk about some potential use cases that we can find in games where
game developers usually apply the State pattern.
One common use case for the State pattern is when we are abstracting character movement. In
these cases, we usually create one class for each movement state we want the context object to be
in. Note that this doesn’t necessarily need to be player actions. For instance, it’s common to have a
FallingState class, especially if you want your character to have falling-specific behaviors, such
as increased gravity to make the jump mechanic feel snappier. We could abstract this with an FSM
that looks like the following:

119

120

Changing Object Behavior with the State Pattern

Figure 8.1 – A set of possible states and their transitions as an FSM

Note that the State pattern is not exclusive to in-game objects, so another common use case is to
manage abstract game states, such as playing, paused, and game over. For instance, if you don’t want
your objects just to stop altogether while a Pause Menu pops, maybe you want them to just stop
processing physics and some gameplay behaviors, but you want to keep animations running and
allow them to talk and say meta-game things such as Am I supposed to wait here forever? or Ohh dang,
I can’t move!. You can create a PausedGameState state that will stop processing certain aspects
of your game. In Godot Engine, you can use SceneTree.call_group("characters",
"set_physics_process", false), where "characters" is the name of the group that
includes all characters that should stop processing physics during PausedGameState. This approach
is preferable to using SceneTree.paused = true, which would stop everything altogether
based on the nodes’ process_mode property.
As mentioned earlier, ideally, the State pattern is applied to specific parts of the game. For instance,
weapons are an excellent example of how applying the State pattern can be of good use, especially if you
are making games that lean more toward war simulation. We can abstract weapons as being in distinct
states such as idling, aiming, firing, reloading, recoiling, overheating, and cooling down. Depending
on how detailed you want your weapon system to be, you can go into more or less specific approaches.
Fighting stances are another good example of a mechanic that can benefit from being abstracted into
states. Depending on your combat system, players may be slower in a defensive stance but take less
damage, faster in an aggressive stance but take way more damage, and balanced in a neutral stance,
moving at a medium pace and taking medium damage.
All of those can be turned into independent State classes, with each one making its own calculation
of damage and movement speed. Then, you can apply yet another distinct and exclusive State pattern
abstraction to manage the animations of each of those stances. I say that because people usually mix
responsibilities when they abstract the context object’s states but all the SOLID principles should
still apply.

Implementing the State pattern in Godot

We could even go as far as having one State family of classes for managing the movement states,
another one to manage the damage states, and one to manage the animations states. I say that because,
for instance, we may want to implement a power-up that makes the player invulnerable, so this would be
a new state. If we isolate it as a new state in the DamageState family, we would only need to create one
new class. But if we make an abstraction that bundles the movement and the damage together, now we
would have to create SlowPacedInvulnerableState, MediumPacedInvulnerableState,
and FastPacedInvulnerableState. So this doesn’t scale well, and this is why I suggest keeping
up with the Single Responsibility Principle and the composition over inheritance approach. With distinct
State class families, we can compose these superpositions of states way more easily.
Another good example of the implementation of the State pattern is regarding enemies’ AI and behaviors.
This is what we are going to do in our next section where we will take the current implementation of
the BumpingPig scene, which already has an implementation of an FSM, but use an enumerator
and match statements to manage state changes. In the next section, we will turn this implementation
into a family of State classes, effectively implementing the State pattern in the BumpingPig scene.

Implementing the State pattern in Godot
One of the things that I want to convey through this book’s approach to technical topics such as OOP
and design patterns is that we should understand their underlying principles instead of strict technical
implementations. In other words, by understanding the philosophy behind these concepts, we will
be able to abstract them in ways that allow us to make the most of the tools we have available. In that
sense, in this section, we will see how we can use animations and the AnimationTree node as
states and an FSM, respectively. We will also implement the State pattern using GDScript and nodes
so you can understand in practice how to implement this pattern. Let’s get it started!

Understanding the designer’s requirements
The designer of our game is planning to make the Bumping Pig a character with a bit more intelligence.
For that, the designer decided that this entity of the game would need a code that provides more
control over its behavior and more predictability regarding when it must perform certain behaviors.
Well, let’s see the designer’s request itself:
Hello,
I’m reaching out because I noticed the game doesn’t have a compelling enemy. Currently, the enemy,
the Bumping Pig, just wanders around and, honestly, doesn’t provide any real challenge. I created some
animations and introduced an attack behavior when the player enters the sight of the enemy. But it got
messy to handle the behaviors, especially because some of them overlap. Sometimes, the enemy is taking
a hit and walking, or walking and attacking at the same time!

121

122

Changing Object Behavior with the State Pattern

I need to be able to control these behaviors and prevent them from overlapping with each other. I already
have the necessary conditions and I managed to put the behaviors within animations and method
calls, but I’m struggling to manage the transitions between these behaviors and to ensure that they are
mutually exclusive.
Another issue is that the Bumping Pig doesn’t remember what it should do after it gets hit or after attacking.
For instance, if it is moving and the player hits it, it plays the animation and goes back to running, but
what if it was idling or attacking before getting hit? The same thing happens when it attacks. I need it to
go back to the previous behavior after performing these one-time animations.
Can you help me with that?
One important thing to note in this request is that the BumpingPig class already has a mechanism
to handle states. It isn’t a State pattern, but if you look at the code itself, you will note a STATES
enumerator and a state variable. Also, in _physics_process(), we have a match statement
discriminating some behaviors that should only happen within certain state values, for example,
state == STATES.RUN. You will also note that the designer took the time to create methods
to encapsulate each of these behaviors, which is excellent because this will help us understand what
should happen within each of these states. But there’s a small issue: we don’t have any way to ensure
a clean slate when the state value changes, meaning we may have residual changes that are carried
on from one state to another, and this can cause some issues.
Note that having states and state management isn’t necessarily an implementation of the State pattern.
You can pretty much have states, state management, and state machines without implementing the
State pattern. The State pattern itself necessarily turns these states into classes and allows us to treat
them as objects.
The designer displays a deep concern about having control over how the enemy is currently behaving.
More specifically, there are behaviors that are overlapping and the designer doesn’t want that; each
behavior should be mutually exclusive with all other behaviors. This is a very good indicator that we
are dealing with a state-related problem.
Another problem presented by the designer is that there’s no clear or manageable way to control the
transitions between one behavior and another, meaning there might be an unpredictable change from one
state to another, which is yet another good indicator to implement the State pattern, as it will encapsulate
transitions within the state classes and prevent them from flowing freely. By implementing this pattern,
we will ensure that one state can only change to a predictable and previously set of other states.
Well, it seems like the presented issues can be solved by implementing a State pattern. Again, I want
to remind you of this process: first, face the issue and try to match it to a pattern. Don’t go out there
implementing design patterns unnecessarily without any good reason. If you face a problem that already
has a widely tested solution, then you implement such a solution. This is what a design pattern is.
That said, in the next section, we will use animations and the AnimationTree node to create an FSM
to handle the transitions between each animation, ensuring that they only play at their respective state.

Implementing the State pattern in Godot

Implementing an FSM with animations
Before we dive into the practical aspect of this section, I want to make a statement about being abstract
with programming concepts. You can program without coding—coding is just a way to formalize the
programming of a solution to a given problem. But you can program through many other ways. One
of these ways, especially in Godot Engine, is to use animations.
At its core, programming is nothing but mutations, in other words, the alteration of data values. A
program then interprets this data accordingly and, ultimately, generates an output. Using animations,
we are doing exactly that: mutating data, with the advantage that we can bind these mutations with
time, which is excellent.
That said, since each animation bundles mutations on objects’ properties, they can be interpreted
abstractly as being objects’ states. Remember, when we talk about an object’s state, we are just referring
to the current values of its properties. In that sense, by using animations, we can rely on an excellent
interface to manage object states. Now, let’s understand how we can create an FSM using animations.
Well, since this book presumes you already have some experience with Godot Engine, it’s fair to assume
that you already know the AnimationPlayer node, right? It is through this node that we create
and manage animations within a scene.
Without going into too much detail, it offers an interface to create, delete, and rename animations and their
keys. Keys in this context are properties’ values bonded to a specific time or frame of the animation. If you open
the res://Actors/BumpingPig/BumpingPig.tscn scene and select the AnimationPlayer
node, you can click on the Animation tab at the bottom of the editor to display the Animation Menu.
Select the attack animation. The animation should look like the one in the following figure:

Figure 8.2 – The Animation interface displaying the attack animation’s keys

123

124

Changing Object Behavior with the State Pattern

You can see in the figure that we have the node’s name, the properties being animated, and the keys
in the timeline. With an abstract interpretation, we can say that this bundles the properties’ values
that compose the attack state. That said, it’s time to introduce you to intermediate-level animation
in Godot Engine!
Don’t get me wrong, understanding how to use the AnimationPlayer node and create animations
is extremely powerful already and absolutely necessary to get the most out of Godot Engine’s power.
The animation system is by far my favorite feature in Godot, especially when you manage to mix Call
Function Tracks and Tweens all together. But when you learn how to use AnimationTree node and
its AnimationNode nodes, you understand how powerful you can get. Coding becomes a secondary
tool, almost, as it serves the purpose of allowing your animations to flow. But, unfortunately, we can’t
get into the intricacies of this system in just one chapter. It would need a whole book dedicated to
animations to get the most out of this system, but let’s give it a brief introduction.
The AnimationTree node allows us to add a layer of logic on an AnimationPlayer node.
They are meant to work together, where AnimationPlayer establishes the animations and
AnimationTree controls their transitions and blending.
According to Godot Engine’s official documentation, the AnimationTree node
is “a node used for advanced animation transitions in an AnimationPlayer.”
The key concept we should pay attention to in this description is the ability of the AnimationTree
node to make advanced transitions. When we use AnimationNodeStateMachine node in the
AnimationTree node, we are able to create transitions between animation nodes. These transitions
have three main properties that are relevant to us:
• Switch Mode allows us to choose whether the transition happens immediately when a condition
is fulfilled, at the end of the animation once the condition is fulfilled, or synchronized with the
current animation’s playback position. The last one means it will change immediately and seek
the playback time of the previous animation in the new one.
• Condition allows us to create a Boolean variable that we can control through the Inspector
and through GDScript that, once set to true, will trigger the transition.
• Expression is an advanced condition. It accepts a logical expression that, if it returns true,
will trigger the transition. Note that it uses the AnimationTree node’s Advance Expression
Base Node property to access properties and use them in the expressions. The Advance
Expression Base Node can be interpreted as the context object from the lens of the State pattern.
For example, we can use the following expression to trigger the attack animation transition:
vision_area.get_overlapping_areas().size() > 0 . Since vision_area
is a property of the BumpingPig node, which is set as the Advance Expression Base Node,
this expression would be able to access this method and dynamically check this condition.

Implementing the State pattern in Godot

There’s a whole page on the official documentation dedicated to teaching how to use the
AnimationTree node’s features. If you want to master this node, which I highly recommend
you do, take a look at the Using AnimationTree tutorial on the official documentation website
at https://docs.godotengine.org/en/stable/tutorials/animation/animation_tree.html.
Here, we are going to focus on one specific feature: the A n i m a t i o n T r e e node’s
AnimationNodeStateMachine node, as this is a good visual way to understand how to implement
the State pattern using Godot Engine’s built-in features. Well, it’s time to get our hands dirty. In the
next section, we will set up our AnimationTree node so it has access to the animations we will use.

Setting up the AnimationTree node
By itself, the AnimationTree node doesn’t make anything. It needs at least an AnimationPlayer
node and AnimationNode to work and do its magic. So, in this section, we will set up these
properties to get AnimationTree ready for the heavy work it will do. Open the res://Actors/
BumpingPig/BumpingPig.tscn scene and follow these steps:
1.

Add a new AnimationTree node as a child of the BumpingPig node.

2.

In the Anim Player property of AnimationTree, select AnimationPlayer:

Figure 8.3 – Selecting the AnimationPlayer node from the menu popped
by pressing the Assign button on the Anim Player property

3.

Then, let’s also set our context object. Change the Advance Expression Base Node property
of AnimationTree from AnimationTree to the BumpingPig node:

125

126

Changing Object Behavior with the State Pattern

Figure 8.4 – Changing the Advance Expression Base Node property’s value
to be the BumpingPig node instead of the default value

4.

Now, it’s time for the star of the show. In the Tree Root property of AnimationTree, click where
it says <empty>, and from the drop-down menu, select New AnimationNodeStateMachine:

Figure 8.5 – Creating a new AnimationNodeStateMachine as the
value of the AnimationTree node’s Tree Root property

Implementing the State pattern in Godot

As soon as you execute the previous step, the following interface will appear in your editor.
This is the AnimationTree graph. Here is where the magic happens. This graph displays
different elements depending on the current AnimationNode. In this specific case, it displays
the graph elements of AnimationNodeStateMachine node

Figure 8.6 – The AnimationNodeStateMachine graph

With that, we have everything we need to access the AnimationPlayer node’s animations and
create transitions between them using the power of this AnimationTreeStateMachine node!
In the next section, we will finally see this powerful tool in action by making complex transitions
between these animations.

127

128

Changing Object Behavior with the State Pattern

Creating animation transitions
Now, it’s time to create our states’ transitions! In this section, we will arrange all our available animations
in a visual graph that makes sense to us and create transitions between them. For that, the first thing
we will do is to right-click on the graph and, from the drop-down menu, add all animations except
the RESET animation:

Figure 8.7 – The Add Animation menu displaying the available animations

After adding all the available animations, organize the node so that it makes visual sense to you. Keep
in mind the transition order: it starts with the idle state, then run; from either run or idle, it can
transition to attack or hit, and from hit, it transits to dead. Notice that on top of animation
nodes, we can also create other node types: BlendSpace1D, BlendSpace2D, BlendTree,
and even another StateMachine node. This is because they are all AnimationNode subtypes,
which allows us to create nested graphs. By the way, using an AnimationNodeStateMachine
node inside another AnimationNodeStateMachine node is how we can create sub-state
machines and cover sub-states; remember attack jumping and jump dashing states from the chapter
introduction? You could create another AnimationNodeStateMachine node to handle Air
sub-states and Dash sub-states. Pretty cool, right? Well, back to our graph; at the end, you should
have all the animations organized in such a way that you can visually see their transitions. In my case,
I organized it as shown in the following figure:

Implementing the State pattern in Godot

Figure 8.8 – The AnimationNode types arranged in the AnimationTree graph

Now, let’s establish the transitions. You can see that there are some icons in this AnimationTree interface.
Currently, there’s an active button in the shape of a selection arrow, like a usual mouse arrow. This is
the default mode, and with some hotkeys, we can achieve the other modes as well. But you can see
there’s also an icon shaped like an arrow with a line in the middle. This is the one that will allow us to
connect two AnimationNode nodes with a transition by clicking and dragging.
Personally, I like to keep with the selection mode and use the Shift key to connect two AnimationNode
nodes. Choose one of these methods and let’s do the following steps:
1.

Make a transition from Start to the idle node:

Figure 8.9 – The Start to idle connection

129

130

Changing Object Behavior with the State Pattern

2.

Then, make a transition from idle to run.

3.

After that, make a transition from run to idle. This means that these animation transitions go
both ways since the Bumping Pig enemy can idle at any moment when it is running and
can start running any time when it is idling.

4.

Make a transition from hit to dead. This will be the final state of the Bumping Pig enemy,
meaning that after reaching death, it doesn’t transit back to any other state.

5.

Now come transitions that are a bit more complex. Start by making a transition from idle to
attack, then from attack back to idle.

6.

Make a transition from run to attack and from attack to run.

7.

Now, make another transition from attack to hit and from hit back to attack.

8.

After that, make transitions from idle to hit, hit to idle, run to hit, and hit to run. At the end,
you should have an AnimationTree graph similar to the one shown in the following figure:

Figure 8.10 – The AnimationTree graph with all available animations as
AnimationNode nodes and their respective transitions

Implementing the State pattern in Godot

With the transitions in place, it’s time to use the transitions’ properties we saw earlier in this chapter.
For context, in Godot Engine, we have two main object classes: Node and Resource. It turns out that
these transitions are Resource objects known as AnimationNodeStateMachineTransition
and, as such, they bundle some interesting properties that we can access through the Inspector. We
will keep our attention to the ones that are relevant to our goal; again, for more information, visit the
official tutorial through the link provided earlier in this section.
Moving on with our task, there are some transitions for which we need to change Switch Mode from
Immediate to At End. Namely, we need to do that on the attack to idle, attack to run, attack to hit,
hit to attack, hit to run, and hit to idle transitions.
We do that because both the attack and hit animations should finish playing before they transit to other
animations. The whole choreography of these animations is important for the gameplay, including
their timing. You will notice that transitions that have Switch Mode set to At End will change their
icon in the graph to something that resembles the icon of a Play Next button in music players; look
at the following figure for reference:

Figure 8.11 – The attack to idle AnimationNodeStateMachineTransition
node with its Switch Mode property set to At End

And with all the transitions in place, it’s time to establish their conditions. This is the most important
part as it is through the transition conditions that we will control the flow of these animations via
code. In the next section, we will understand what conditions are and how to use them, when to use
Advance expressions instead, and how to access them via code, which will lead us to create an interface
for AnimationTree node to facilitate accessing and mutating the transition conditions.

131

132

Changing Object Behavior with the State Pattern

Establishing transition conditions and Advance expressions
As we saw earlier in this chapter, the main purpose of AnimationTree node is to create advanced
animation transitions in an AnimationPlayer node. So, we finally reached the main goal of the
first part of this chapter. In this section, we will create the conditions that will trigger each transition
from one animation (which, through our lens, is a state) to another. For that, we will open the
animation graph and, at this moment, it should look like the one showcased in Figure 8.11. With the
graph opened, we will do the following steps:
1.

Select the idle to run transition and, in the Inspector, under the Advance category, set the
value of the Condition property to run. This means that if the AnimationPlayer is currently
playing the idle animation and the run condition becomes true, it will transit to the run
animation. Keep that in mind.

2.

Select the run to idle transition and set its Condition value to idle.

3.

In the idle to attack transition, set the Condition value to attack.

4.

As for the attack to idle transition, set the Condition value to idle.

5.

For the run to attack transition, set the Condition value to attack.

6.

For the attack to run transition, set the Condition value to run.

7.

For the attack to hit transition, set the Condition value to hit.

8.

For the hit to attack transition, set the Condition value to attack.

9.

For the hit to run transition, set the Condition value to run.

10. For the hit to idle transition, set the Condition value to idle.
These are the simple transition conditions that we have for these animations. But I want to present to
you the concept of Advance expressions. An expression in this context is a logical statement that returns
either true or false. Interestingly enough, it can be written just like any GDScript expression. As
mentioned earlier in the chapter, we could use vision_area.get_overlapping_areas().
size() > 0 as an expression in the transitions that transit to the attack animation instead of using
the attack condition. But let’s keep things simple, there’s no need to overcomplicate things if they are
still in a manageable complexity. But I feel obligated to show you at least one other expression that
can be useful for us in this context.
Since we are using the BumpingPig node for Advance Expression Base Node, we have direct
access to its properties and can use them in these Advance expressions. To wrap up our transitions,
select the hit to dead transition, and in the Advance Expression property, we will check whether the
BumpingPig.health property is lower than 1, meaning the enemy should die. The expression
should look like the following figure:

Implementing the State pattern in Godot

Figure 8.12 – The hit to dead transition’s Advance expression

Note that since Advance Expression Base Node is the BumpingPig node, we can directly refer
to its properties and methods. This also allows us to access any of the other nodes referred to in its
properties. For instance, we could use an expression such as body.direction == 0 to transit
to the idle animation or not body.velocity.x == 0 to transit to the run animation. This
would allow us to create complex transitions, as proposed by the AnimationTree documentation.
But we will keep things simple.
With that, we have everything in place regarding our animations, transitions, and conditions. A nice
tip to test these transitions is to select one AnimationNode node on the AnimationTree graph,
then select the AnimationTree node, and use the Inspector to toggle the properties displayed
under the Conditions category. Keep in mind that, ideally, only one condition should be true at a
time. This is important to remember when we start to code them. In the following figure, you can see
the attack animation playing after I toggled on the Attack condition in the Inspector:

133

134

Changing Object Behavior with the State Pattern

Figure 8.13 – The attack animation playing after the Attack condition value
was set to true; the transition happened from the run animation

This is a nice way to debug your transitions and understand whether there’s room for any bugs or
if you detect a bug when testing the game. Try to test every condition on every animation and see
how AnimationTree will respond. You can even try to have multiple conditions toggled on to see
whether there’s room for this kind of situation in your game.
Before we move on to the next section, where we will create our own custom State pattern implementation
using nodes and GDScript, I want to provide you with a nice interface that we will use to toggle these
conditions on AnimationTree more easily.
By default, Godot Engine documentation suggests that we use the set() method to mutate these
conditions. For instance, we would use AnimationTree.set("parameters/conditions/
attack", true) to change the attack condition value to true. This is not convenient at all.
Instead, we will do the following:
1.

Attach a new GDScript to the AnimationTree node; you can save it as res://Actors/
AnimationTree.gd since it’s a generic script that can be useful for other actors in our game.

Implementing the State pattern in Godot

2.

In the script, create a method that will behave as a shortcut to set conditions; we will name it
set_condition() and it will ask for two arguments. The first will be condition, which
will be a StringName type referring to the condition’s name, for example, "idle". The
second argument will be value, which is a Boolean representing whether the condition will
be set to true or false:
extends AnimationTree

func set_condition(condition: StringName, value: bool) -> void:

3.

Then, inside this method, we will use the default way to access the AnimationTree
conditions using the set() method with a %s placeholder that we will replace using the
condition argument:
extends AnimationTree
func set_condition(condition: StringName,
  value: bool) -> void:
set("parameters/conditions/%s" % condition, value)

4.

To facilitate the process of changing the condition value even more, we will create two other
methods: one to directly set a condition value to true and the other to false. We will
call them enable_condition() and disable_condition(), respectively. Both will
ask for the condition name as a StringName argument. The complete AnimationTree
script should look like this by now:
extends AnimationTree
func set_condition(condition: StringName,
  value: bool) -> void:
    set("parameters/conditions/%s" % condition,
      value)
func enable_condition(condition: StringName) ->
  void:
    set_condition(condition, true)
func disable_condition(condition:StringName) ->
  void:
    set_condition(condition, false)

135

136

Changing Object Behavior with the State Pattern

With that, we have completed everything we need to integrate the animations and their transitions
into the Bumping Pig enemy behaviors. Now, it’s time to encapsulate these behaviors into State
pattern classes that will handle behavior-specific code and also will be responsible for handling these
animation transitions. In the next section, we will see how we can implement the State pattern using
GDScript, extracting behavior-specific code and encapsulating it into dedicated State classes that will
handle these behaviors properly and prevent undesired overlapping of such behaviors.

Handling state-specific behaviors with the State pattern
Well, if we go back to our game designer’s request, one of the main issues presented is that there are
multiple overlapping behaviors and there’s a lack of predictability and control over how one behavior
transits to another. The Bumping Pig looks like having a single messed-up behavior instead of multiple
consistent and predictable behaviors. This is because, since the code doesn’t explicitly set a boundary
between each behavior depending on the BumpingPig enemy state, they bleed and blend on and
with each other. This is what we are going to fix in this section by implementing a family of State classes
to isolate these behaviors from each other and create a proper transition between them, preventing,
for instance, the Bumping Pig enemy from moving while taking a hit or attacking.
Before we get started, I want you to take note that this is not the only way and may not even be the best
way to implement the State pattern or a state machine. This is why I’m repeating that you understand
the underlying abstract concept behind each pattern, so you can come out with the best solutions that
fit your projects or your way of thinking and abstracting problems.
That said, what we are going to do is create multiple nodes as children of a States node, which,
in turn, is a child of the BumpingPig node. Each one of them will have its own script, which will
inherit from an abstract BumpingPigState class. This abstract class will serve as an interface class;
it will have the methods that user classes can expect to access in these BumpingPigState classes
but each will have its own implementation of these methods. Without further ado, let’s get started.
Add a new node as a child of the BumpingPig node and follow these instructions:
1.

Rename this node as States to make it visually clear that all its children are supposed to
represent states of the BumpingPig enemy, which will be their context object.

2.

Right-click on the FileSystem dock and, from the drop-down menu, create a new folder
inside the BumpingPig folder and name it States. Here is where we will put the
BumpingPigState scripts:

Implementing the State pattern in Godot

Figure 8.14 – Creating a new folder using the FileSystem drop-down menu

3.

Right-click on the States folder and, from the drop-down menu, create a new script. Save it
as res://Actors/BumpingPig/States/BumpingPigState.gd.

4.

Open the script and the first thing we are going to do is register this as a named class using
the class_name keyword followed by BumpingPigState. This will allow us to easily
use it as a type on our project. By doing that, we can communicate to our peers the value type
that our script expects to receive as an argument or as a variable, among other situations. This
prevents errors in the future:
extends Node
class_name BumpingPigState

5.

After that, we will declare our notable context! We will call it context to make it clear that
this is the context object the states will use in their code. This variable should be typed as being
a BumpingPig variable to make it clear that this class, and subclasses, expect a context with
the same interface as the BumpingPig class.

137

138

Changing Object Behavior with the State Pattern

Note that we won’t assign any value to this variable here, firstly, because this is not only an
abstract class but also because we will use a technique (considered by many as also a design
pattern) called dependency injection, where user classes provide the dependencies directly to
their service classes:
extends Node
class_name BumpingPigState
var context: BumpingPig

6.

Then, we will also create a variable to hold a reference to the previous state the context was in.
This will help us make dynamic transitions back to any state in case we need them. For instance,
since the Bumping Pig can transit to the attack state from multiple states, it’s important to
keep them in memory so that when the attack state finishes, it can properly transit to the
previous state it was in before attacking or getting hit:
extends Node
class_name BumpingPigState
var context: BumpingPig
var previous_state: BumpingPigState

7.

Now comes two fundamental methods that we typically have in State classes: enter() and
exit(). These are super useful methods that we can use to initiate or terminate a state.
For instance, in our case, this will be useful to enable and disable the conditions to play the
state-equivalent animation:
func enter() -> void:
    pass
func exit() -> void:
    pass

8.

Finally, here goes one of the most important aspects of implementing the State pattern. All
state-specific behaviors must be delegated to the states instead of being processed by the context
object. It won’t be our case, but here we could have _process(), _physics_process(),
or _unhandled_input(), among other relevant process-based virtual functions being
delegated to states. In these cases, we could use set_process_*(false) inside the enter()
method and the opposite inside the exit() method of each State instance. This would prevent
overlapping of the logic inside these virtual functions, for instance, the same input event leading
to multiple outcomes each from a different state. By delegating that to the State instance,
we prevent these issues. In our case, we will create a method called get_hurt(), which the

Implementing the State pattern in Godot

context object will call to delegate the behavior to its current State instance. We do that
because, for instance, the hit state and the dead state won’t need to implement any behavior
when the context gets hurt, whereas idle, run, and attack will transit to the hit state:
func get_hurt() -> void:
    pass

Alright, we have our abstract BumpingPigState class ready. With that, we can create concrete
implementations for each of the states we want the Bumping Pig enemy to be in, namely, idle, run,
attack, hit, and dead. In the next section, we will start extracting the behaviors we currently have
in the context object into our BumpingPigStates class using a factoring technique called extraction.

Extracting the context behaviors into states
Our game designer created some methods in the BumpingPig class, but you will notice that things
are a bit messy. There is a match check in _physics_process() just to play some animations
in specific states, the idle() and run() methods just set the state variable to their respective
state, and while the hit() and dead() methods have some actual logic, their animation is still
being played in the match statement for some weird reason. Well, this match statement is like a
state machine or something, but it’s not very well implemented. Let’s fix all that; I hope you are ready
for some heavy refactoring! Open the res://Actors/BumpingPig/BumpingPig.gd script
and follow these steps:
1.

Since we are not going to use AnimationPlayer anymore, we will replace the anim_player
variable with a reference to AnimationTree instead, and rename it animation_tree:
extends Node2D
class_name BumpingPig
@export var initial_direction = -1
@export var max_health = 3
@onready var body = $BumpingEnemy2D
@onready var vision_area =
  $BumpingEnemy2D/Sprites/VisionArea2D
@onready var animation_tree = $AnimationTree

2.

Then, we can get rid of the States enumerator, since we will use the BumpingPigStates
class instead. After removing the States enumerator declaration, change the state variable
type to BumpingPigState and leave it blank with no value set for now:
@onready var state: BumpingPigState

139

140

Changing Object Behavior with the State Pattern

3.

After that, we will create a setter method for the state variable to encapsulate some procedures
that must be performed every time we change its value. So, right after the type declaration, let’s
create a setter statement to a callable, which we will create in the next step, called set_state():
@onready var state: BumpingPigState : set = set_state

4.

After the _ready() callback, let’s create the set_state() method, which must have an
argument with the new value, which we can call new_state to help us identify the new,
current, and previous state:
func set_state(new_state: BumpingPigState) -> void:

5.

Then, inside the set_state() setter method, we will create the state-changing procedure.
Start by checking whether there’s any state set already; this will prevent errors in case this variable
isn’t fed yet. If there’s a state reference inside the state variable, we will call the exit()
method on it and set new_state.previous_state to the current state:
func set_state(new_state: BumpingPigState) -> void:
    if state:
        state.exit()
        new_state.previous_state = state

6.

With the previous state stored and properly exited, we will set the current state to new_state
and call the enter() method on it, effectively finishing our state transition procedures:
func set_state(new_state: BumpingPigState) -> void:
    if state:
        state.exit()
        new_state.previous_state = state
    state = new_state
    state.enter()

7.

The next thing we need to do is inject the missing dependencies that the BumpingPigState
instances have, which is the context object. For that, in the _ready() callback, we will run through
every child of the States node, which, in our architecture, will be all BumpingPigState
instances, and set their context variable to point to the BumpingPig instance using the
self keyword:
func _ready() -> void:
    body.direction = initial_direction
    for state in $States.get_children():
        state.context = self

With that, we have a pretty decent state machine ready to perform some state transitions. In the next
section, we will create the states themselves.

Implementing the State pattern in Godot

Creating concrete states
Since we will be extracting some code from the BumpingPig class, this process will have some backand-forth steps, so take a seat, and let’s start by creating the IdleState class logic and work from
there. Also, you will notice that the implementation of the State pattern will add a lot of duplication
and extra code that might seem unnecessary at first.
The idea is not to decrease the total pool of lines of code in our code base, but instead, to have
manageable classes that we can intuitively make sense of. That said, add a new node as a child of the
States node and follow these steps :
1.

Rename this node as IdleState and, from the FileSystem dock, drag and drop
BumpingPigState.gd to it, attaching the script to the node.

2.

Then, right-click on the IdleState node, and from the drop-down menu, select the Extend
Script… option.

Figure 8.15 – Extending a GDScript using the Scene dock’s node menu

141

142

Changing Object Behavior with the State Pattern

3.

From the pop-up menu, make sure to save the file under the States folder, and for consistency
and better communication and searching, name the file res://Actors/BumpingPig/
States/IdleBumpingPigState.gd. We will follow this pattern in every other state from
now on: res://Actors/BumpingPig/States/*BumpingPigState.gd, where * is
the state name. This will ensure that we know they are all part of the same family of algorithms:

Figure 8.16 – Extending the BumpingPigState script as the IdleBumpingPigState script

4.

Inside the script, get rid of the Node: Default template methods, and instead, we will implement
the methods from the abstract BumpingPigState class (enter(), exit(), and get_
hurt()):
extends BumpingPigState
func enter() -> void:
func exit() -> void:
func get_hurt() -> void:

Implementing the State pattern in Godot

5.

Inside the enter() method, we will check whether the direction_changed signal from the
BumpingPig.body variable is connected to a method that we will create in the next steps. If it isn’t,
then we will connect it. The callback method will be named _on_body_direction_changed:
func enter() -> void:
    if not context.body.direction_changed.is_connected(
      _on_body_direction_changed):
        context.body.direction_changed.connect(
          _on_body_direction_changed)

6.

After that, we will also connect the body.vision_area.area_entered signal to a
signal callback that we will name _vision_area_area_entered(). We will use this
callback to transit to the attack state:
func enter() -> void:
    if not context.body.direction_changed
      .is_connected(_on_body_direction_changed):
        context.body.direction_changed
        .connect(_on_body_direction_changed)
    if not context.vision_area.area_entered
      .is_connected(_vision_area_area_entered):
        context.vision_area.area_entered
        .connect(_vision_area_area_entered)

7.

Then, we will enable AnimationTree’s idle condition using the interface we created:
func enter() -> void:
    if not context.body.direction_changed
      .is_connected(_on_body_direction_changed):
        context.body.direction_changed
        .connect(_on_body_direction_changed)
    if not context.vision_area.area_entered
      .is_connected(_vision_area_area_entered):
        context.vision_area.area_entered
        .connect(_vision_area_area_entered)
    context.animation_tree.enable_condition("idle")

8.

In the exit() method, we will essentially undo these. It’s important to connect and disconnect
the signals because we may want to use them in other states, and if they trigger multiple states’
behaviors, we will get into trouble. An alternative for that would be to connect these signals to
the BumpingPig class and delegate the behavior to each state; we could do that using other
methods in the BumpingPigState interface, for instance. But I prefer to implement them
only in the states that actually need them:
func exit() -> void:
    context.body.direction_changed

143

144

Changing Object Behavior with the State Pattern

    .disconnect(_on_body_direction_changed)
    context.vision_area.area_entered
    .disconnect(_vision_area_area_entered)
    context.animation_tree.disable_condition("idle")

9.

As for the get_hurt() state, we will use it to trigger a transition to the hit state. Following
our architecture, the node that will hold the hit state logic will be named HitState, so we
will use the find_child() method to change context.state to HitState:
func get_hurt() -> void:
    context.state = context.find_child("HitState")

10. Then, let’s implement the _on_body_direction_changed() callback, which is another
transition. This time, it will transit to RunState if the direction is not equal to 0:
func _on_body_direction_changed(new_direction:
  int) -> void:
    if not new_direction == 0:
        context.state = context.find_child("RunState")

11. Finally, we will implement the _vision_area_area_entered() signal callback. Here, we
will transit to the attack state; following our architecture, it should be named AttackState:
func _vision_area_area_entered(area: Area2D) -> void:
    context.state = context.find_child("AttackState")

And this wraps up the IdleBumpingPigState class. For reference, the complete script
should look like the following:
extends BumpingPigState
func enter() -> void:
    if not context.body.direction_changed
      .is_connected(_on_body_direction_changed):
        context.body.direction_changed
        .connect(_on_body_direction_changed)
    if not context.vision_area.area_entered
      .is_connected(_vision_area_area_entered):
        context.vision_area.area_entered
        .connect(_vision_area_area_entered)
    context.animation_tree.enable_condition("run")
func exit() -> void:

Implementing the State pattern in Godot

    context.body.direction_changed
    .disconnect(_on_body_direction_changed)
    context.vision_area.area_entered
    .disconnect(_vision_area_area_entered)
    context.animation_tree.disable_condition("run")
func get_hurt() -> void:
    context.state = context.find_child("HitState")
func _on_body_direction_changed(new_direction:
  int) -> void:
    if context.body.direction > 0:
        context.sprites.scale.x = -1
    elif context.body.direction < 0:
        context.sprites.scale.x = 1
    if context.body.direction == 0:
        context.state = context
          .find_child("IdleState")
func _vision_area_area_entered(area: Area2D) -> void:
    context.state = context.find_child("AttackState")

In the next section, we will implement the RunBumpingPigState script.

Moving around with the run state
We will repeat steps 1 to 4 from the previous section. After that, in the RunBumpingPigState
script, let’s do the following:
1.

In the enter() method, we will do what we did in the IdleBumpingPigState.enter()
method, but instead of enabling the idle condition, we will enable the run condition:
func enter() -> void:
    if not context.body.direction_changed
      .is_connected(_on_body_direction_changed):
        context.body.direction_changed
        .connect(_on_body_direction_changed)
    if not context.vision_area.area_entered
      .is_connected(_vision_area_area_entered):
        context.vision_area.area_entered
        .connect(_vision_area_area_entered)
    context.animation_tree.enable_condition("run")

145

146

Changing Object Behavior with the State Pattern

2.

In the exit() method, we will do the opposite of that, disconnecting the signals and disabling
the run condition. You can see now the importance of connecting and disconnecting these
signals every time. Without that, the signals could emit, triggering the callback methods on
the IdleBumpingPigState and RunBumpingPigState classes, which is not desired:
func exit() -> void:
    context.body.direction_changed
    .disconnect(_on_body_direction_changed)
    context.vision_area.area_entered
    .disconnect(_vision_area_area_entered)
    context.animation_tree.disable_condition("run")

3.

Then, inside the get_hurt() method, we will transit to HitState, just like in the
IdleBumpingPigState class:
func get_hurt() -> void:
    context.state = context.find_child("HitState")

4.

Then, in the _on_body_direction_changed() signal callback, we will extract the code
from BumpingPig._on_body_direction_changed() that controls the looking
direction of the BumpingPig scene’s sprites:
func _on_body_direction_changed(new_direction:
  int) -> void:
    if context.body.direction > 0:
        context.sprites.scale.x = -1
    elif context.body.direction < 0:
        context.sprites.scale.x = 1

5.

Still inside the _on_body_direction_changed() signal callback, if new_direction
is 0 (meaning the Bumping Pig enemy shouldn’t be moving), we will transit to IdleState:
func _on_body_direction_changed(new_direction:
  int) -> void:
    if context.body.direction > 0:
        context.sprites.scale.x = -1
    elif context.body.direction < 0:
        context.sprites.scale.x = 1
    if context.body.direction == 0:
        context.state = context
          .find_child("IdleState")

Implementing the State pattern in Godot

6.

Finally, in the _vision_area_area_entered() signal callback, we will transit to
AttackState as we did in the IdleBumpingPigState class:
func _vision_area_area_entered(area: Area2D) -> void:
    context.state = context.find_child("AttackState")

And our second state is done! I think that, at this point, you are already grasping the gist of how the
State pattern works, right? As I mentioned earlier in this section, it’s common to have duplication of
code, so don’t bother about that. Unlike most other architectures, the State pattern classes are aware
of their sibling classes. This is necessary for handling transitions between states, so don’t be surprised
by the cross-references between nodes such as IdleState, RunState, AttackState, and so
on. With that said, the RunBumpingPigState class should look like the following code after
implementing the preceding steps:
extends BumpingPigState
func enter() -> void:
    if not context.body.direction_changed
    .is_connected(_on_body_direction_changed):
        context.body.direction_changed
        .connect(_on_body_direction_changed)
    if not context.vision_area.area_entered
      .is_connected(_vision_area_area_entered):
        context.vision_area.area_entered
        .connect(_vision_area_area_entered)
    context.animation_tree.enable_condition("run")
func exit() -> void:
    context.body.direction_changed
    .disconnect(_on_body_direction_changed)
    context.vision_area.area_entered
    .disconnect(_vision_area_area_entered)
    context.animation_tree.disable_condition("run")
func get_hurt() -> void:
    context.state = context.find_child("HitState")
func _on_body_direction_changed(new_direction:
  int) -> void:
    if context.body.direction > 0:
        context.sprites.scale.x = -1
    elif context.body.direction < 0:
        context.sprites.scale.x = 1

147

148

Changing Object Behavior with the State Pattern

    if context.body.direction == 0:
        context.state = context.find_child("IdleState")
func _vision_area_area_entered(area: Area2D) -> void:
    context.state = context.find_child("AttackState")

It’s time to make a change and see the real power of encapsulating the context object’s behaviors into
state classes!
In the next section, we will implement the attack state. It will encompass some really interesting logic
that only makes sense because we are working with the State pattern!

Dealing damage in the attack state
Follow steps 1 to 4 from the IdleBumpingPigState class again, naming the node AttackState,
and let’s dive into action by following these steps:
1.

In the AttackBumpingPigState class, we will start by enabling the attack animation
in the enter() method:
extends BumpingPigState
func enter() -> void:
context.animation_tree.enable_condition("attack")

2.

Then, we will disable the Bumping Pig enemy movement by turning off the physics process:
extends BumpingPigState
func enter() -> void:
context.animation_tree.enable_condition("attack")
context.body.set_physics_process(false)

3.

After that, we will wait for the finished signal to be emitted by the animation_tree
instance. This will mean the Bumping Pig finished its attacking animation so it should leave
the attack state:
extends BumpingPigState
func enter() -> void:
context.animation_tree.enable_condition("attack")

Implementing the State pattern in Godot

context.body.set_physics_process(false)
await context.animation_tree.animation_finished

4.

Then, we will immediately transition to whatever state preceded the attack state. For that,
we will use the previous_state variable:
extends BumpingPigState
func enter() -> void:
context.animation_tree.enable_condition("attack")
context.body.set_physics_process(false)
await context.animation_tree.animation_finished
context.state = previous_state

5.

Moving on to the exit() method, we will disable the attack condition on the animation_
tree instance, and enable the physics processing again:
func exit() -> void:
context.animation_tree.disable_condition("attack")
context.body.set_physics_process(true)

6.

Finally, in the get_hurt() method, we will override it to transition to the HitState node,
which is the node carrying the hit state logic. We will implement the hit state behavior in
the next section:
func get_hurt() -> void:
context.state = context.find_child("HitState")

That’s it, the complete AttackBumpingPigState class script should look like the following code
after following the preceding instructions:
extends BumpingPigState

func enter() -> void:
context.animation_tree.enable_condition("attack")

149

150

Changing Object Behavior with the State Pattern

context.body.set_physics_process(false)
await context.animation_tree.animation_finished
context.state = previous_state

func exit() -> void:
context.animation_tree.disable_condition("attack")
context.body.set_physics_process(true)

func get_hurt() -> void:
context.state = context.find_child("HitState")

Moving on to the next state, in the next section, we will finally implement the hit state.

Getting hurt in the hit state
This one is interesting because it won’t implement the get_hurt() method. Since the hit animation
itself disables the Bumping Pig hurt box, there’s no reason to implement the get_hurt() method
in the hit state, as the Bumping Pig can’t be hurt while in this state. So, start by following steps 1 to
4 from the IdleBumpingPigState class implementation making the proper adjustments, and
then we will perform the following steps:
1.

Inside the enter() method, we will enable the hit condition on AnimationTree and
disable the context.body physics process to prevent it from moving while taking a hit.
Remember, this was one of the designer’s complaints:
func enter() -> void:
    context.animation_tree.enable_condition("hit")
    context.body.set_physics_process(false)

2.

Then, we will adapt the logic from the BumpingPig.hit() method. Instead of extracting
it directly, we will make some tweaks. First of all, we will increase the player’s score:
func enter() -> void:
    context.animation_tree.enable_condition("hit")
    context.body.set_physics_process(false)
    context.score.increase_score()

Implementing the State pattern in Godot

3.

Then, we will use the await keyword to wait until the hit animation finishes playing:
    await context.animation_tree.animation_finished

4.

Now, we can check whether the Bumping Pig is still alive. If it is, we will transition back to the
previous state. Otherwise, we will increase the score again and transit to DeadState:
    await context.animation_tree.animation_finished
    if context.health > 0:
        context.state = previous_state
    else:
        context.score.increase_score()
        context.state = context
          .find_child("DeadState")

5.

Now, for the exit() method implementation, we will enable the context.body physics
processing again and disable the hit condition:
func exit() -> void:
    context.body.set_physics_process(true)
    context.animation_tree.disable_condition("hit")

At this point, I think you are already noticing some advantages of encapsulating each behavior inside
a dedicated State class, right? By doing that, you don’t have to be concerned about how each of the
behaviors will interact with each other and prevent weird undesired outcomes with brute force.
Everything is nice and clean, and this brings some predictability to our code. A good saying states
that “a good code should look like a bad screen script: predictable and boring with no surprises,” and
this is what we get by implementing the proper design patterns. For reference, this is the complete
HitBumpingPigState class code:
extends BumpingPigState
func enter() -> void:
    context.animation_tree.enable_condition("hit")
    context.body.set_physics_process(false)
    context.score.increase_score()
    await context.animation_tree.animation_finished
    if context.health > 0:
        context.state = previous_state
    else:
        context.score.increase_score()
        context.state = context.find_child("DeadState")

151

152

Changing Object Behavior with the State Pattern

func exit() -> void:
    context.body.set_physics_process(true)
    context.animation_tree.disable_condition("hit")

In the next section, we will implement the final state, both practically and philosophically: the dead state.

Killing our character with the dead state
In this one, we won’t have transitions to any other state and the Bumping Pig will drop its resources.
Quite like in real life. So, without further ado, follow steps 1 to 4 from the IdleBumpingPigState
class instructions and follow these steps:
1.

In the enter() method, we will disable the context.body physics processing:
func enter() -> void:
    context.body.set_physics_process(false)

2.

Then, we will extract the loot logic from the BumpingPig.die() method, and this is all
we have to do. The complete DeadBumpingPigState class script follows:
extends BumpingPigState
func enter() -> void:
    context.body.set_physics_process(false)
    for loot in context.loots.get_children():
        loot.drop()

With that, we still have two things to do in the BumpingPig class. First, we need to initialize the
state machine logic by feeding it with an initial state, and we will use IdleState in the _ready()
callback for that. Then, in the _on_hurt_area_2d_hurt() signal callback, we will delegate the
getting hurt logic to the state.get_hurt() method. After that, we can remove everything in
_physics_process(), which was basically just handling animations. We can also remove the
state-specific methods since their behaviors are now self-contained in their respective state classes.
The whole BumpingPig class script will be way cleaner now; it should look like the following:
extends Node2D
class_name BumpingPig
@export var initial_direction = -1
@export var max_health = 3
@onready var body = $BumpingEnemy2D
@onready var vision_area =
  $BumpingEnemy2D/Sprites/VisionArea2D

Implementing the State pattern in Godot

@onready var animation_tree = $AnimationTree
@onready var sprites = $BumpingEnemy2D/Sprites
@onready var score = $BumpingEnemy2D/ScorePoint
@onready var loots = $BumpingEnemy2D/Loots
@onready var health = max_health
@onready var state: BumpingPigState : set = set_state
func _ready() -> void:
    for state in $States.get_children():
        state.context = self
    set_state(find_child("IdleState"))
    body.direction = initial_direction
func set_state(new_state: BumpingPigState) -> void:
    if state:
        state.exit()
        new_state.previous_state = state
    state = new_state
    state.enter()
func _on_hurt_area_2d_hurt(damage: int) -> void:
    health -= damage
    state.get_hurt()

Note that we call set_state(find_child("IdleState") before setting the initial direction
because this will allow the IdleBumpingPigState class to process the direction properly,
immediately changing to the RunState instead. This ensures that the whole logic is working!
Well, this was a tough chapter, right? We saw so many things and learned a lot about this popular
and controversial design pattern. Let’s summarize the chapter so we can revisit some concepts and
process them again with a fresher look.

153

154

Changing Object Behavior with the State Pattern

Summary
In this chapter, we learned that changing the behavior of objects using the State pattern allows for
more manageable and scalable code. The State pattern is a behavioral design pattern that helps an
object alter its behavior when its internal state changes. This pattern provides a cleaner and more
organized way to handle state transitions compared to using numerous conditional statements. Each
state is represented as a separate class, and the context object delegates state-specific behavior to these
classes. By encapsulating state-related behavior, we achieve better code maintainability.
On top of that, the chapter illustrated how state transitions can be implemented in Godot Engine.
We explored how to use the AnimationTree node to handle animations and transitions based on
the object’s state. Advance expressions were introduced as a way to create more complex transition
conditions. These expressions are logical statements that return true or false, allowing for dynamic
and flexible transitions between animations. The chapter provided practical examples of using these
expressions to control transitions between different animations, such as attacking and dying.
To facilitate testing and debugging these transitions, the chapter recommended using the Inspector
to toggle conditions and observe the resulting animations. This method helps identify potential bugs
and ensure that transitions behave as expected. Additionally, we created a custom GDScript attached
to the AnimationTree node, providing convenient methods to set conditions and toggle them
easily. This script streamlines the process of managing animation states and conditions, making it
more efficient to test and debug animations.
The chapter also emphasized the importance of understanding the State pattern and its application in
game development. By studying real-world examples and use cases, we gained insights into how the
State pattern can solve common problems related to object behavior and state management. The pattern’s
ability to encapsulate state-specific behavior into separate classes enhances code organization and
reduces the risk of introducing bugs when modifying state-related code that would overlap otherwise.
As we move forward to the next chapter, we will explore designing game actors using the Command
pattern. This pattern will allow us to enhance our ability to create complex and dynamic behaviors
for enemies and NPCs of our games, even for the player character itself. By leveraging the Command
pattern, we can encapsulate methods as objects, allowing us to execute, cancel, and even suspend
the execution of a method. This approach will provide a powerful tool for managing game actors’
behaviors, enabling more sophisticated game mechanics and interactions.

9
Designing Actors with the
Command Pattern
The Command pattern is a behavioral design pattern that allows us to turn method calls into objects.
By doing that, we open up a world of possibilities, such as serializing method calls to pass them through
the network, delaying method calls, serializing method calls to save game states, queuing method calls
to create turn-based combat systems, and more.
The Command pattern is widely used in applications as the go-to approach to implementing features
such as undo/redo systems since they allow the application to create a stack of commands, with each
containing the values used to make the method call. Since commands have all the information involved
in a method call, they can be used to undo the operation, which can also be useful in games if you
want to implement a backtrack or replay system. It’s also useful to implement keyboard shortcuts and
other input event systems, such as assigning actions to mouse clicks.
In this chapter, we will understand how we turn a request into an object and the advantages of doing
that, investigate where game developers typically implement this pattern, and we will implement it
on our own in our Godot Engine project to create actors with complex behaviors and map the player
character’s actions to different input sources, including a GUI controller that will allow the game to
be played on mobile devices.
You will cover the following main topics in the chapter:
• Understanding the Command pattern
• Spotting use cases of the Command pattern in games
• Implementing the Command pattern in Godot

156

Designing Actors with the Command Pattern

You will notice that implementing the Command pattern resembles a lot the idea of the Callable type
in Godot Engine. However, the Command pattern is different from Callables, especially in the sense
that we can store and delay method calls with both. But they are not the same thing, as the Command
pattern has all the components involved in invoking the request, including the request’s argument
values, whereas, with Callables, you will have to provide the method’s arguments just in time. Callables
use the Callable.call() method, which asks for the arguments, so it’s not possible to serialize
Callables directly.

Technical requirements
To follow this chapter, access the project files located in the 09.designing-actors-withcommands/01.start/ directory. If you run into any confusion, errors, or bugs while working through
the Implementing the Command Pattern in Godot section, check the files in the 09.designingactors-with-commands/02.finished/ folder for guidance. Any issues you encounter can
be reported using the repository’s issue tracker at the following link:
https://github.com/PacktPublishing/Game-Development-Patterns-withGodot-4/issues
If you haven’t downloaded the repository files yet, you can get them using the following link: https://
github.com/PacktPublishing/Game-Development-Patterns-with-Godot-4.
With this in mind, we’ll now delve into the fundamental principles of the Command pattern. By
understanding the pattern’s purpose, characteristics, the problems it addresses, and typical implementation
methods, we’ll be ready to apply it effectively in Godot, leveraging its built-in features while steering
clear of common pitfalls. Let’s get started!

Understanding the Command pattern
The whole idea behind the Command pattern is to be able to treat method calls, or requests, as objects.
Imagine that you need to tell something to a colleague in your company. You don’t want to forget
about the subject, but you will only meet the colleague during lunchtime. So instead of calling them
right away, probably messing up with their focus during work, you instead write down the subject
and the content on a sticky note. Later on, you meet your peer during lunch and you tell them you
have something to ask, but can’t remember. You pick up your sticky notes block and there’s the note
with the subject and the content of the conversation you want to have with them.
This is more or less how the Command pattern works. You can queue, delay, store, and serialize the
request, which allows you to implement a range of useful features, like the previously mentioned
undo and redo feature.

Understanding the Command pattern

The Command pattern is a behavioral design pattern, which means it solves a problem specifically
related to the object’s behavior and responsibilities. The Command pattern addresses how objects
make method calls on other objects, adding a layer of indirection that prevents a hard coupling and
encapsulates possible changes that could affect the health of our code base.
The typical implementation of the Command pattern includes three core aspects:
• An execution method, usually called execute(), that we use to effectively execute the request
• A sender object, which is the object that makes the request
• A receiver object, which is the object in which we will actually call the method from inside
the Command object
Then, we add all the necessary properties to store the parameters, or arguments, that we will need
to make the method call on the receiver. Optionally, we can create an undo() method to undo the
changes made by the execute() method.
By doing that, we turn the method call into an object instead of an ephemeral event that we have no
control over or reference. One of the major benefits of implementing this pattern is that, by turning the
request into an object, we can store it in a variable. We can also pass it as an argument in a function or
mutate the variable, allowing us to change which command it stores. This lets us change what happens
when the object executes the method later on in the game. Being able to delay the method execution
is an additional benefit of turning the request into an object.
On top of all that, since it is an object now, we serialize the request, which solves a very annoying
issue of network-based operations. For instance, you can’t call a method on an object remotely directly
because you don’t have access to this object on your machine, since it is a memory reference on your
machine. The way we pass data around in the network is through serializing it and deserializing it on
the other end of the communication.
Serialization is essentially the process of turning data types into a text string that we can store and
reuse later. Godot Engine offers some alternatives to call methods on remote objects, such as Remote
Procedure Calls (RPCs), among other tools and techniques. If you want to know more about that,
I highly recommend reading my other book also in partnership with Packt, The Essential Guide to
Creating Multiplayer Games with Godot 4, available on Amazon and the Packt Learning platform.
Another nice benefit of turning requests into objects is the possibility of storing them in lists, which
allows us to create a history of events in the game or application. This is typically how people implement
undoable and redoable operations in applications and tools. We are going to talk more about use cases
in the next section, Spotting use cases for the Command pattern.
You can think about the Command pattern as an object-oriented programming way to implement firstclass functions with more specific benefits and the possibility to implement undo and redo operations.
But, unlike first-class functions, commands’ main benefit is that they completely decouple the sender
of the request from its receiver, allowing us to create a much more flexible code base.

157

158

Designing Actors with the Command Pattern

This happens especially because by coupling the sender to the Command class instead of directly
coupling it to the receiver, the sender only needs to know that it should call the Command.execute()
method, which is very unlikely to change its contract. With that, we adhere to the Open-Closed
Principle perfectly.
On the other hand, if there are any changes in the receiver object, the Command class itself will
encapsulate any changes in the code base. Instead of changing all classes that use the receiver class, we
only change the Command class itself to adapt to the changes in the receiver, preventing unpredictable
consequences of changing the receiver class.
The final benefit, and one that will be most useful for us as we move forward with our project, is that
the Command pattern allows us to simplify the management of complex behaviors by compositing
multiple simpler commands into complex sequences. For instance, if we have a PickCommand,
MoveCommand, AimCommand, and ThrowCommand command, we can create a sequence of
commands that execute one after the other to create an AI that will make an enemy pick up a bomb,
move close enough to the player to aim it, and then throw it at the player’s character. We can then
create a whole library of these behaviors to give our actors complex and meaningful behaviors that
will help the player immerse themselves in the game.
To summarize, the Command pattern encapsulates a request as an object, allowing us to treat the
request as an object with all the parameters necessary to perform the request. This allows us to delay,
queue, serialize, store, and pass the request around to other objects with the main benefit of decoupling
the object that invokes that request from the object that performs it.
In the next section, we will see how all this abstract talk turns into concrete implementations that will
help us understand how all these benefits turn into features that we can use in our game or as tools
that we can use to create our games.

Spotting use cases for the Command pattern
We just saw the potential usefulness of the Command pattern, but outside of the abstract talks, how
can it actually help us? In this section, we will see some real-world use cases for the Command pattern,
especially related to games and game development.

Using commands such as undo/redo in level editors
Imagine that you have a level designer in your team and they don’t like to use the Godot Engine’s
editor to design and manage levels. They ask you instead to create a custom editor or tool to help
them design their levels. You create a very nice tool with the ability to create terrains, position objects,
quickly scale them up and down or randomly, a grid-based design tool to create buildings, and more.
The level designer goes ahead and tries to make some levels.

Spotting use cases for the Command pattern

But they suddenly notice they can’t undo or redo their actions in the level design tool. Since design
implies a lot of experimentation, and thus, testing, therefore undoing and redoing things, they ask
you to implement an undo and redo system. There you have an excellent opportunity to implement
the Command pattern.

Queuing commands in real-time strategy games
Now, let’s say you are making a Real-Time Strategy (RTS) game. In the game, players need to collect
some resources such as lumber, gold, and food to create an army and defeat their opponents. Players,
including AI players, can queue actions in their faction’s units. For instance, a unit can be set to collect
lumber, deliver it to the main building, then collect gold, deliver it to the main building, hunt some
deer, collect food from them, and deliver it to the main building. All of this can be a single queue of
actions. Note that an AI opponent could queue these actions as well to create a sense of strategy on
their part, building their faction to success. We can even adjust how fast, accurate, or effective the AI
players would perform these actions based on their difficulty. There we have another opportunity to
implement the Command pattern.

Creating strategic encounters in role-player games
Then, we can think the same about battle systems, especially those that are more oriented toward
strategy than action. Let’s say you are making a Role-Playing Game (RPG) where you can have a party
with three characters. You control the main character and the other two can be set to be controlled
by an AI, but you can interfere in their actions by swapping the current character.
In this game, players have visible encounters, in opposition to random encounters. So, before the player
engages in a battle, they can queue some actions, such as attacking the monster using the weapon in the
character’s hand, then casting a fireball spell on an enemy that has fire weakness, casting a protection
spell on the ally, and entering in berserk mode with the main character.
Meanwhile, the AI assistants will engage in the battle and will queue some actions based on how the
battle unfolds, healing the player character, attacking the weakest enemy, and casting some buffs on
the whole party to increase their attributes. To create these complex actions, and especially this AI
system, we could definitely use the Command pattern as well.

Making template behaviors in RPGs
Still in the realm of RPGs, we can allow players to create macros based on the available actions. So,
let’s say the player already has a queue of actions they always want to perform before facing a boss,
such as buffering their characters, healing, and crafting items to use during the battle. There we have
it, another use case for the Command pattern. Since by implementing the Command pattern we can
serialize the action queues, they can be stored as part of the player’s save file, allowing them to create
and maintain a library of macros that save them time and allow them to fine-tune their strategies.

159

160

Designing Actors with the Command Pattern

Backtracking actions in tactical RPG battles
A final example I want to give regarding games is related to tactical turn-based games. Imagine that
you want to create a tactical RPG where the player’s character has the ability to go back in time. Each
of their and the opponents’ actions are stored in a stack of events, and during the combat, players can
move back to any point in time to try a different approach to defeating their foes. Using the Command
pattern, we can play all the combat back and forward so players can see the rewinding of their actions
unfolding in real time. How awesome is that?
Well, the Command pattern is useful not only for mechanics but also for basic features that we may
want to add in any game, or application for that matter. Imagine that you make a fighting game, a
platformer game, or a rhythm game, and you want to give players the opportunity to mess up with your
carefully designed controls. By implementing the Command pattern, you don’t have to be concerned
about what key triggers what action. You add a layer of indirection using the Command pattern; any
key can trigger any action in the game and players can finally configure their weird custom inputs
that they say are better than the defaults.
With all these potential use cases for the Command pattern, it’s time to understand how it can be
useful for us in our project. In the next section, we will get yet another request from our game designer.
This time around, they say they want to be able to design the game actors with more modularity. For
instance, why can the player jump and the Bumping Pig enemy can’t? What if they want to make
complex actions for the enemies, such as throwing a bomb at the player? We will have to come out
with a solution for these requests.

Implementing the Command pattern in Godot
In this section, we will put the Command pattern into practice by paving the way for an AI system that
takes the Bumping Pig enemy actions and turns them into commands that we can map to an interface.
This all boils down to our game designer’s request, as they want to quickly test new behaviors for the
Bumping Pig enemy and would like to put them into context instead of creating fake testing scenes.
Let’s see what they want so we understand their issues and goals and help them:
“Hey there, it’s me again, the game designer.
You did an excellent job with that state thing. Having the Bumping Pig delegate all its actions to the states
really helped me have more control over what is possible in each state. Though, there’s a lot of duplicate
code now. But I think it paid off.
I also managed to understand how to use the AnimationTree’s state machine! I managed to make one
new animation node. I implemented some bomb-related behaviors and animations using these features.
Our code base is really shaping nicely.

Implementing the Command pattern in Godot

With that, I want to start designing its AI. So I need to be able to test these behaviors by putting the
Bumping Pig into actual game situations so I can create some nice challenges.
I think that having some interface to play with its actions would be nice. But I don’t want to tweak this
interface myself if something changes in the BumpingPig code, so try to keep the debug interface completely
decoupled from the BumpingPig class.
Thinking about it, it would be nice to have on-screen controls for the player as well, following this same
implementation; maybe we want to port the game to mobile. Sounds cool, doesn’t it? Well, we never know.
All I need for now is to be able to play with the Bumping Pig behaviors and test them using a visual interface
instead of those fake testing scenarios. If you could also create a separate class to put some AI-related code
so I understand how I can automate my tests, it would be awesome, since I removed some code from the
state classes, especially the ones related to player and object detection, I don’t want to mix these things.”
Well, our game designer is getting really independent, aren’t they? They have made some changes to
the code base since our last delivery. This is very common and we typically have to deal with it. Let’s
take a brief look to ensure everything is still working smoothly.
In the following section, we will review the changes in the BumpingPig class, the sub-state machine
added to the AnimationTree node, and the changes in the BumpingPigState class so we know
what we are dealing with now.

Evaluating the game designer’s changes
Since our game designer is getting more and more familiar with our code, it’s common for them to
get some autonomy and make changes. As the project engineer, it’s our role to evaluate these changes
and approve or reprove them, making the necessary adjustments to keep them aligned with our
standards and vision.
So, let’s start with what they did on the AnimationTree node. For that, open the res://
Actors/BumpingPig/BumpingPig.tscn scene and select the AnimationTree node.
The AnimationTree node graph will now display some new animation nodes; one, in particular,
is called StateMachine. It represents the state machine that will handle more animation transitions,
and it has a pencil on it so we can edit it. Figure 9.1 highlights this, as follows:

161

162

Designing Actors with the Command Pattern

Figure 9.1 – The AnimationTree graph with a StateMachine node about to be edited

If we left-click on this pencil, we will enter a new state machine graph with other animations. We
typically call these nested state machines, when we have a state that transitions to a new State Machine.
People also call it hierarchical state machines or sub-state machines.
Inside this StateMachine animation node, there are some animations and two of them lead to the
End animation node. This means that once one of these transitions is executed, StateMachine will
trigger its own transitions. In this case, it will either transition back to the idle animation or the run
animation on the Root State Machine. You can navigate back to the Root State Machine, or other state
machines if this is the case, using the buttons available in the Path field of the AnimationTree
graph, as shown in Figure 9.2:

Implementing the Command pattern in Godot

Figure 9.2 – The AnimationTree graph navigation paths

It seems like everything here is done nicely. I wonder how the game designer managed to implement the
transition from one State Machine to the other, as this would mean different paths for the conditions
we use to trigger the animation transitions.
If you check the Inspector panel, there’s a new set of conditions. If you hover the mouse over them, you
will notice that the paths to these parameters are different from the ones of the Root State Machine.
Figure 9.3 highlights the path to the new State Machine’s throw condition:

163

164

Designing Actors with the Command Pattern

Figure 9.3 – The AnimationTree properties showcasing a new category of custom
parameters related to the bomb animations sub-state machine

Let’s open res://Actors/AnimationTree.gd and see how this is being dealt with. There are
surely some changes here – let’s have a closer look at these.
If you notice, now we have a property called condition_path and instead of directly accessing
the path using a hard-coded string, we store a reference and use it to concatenate the final path to
the desired condition. Really smart. Now, we can support any number of sub-state machines and
hierarchies simply by changing the path.
Notice that the game designer followed the Open-Closed Principle by maintaining the AnimationTree
class interface, so previous user classes wouldn’t suffer any damage from this addition. This doesn’t
necessarily configure a change in the class, as it basically extended its initial interface, maintained its
contract with previous classes, and added a new functionality.
This way, the game designer encapsulated the changes in the condition setting implementation, but
for all the previous user classes, the AnimationTree class stayed the same. This is an excellent
approach. We usually refer to that approach as encapsulate what changes, and it does exactly that:
prevents changes in the implementation itself from causing collateral changes by maintaining the
interface and changing just the implementation.

Implementing the Command pattern in Godot

If you want to check how the game designer managed to switch condition_path, check the
res://Actors/BumpingPig/States/BombPickingBumpingPigState.gd script and
res://Actors/BumpingPig/Commands/BombThrowCommand.gd. They are the states that
enter and exit the bomb behavior animations, so it’s a good place to have these changes.
Moving on, let’s take a look at the new methods created in the BumpingPig class. Open the res://
Actors/BumpingPig/BumpingPig.gd script and let’s take a look at it:
extends Node2D
class_name BumpingPig
@export var initial_direction = -1
@export var max_health = 3
@onready var body = $BumpingEnemy2D
@onready var vision_area =
  $BumpingEnemy2D/Sprites/VisionArea2D
@onready var bomb_vision_area =
  $BumpingEnemy2D/Sprites/BombVisionArea2D
@onready var animation_tree = $AnimationTree
@onready var sprites = $BumpingEnemy2D/Sprites
@onready var score = $BumpingEnemy2D/ScorePoint
@onready var loots = $BumpingEnemy2D/Loots
@onready var bomb_factory =
  $BumpingEnemy2D/Sprites/BombFactory
@onready var health = max_health
@onready var state: BumpingPigState : set = set_state

func _ready() -> void:
  for state in $States.get_children():
    state.context = self
for command in $Commands.get_children():
  command.receiver = self
  set_state(find_child("IdleState"))
  move(initial_direction)
func set_state(new_state: BumpingPigState) -> void:
  if state:
     state.exit()
     new_state.previous_state = state

165

166

Designing Actors with the Command Pattern

  state = new_state
  state.enter()
func _on_hurt_area_2d_hurt(damage: int) -> void:
  state.get_hurt(damage)
func move(direction: int) -> void:
  state.move(direction)
func stop() -> void:
  state.stop()
func throw(throw_force: Vector2) -> void:
  state.throw(throw_force)
func jump() -> void:
  state.jump()
func cancel_jump() -> void:
  state.cancel_jump()
func pick_bomb(bomb: Bomb) -> void:
  state.pick_bomb(bomb)
func attack() -> void:
  state.attack()
func turn(direction: int) -> void:
  state.turn(direction)

The first thing you will notice is that now there are a bunch of methods and they are all being delegated
to the state object. This is a good practice, as now we can override specific behaviors and allow
each state to handle them differently. For instance, we now have the JumpState and FallState
classes, and their move() method does not change the character’s state but, rather, just moves it.
The move() method from the IdleState class, on the other hand, triggers the transition to the
RunState node. This gives us a lot of flexibility to fine-tune how each method will have different
implementations depending on the internal state of the BumpingPig class. On the other hand, we
now have a lot of duplicate code. This is expected when implementing the State pattern. Talking about
it, let’s see how the BumpingPigState class interface is now, since it now has to support all these
new methods that are being delegated from the BumpingPig class.

Implementing the Command pattern in Godot

Open the res://Actors/BumpingPig/States/BumpingPigState.gd script and you
will notice that the interface has a lot of new methods:
extends Node
class_name BumpingPigState
var context: BumpingPig
var previous_state: BumpingPigState
func enter() -> void:
  pass
func exit() -> void:
  pass
func get_hurt(damage: int) -> void:
  pass
func move(direction: int) -> void:
  pass
func stop() -> void:
  pass
func jump() -> void:
  pass
func cancel_jump() -> void:
  pass
func attack() -> void:
  pass
func throw(throw_force: Vector2) -> void:
  pass
func turn(direction: int) -> void:
  pass
func pick_bomb(bomb: Bomb) -> void:
  pass

167

168

Designing Actors with the Command Pattern

We could say that this would break the Open-Closed Principle, but the designer only extended the
interface, and there were no changes in the contracts. The only change on the previous contracts was
made to the get_hurt() method, which now asks for an argument. This is not ideal, but the only
user class, by design, of the BumpingPigState class is the BumpingPig class itself, so we are good.
Understand the State pattern as an extension of its context. Note that the callback method that triggered
the get_hurt() call in the BumpingPig class didn’t change, so this change on the get_hurt()
method only affects, technically, the BumpingPig class itself. All good here. Well, I think our designer
did a good job. So, let’s move on to the next task.
In the following section, we will create the base class for the BumpingPig class commands and all
the commands necessary to test the Bumping Pig enemy behaviors.

Creating the BumpingPig commands
Now, it’s time to really understand the power we are about to develop. With the project opened, let’s
create a new GDScript; you can save it as res://Actors/Command.gd since it will be used as
a base for the commands in all actors in our project. With the script opened, let’s follow these steps:
1.

Create a new variable to store a reference to the receiver object. Remember, the Command
pattern has essentially three features: a sender, a receiver, and an execution method. Here, we
are creating the reference to the receiver; let’s call it receiver:
extends Node
class_name Command
var receiver

2.

Then, the next step is to create the execution method, which we can call it execute() and it
won’t return anything. Typically, when we implement the Command pattern, if the target method
returns any value, we store it in a variable in the command itself. Remember, the Command
pattern parameterizes the request for a method execution. This means that the Command object
bundles and stores all the data related to the request such as arguments and returned values:
extends Node
class_name Command
var receiver
func execute() -> void:
    pass

Implementing the Command pattern in Godot

3.

Finally, we will also create a method to undo the changes made by the execute() method
in case we want to create an undo-redo mechanic or anything of the sort. The final Command
class script will look like the following script:
extends Node
class_name Command
var receiver
func execute() -> void:
    pass
func unexecute() -> void:
    pass

Yes, this is the basic implementation of the Command pattern. Pretty simple right? The real power
and responsibility come when we decide what to do with this. Note that we don’t have a reference to
the sender object. This is because we don’t need to; the sender is simply the user class that will take
advantage of the Command class. We will implement the user class in the next section, where we
will create the graphic interface to debug the actors’ behaviors.

Using commands with buttons
Now that we have an interface to work with, we can create a user class and move on to the concrete
use cases after that, knowing we have a backbone architecture to build upon. That said, in this section,
we will create the CommandButton class, which will execute and unexecute a command based on
a button’s pressed state. For that, let’s do the following steps:
1.

Create a new scene using a Button node as the root node and rename it as CommandButton.
Save the scene as res://Actors/Debug/CommandButton.tscn.

2.

Attach a new GDScript and save it alongside the scene as res://Actors/Debug/
CommandButton.gd.

3.

Open the script and create an exported variable to get the path to the Command node that this
button will interact with. For that, use the @export_node_path annotation and use the
Command string to filter all other nodes but the ones that extend from the Command class.
Let’s name this variable command_path:
extends Button
@export_node_path("Command") var command_path

169

170

Designing Actors with the Command Pattern

4.

Then, right below command_path, we will actually retrieve this node. Note that this is a method
that I particularly don’t recommend for production because it implies that the CommandButton
node will always trigger the _ready() callback after its target Command node, which may
not always be the case and depends on their arrangement in the node hierarchy. Ideally, we
inject these dependencies from a topmost node. But for a debug class, we don’t need to be as
strict, since they are likely to be discarded in the middle of the production anyway:
extends Button
@export_node_path("Command") var command_path
@onready var command: Command = get_node(command_path)

5.

Now, we will use the Editor interface to connect the button_up and button_down signals
to their respective callbacks:

Figure 9.4 – The button_up and button_down signals connected to
their callback methods in the CommandButton class

6.

Back to the script; inside the _on_button_down() callback, we will call the execute()
method on the command object:
func _on_button_down() -> void:
    command.execute()

7.

And in the _on_button_up() callback, we will call the unexecute() method on the
command object. Note that this may vary. We may not want to unexecute a command upon
releasing a button. But since we don’t have any use case for that and since we can extend the
CommandButton class to change this behavior when we find it necessary, let’s keep it that way:
func _on_button_up() -> void:
    command.unexecute()

Implementing the Command pattern in Godot

And this wraps up the CommandButton class. With that, we can assign a Command node to a
CommandButton node and create a direct trigger to test the actors’ behaviors. There’s something
still missing at this point. We need to actually create concrete Command classes for our actors!
In the next section, we will see how to implement concrete commands based on the abstract Command
class we created previously. With that, we will have that layer of indirection that the Command pattern
offers, where we will be able to call methods on an object from any object in our code base without
coupling them to the BumpingPig class.

Implementing the concrete commands
We now have the bread and butter to experience the advantages of the Command pattern. In this
section, we will create a series of commands, extending the Command class, inside the BumpingPig
scene. Using this approach, where we have nodes as commands, is nice because it will give us a visual
cue about the possible behaviors of the Bumping Pig enemy without the need to investigate its class.
Now, let’s get into action. Open the res://Actors/BumpingPig/BumpingPig.tscn scene
and follow these steps:
1.

Create a new node as a child of the BumpingPig node and name it Commands. This will
be the container node for all the commands we will create. Doing this helps us have a better
structure for our scene and also allows us to do some batch procedures, such as injecting the
BumpingPig node into the commands:

Figure 9.5 – The Commands container node as a child of the BumpingPig node

2.

With that, create a new node and attach the Command class script to it. Name it JumpCommand:

171

172

Designing Actors with the Command Pattern

Figure 9.6 – JumpCommand as a child of the Commands container

3.

Then, duplicate the JumpCommand node to create the MoveLeft, MoveRight, TurnLeft,
TurnRight, Stop, Attack, PickBomb, and Throw commands:

Figure 9.7 – All the commands available in the BumpingPig scene

With that, we have everything in place to make the concrete implementations of our commands.
Let’s start with the JumpCommand class.

Implementing the Command pattern in Godot

4.

Right-click the JumpCommand node and extend the script, saving it as res://Actors/
BumpingPig/Commands/JumpCommand.gd.

5.

Open the script and let’s override the execute() method by calling the jump() method
on receiver:
extends Command
func execute() -> void:
    receiver.jump()

6.

Then, in the unexecute() method, we will call the cancel_jump() method on receiver.
We do that so we can control the Bumping Pig enemy jump height if we want to:
func unexecute() -> void:
    receiver.cancel_jump()

That’s it! This was quite simple, right? But this is very powerful. We now have three layers of indirection:
one from the JumpCommand class, then the delegation from the BumpingPig class to its states,
and from the state to the final context, in this case, the BumpingPig.body variable.
It may sound too complex but, in fact, this adds layers of encapsulation that will help us create a
reliable framework that we can isolate the changes from one point in the system and prevent them
from bleeding into other parts of our code base. Think about our code base as a reservoir and from
time to time the water floods. These layers of indirection help us contain the flood into sectors, like
floodgates, and bring us other benefits on top of helping us contain the damage.
That said, let’s move on to the MoveLeftCommand and MoveRightCommand classes. There’s
something really interesting about them. Repeat the first step from the JumpCommand class instructions
but, this time around, we will only have a single script, the MoveCommand class, which we will save as
res://Actors/BumpingPig/Commands/MoveCommand.gd. After that, follow these steps:
1.

Export a variable to store a reference to the direction of the movement; let’s name it direction:
extends Command
@export var direction := -1

2.

Then, in the execute() method, we will call the move() method on the receiver object,
passing the direction variable as an argument:
func execute():
    receiver.move(direction)

173

174

Designing Actors with the Command Pattern

And we are done! We won’t override the unexecute() method this time, but it’s not a problem.
This is because the Command class interface provides an empty method, ensuring that when the
CommandButton class calls the unexecute() method on the MoveCommand class, it won’t
throw any errors. If you prefer, you can override it by calling the stop() method on the receiver
variable. However, since we will have a CommandButton node dedicated to that, we will only
implement the execute() method for now.
Notice that, this time, we have a property to store the movement direction. Since the Command
pattern is meant to allow us to serialize the request, we can serialize a request using direction set
to -1 for the MoveLeftCommand node and using the same script on the MoveRightCommand
node but setting direction to 1.
As a side note, using the @export annotation is a way to serialize the exported property within
the PackedScene file, which is a serialization of how the scene nodes are structured and their
properties’ values. In Figure 9.8, you can see the MoveLeftCommand and MoveRightCommand
nodes’ properties in Inspector:

Figure 9.8 – The MoveLeftCommand and MoveRightCommand difference in the Direction property

With that, we will be able to properly map these commands to their respective buttons with the proper
changes to reflect what each button should do as if they were calling the move() method on the
BumpingPig class, but note that the CommandButton class itself is completely unaware of the
existence of the BumpingPig class.

Implementing the Command pattern in Godot

Moving on, we will do the same thing with the TurnLeftCommand and TurnRightCommand
nodes, but instead of calling the move() method on receiver, the TurnCommand class will call
the turn() method. The TurnCommand class should look like the following script:
extends Command
@export var direction: int = -1
func execute() -> void:
    receiver.turn(direction)

Again, we change the direction property of TurnRightCommand to 1 using the Inspector
panel. Then, let’s make the StopCommand class – it’s the simplest of them all. It will essentially call
the stop() method on receiver. The StopCommand class should look like the following code:
extends Command
func execute() -> void:
    receiver.stop()

The AttackCommand class follows the same approach; its code should look like the following code:
extends Command
func execute() -> void:
    receiver.attack()

Then, we have the PickBombCommand class. In this one, we need to store a reference to the Bomb
object because the BumpingPig.pick_bomb() method asks for an object of the Bomb type as
an argument. So, we will store it in the PickBombCommand class. This can be useful if we want to
create something such as object polling. By keeping the Bomb node stored, we can use it in the throw
behavior instead of creating a new Bomb node every time. But since we don’t have hundreds of Bomb
nodes being thrown, we don’t need to poll them.
The PickBombCommand class script should look like the following code:
extends Command
var bomb: Bomb
func execute() -> void:
    receiver.pick_bomb(bomb)

Note that the bomb variable is empty, so this means the user class will need to inject it.

175

176

Designing Actors with the Command Pattern

Now, the ThrowCommand class is the most complex one. So, let’s follow the extending, naming, and
saving processes. Save it as res://Actors/BumpingPig/Commands/ThrowCommand.gd
and let’s follow these instructions:
1.

Since the BumpingPig.throw() method asks for a throw_force argument, we will
export a variable to store the impulse force that we will use to throw the bomb. This will allow
the game designer to easily change the values using the Inspector panel if they want. Let’s use
Vector2(600, -600) as the default impulse force:
extends Command
@export var impulse := Vector2(600, -600)

2.

The actual throw_force will be stored separately because this will be the force used by the
request itself. In other words, impulse is to keep in memory the default force, but the force
used in the request is stored separately in case we want a history of all the values used each
time the enemy threw a bomb. The throw_force variable will be equal to the impulse
variable by default:
extends Command
@export var impulse := Vector2(600, -600)
var throw_force := impulse

3.

Then, in the execute() method, let’s call the throw() method on receiver passing
throw_force as an argument:
func execute() -> void:
    receiver.throw(throw_force)

We have everything in place now. Each of these commands does its job as a layer of indirection to access
the BumpingPig class methods. This brings us a layer of safety to work knowing that if there are any
changes in the BumpingPig class methods, they will be contained to their respective Command class.
Not only that, but the commands also serialize the requests allowing us to directly design the values
we want to use on each respective request without touching the code and having extra if statements.
On top of that, since we now have the requests as objects, we are able to store and queue them. This
will be an important feature moving on in our approach.
In the next section, we will finally use the CommandButton nodes to create the debug interface,
allowing us to map each of these commands to their respective button.

Implementing the Command pattern in Godot

Mapping the commands to buttons
Now that we have all the commands available, we can take advantage of the fact that they are objects
(more specifically, nodes) and use them in the CommandButton.command property. This will allow
us to create a graphical interface for our game designer to test the Bumping Pig enemy behaviors.
In this section, we will create this interface mapping each button to a command. By the end of the
section, we will have buttons around the Bumping Pig enemy each with an action that the Bumping
Pig enemy can perform and, once clicked, will execute the command, allowing the game designer to
quickly and visually test the Bumping Pig enemy without having to code tests or create fake scenarios
to test specific behaviors.
That said, open the res://Actors/BumpingPig/BumpingPig.tscn scene, and let’s follow
these steps:
1.

Create a new Node2D as a child of the BumpingEnemy2D node and name it DebugButtons,
as shown in Figure 9.9. Again, we will use this node as a container for our CommandButton
nodes. We use a Node2D node because this will allow the CommandButton nodes to follow
the BumpingEnemy2D node transform.

Figure 9.9 – The DebugButtons container node as a child of the BumpingEnemy2D node

2.

Then, we will create an instance of the CommandButton scene as a child of the DebugButtons
node and duplicate it for each Command node we have inside the Commands node except
the PickBombCommand node, as this will be an automatic command triggered when the
Bumping Pig enemy gets close to a Bomb object.

177

178

Designing Actors with the Command Pattern

3.

Name each CommandButton node according to the Command object it will execute. By the
end, the DebugButtons node hierarchy should look like the one in Figure 9.10:

Figure 9.10 – All the CommandButton nodes as children of the
DebugButtons node, one for each necessary command

4.

After that, using the Inspector panel, set the Command Path property. A pop-up menu will appear,
and from there, select the Command node you want to link to this CommandButton node.
Figure 9.11 showcases the JumpButton node assigning the JumpCommand node using the
mentioned menu. Repeat this step for all the other CommandButton nodes assigning their
respective Command node.

Implementing the Command pattern in Godot

Figure 9.11 – Assigning JumpCommand as the node to get NodePath from the JumpButton node

5.

At this point, everything is technically done and each CommandButton node will invoke its
respective Command node. But to make it easy for the game designer to know which button
refers to which command, let’s use the CommandButton node’s Text property to indicate
the Command node it’s bound to and position the CommandButton node around the
Bumping Pig enemy so that each button has its position in a place that makes sense and they
don’t overlap each other.
Figure 9.12 displays how I organized it in the final project. Note that I turned the visibility of
the ThrowVisionArea node off; you can see the buttons arranged better:

179

180

Designing Actors with the Command Pattern

Figure 9.12 – The CommandButton nodes arranged around the Bumping Pig

Now, if you open the res://Levels/Level1/Level1.tscn scene and play it, you will be
able to see the Bumping Pig enemies mindlessly running until they hit a wall and keep running in its
direction. It’s your chance to end their misery. Play around with the Debug buttons we just created.
Make them stop running, jump, grab and throw the bomb, move in the direction of the player, and
maybe even attack the player a bunch of times.
In this section, we mapped the Command nodes we created in the Implementing the concrete commands
section to CommandButton nodes and arranged them around the Bumping Pig enemy to create a
debugging interface that allows us to visually test the behavior of the Bumping Pig enemy within our
game without messing around with code.
In the next section, we will create a primitive AI that will automatically trigger these behaviors using
the same Command objects interface. Again, since we are using the Command subclasses, we will
take advantage of the fact that they have a simple interface that won’t change through the project,
effectively safeguarding this AI class from changes in the BumpingPig class itself.
We will also see how we can queue multiple Command objects to execute more complex behaviors,
which is another excellent by-product of the Command pattern: the ability to mix and match multiple
commands to create complex behaviors.

Implementing the Command pattern in Godot

Designing the Bumping Pig brain
The main feature that distinguishes an object from an actor is the actor’s ability to make intelligent
decisions. In this context, intelligent just means the ability to solve a problem that will move it toward its
goal. For instance, a flamethrower is a hazard that has no purpose in itself. It mindlessly throws flames
from time to time, and if the player manages to maneuver it, it will keep throwing flames as it used to.
An actor, on the other hand, may have the purpose of preventing the player from passing from a given
section of a level, and one way to accomplish that is by killing the player’s character. For that, it can chase
the player, attack it, flee when it is with critical health, recover the health, and chase the player again.
Another actor may have the purpose of protecting a treasure chest, and it may throw objects when the
player is getting close, and attack the player when the player is in melee range. It may even pick up the
treasure chest and run away from the player. The fact is, actors are purposeful and their behavior reflects
their purpose, whereas objects are mechanical and don’t have any intelligence behind their behavior.
In this section, we will give our BumpingPig scene a brain, a class whose sole purpose is to ensure that
the BumpingPig class is fulfilling its purpose of wandering around bumping into walls and attacking
the player when disturbed. For that, we will rely on the robotics sensors and actuators paradigm.
Essentially, we have objects that detect and measure the environment and objects that transform and
interact with the environment, respectively, sensors and actuators. These objects have an interesting
inter-play where sensors provide data to the system, or a controller, which then sends commands to
the actuators to perform specific actions. Actuators take these commands and output them, which,
in turn, affect the system’s environment.
Very abstract talk, but since you are a smart person, you already catch some core keywords in this
description, right? Environment, data, interaction, command, actions, and system. So, for us, we will
apply this to our context as the following:
• The environment is our game’s levels, with the ground, walls, and other objects that the
BumpingPig scene can interact with
• The Bumping Pig enemy sensors will be the VisionArea2D, BombVisionArea2D, and
ThrowVisionArea2D nodes, and the very BumpingEnemy2D node itself, which provides
the data we need about the environment
• Our actuators will be the BumpingEnemy2D and BombFactory nodes, which are the nodes
that can effectively interact with the environment
• All the actions we need are available through our Command nodes, which are the means through
which our actor will interact with the environment
• The system, or controller, will be the Brain class itself

181

182

Designing Actors with the Command Pattern

Sounds complicated, but once we get our hands dirty, it will all make sense. You will start to think
in terms of sensors, controllers, and actuators all the time when you design your AIs. Well, without
further ado, let’s open the res://Actors/BumpingPig/BumpingPig.tscn scene and
implement the following instructions:
1.

Create a new node as a child of the BumpingPig node and name it Brain. Make sure the
Brain node is at the very bottom of the hierarchy so it will be the last node to process before
the BumpingPig node itself, as shown in Figure 9.13. This is because the Brain class will
need the Commands and BumpingEnemy2D nodes to be ready and inside the SceneTree
object to work.

Figure 9.13 – The Brain node position in the BumpingPig node hierarchy

2.

Attach a new script to the Brain node and save it as res://Actors/BumpingPig/
Brain.gd.

3.

Open the script and let’s start by exporting a variable to store the path to the BumpingEnemy2D
node. We will call it actor_path and we will use the @export_node_path annotation
filtering only nodes of the BumpingEnemy2D type:
extends Node
@export_node_path("BumpingEnemy2D") var actor_path

Implementing the Command pattern in Godot

4.

Then, right below it, let’s get the node from this path using an @onready variable and the
get_node() method:
extends Node
@export_node_path("BumpingEnemy2D") var actor_path
@onready var actor = get_node(actor_path)

5.

Then, it’s time to store references to our commands. For that, we will first export a variable to
the Commands node as it is the container node for all commands. This will make it easier for
us to access the commands moving on. Let’s call this variable commands_path:
extends Node
@export_node_path("BumpingEnemy2D") var actor_path
@onready var actor = get_node(actor_path)
@export_node_path("Node") var commands_path

6.

Just like before, we will also create an @onready variable to store the actual node
using commands_path:
extends Node
@export_node_path("BumpingEnemy2D") var actor_path
@onready var actor = get_node(actor_path)
@export_node_path("Node") var commands_path
@onready var commands := get_node(commands_path)

7.

With that, we have an easy path to access all the Command nodes. Let’s create one variable
for each Command node available; don’t forget to use the @onready annotation to ensure
Brain will only try to set these variables once it triggers its _ready() callback. Also, use
the commands as a base reference to access the Commands node using the get_node()
method. It should look like the following snippet after you finish:
extends Node
@export_node_path("BumpingEnemy2D") var actor_path
@onready var actor = get_node(actor_path)
@export_node_path("Node") var commands_path
@onready var commands := get_node(commands_path)
@onready var attack_command: Command = commands

183

184

Designing Actors with the Command Pattern

  .get_node("AttackCommand")
@onready var jump_command: Command = commands
  .get_node("JumpCommand")
@onready var pick_bomb_command: Command = commands
  .get_node("PickBombCommand")
@onready var throw_command: Command = commands
  .get_node("ThrowCommand")
@onready var turn_left_command: Command = commands
  .get_node("TurnLeftCommand")
@onready var turn_right_command: Command = commands
  .get_node("TurnRightCommand")
@onready var move_left_command: Command = commands
  .get_node("MoveLeftCommand")
@onready var move_right_command: Command = commands
  .get_node("MoveRightCommand")

8.

And here comes the cool and novel part. Once BumpingEnemy2D bumps into a wall, we want
to perform two commands: turn and move. For that, we will create two arrays, each of them
for each direction, and they will contain their respective commands as elements.
Note that we could create a node and use it as a container for these behaviors that rely on
multiple commands, then we could loop through its children using the get_children()
method and execute each child. But using arrays will do the trick for now:
@onready var bump_left_queue := [turn_right_command,
  move_right_command]
@onready var bump_right_queue := [turn_left_command,
  move_left_command]

9.

Now that we have all the commands, and therefore the actions, and the actuators of our AI, it’s
time to use the sensors to create the right controls for each command. Let’s start by connecting
the BumpingEnemy2D node’s bumped signal using the Editor interface to a signal callback
in the Brain class; we can name the callback _on_bumping_enemy_2d_bumped().

Implementing the Command pattern in Godot

Figure 9.14 – The BumpingEnemy2D bumped signal connected to the
Brain _on_bumping_enemy_2d_bumped() callback

10. Then, back to the script, inside the _on_bumping_enemy_2d_bumped() callback, we will
check actor.direction to see whether it bumped while moving to the left or the right.
If actor.direction is greater than 0, it bumped while moving to the right, so we can
loop through the commands in bumped_right_queue and execute them. Otherwise, we
execute the commands in bumped_left_queue:
func _on_bumping_enemy_2d_bumped() -> void:
    if actor.direction > 0:
        for command in bump_right_queue:
            command.execute()
    else:
        for command in bump_left_queue:
            command.execute()

11. The next sensor we will work with is VisionArea2D. Let’s use the Editor interface to connect
its area_entered signal to a callback in the Brain class, which we will name _on_vision_
area_2d_area_entered(). Inside this method, we will execute attack_commmand
so that when the player enters the Bumping Pig enemy’s melee attack area, the Bumping Pig
enemy will try to land an attack:
func _on_vision_area_2d_area_entered(area:
  Area2D) -> void:
    attack_command.execute()

185

186

Designing Actors with the Command Pattern

12. Then, let’s connect the BombVisionArea2D node’s area_entered signal to a callback
named _on_bomb_vision_area_2d_area_entered().
13. Inside the func _on_bomb_vision_area_2d_area_entered() callback, we will
assign area.owner as the value of the pick_bomb_command.bomb property. We do
that because the owner of the area detected by BombVisionArea2D will be the Bomb node
itself, which is the node we need to pass as an argument in the BumpingPig.pick_bomb()
method that the PickBombCommand class invokes:
func _on_bomb_vision_area_2d_area_entered(area:
  Area2D) -> void:
    pick_bomb_command.bomb = area.owner

14. After that, we can execute pick_bomb_command and do something interesting. We will
connect the ThrowVisionArea2D node’s area_entered signal here instead of using the
Editor. We do that because we will need to dynamically connect and disconnect this signal to
prevent it from triggering the throwing behavior if there’s no Bomb object to throw:
func _on_bomb_vision_area_2d_area_entered(area:
  Area2D) -> void:
    pick_bomb_command.bomb = area.owner
    pick_bomb_command.execute()
    actor.find_child("ThrowVisionArea2D")
    .area_entered.connect(
      _on_throw_vision_area_2d_area_entered)

15. Finally, let’s implement the _on_throw_vision_area_2d_area_entered() callback.
We start by disconnecting the ThrowVisionArea2D node’s area_entered signal from it:
func _on_throw_vision_area_2d_area_entered(area:
  Area2D) -> void:
    actor.find_child("ThrowVisionArea2D")
    .area_entered.disconnect(
      _on_throw_vision_area_2d_area_entered)

16. Then, we calculate the direction in which the Bumping Pig enemy will throw the bomb. For
that, we use the actor.global_position.
17. direction_to() method, passing area.global_position and only using the x axis
of this vector to store the throw direction:
    var throw_direction: int = actor.global_position
      .direction_to(area.global_position)).x

Implementing the Command pattern in Godot

18. Then, we will change the throwing force we will use to match the throw direction on the x axis:
    var throw_direction: int = actor.global_position
      .direction_to(area.global_position).x
    var throw_force := Vector2(600 * throw_direction,
      -600)

19. Assign the throw_force variable we just created as throw_commmand.throw_force
and execute throw_command:
    throw_command.throw_force = throw_force
    throw_command.execute()

Well, this should give our game designer an idea of how to use the capabilities of the Command class
we created to design the Bumping Pig actor. If you want to test it out, open the res://Levels/
Level1/Level1.tscn scene and play it. Use the DebugButtons we created in the Mapping
the commands to buttons section to make the Bumping Pig enemy jump and pick a bomb. Then, move
the player close to the Bumping Pig enemy to see whether it will throw the bomb at the player. Play
around with other commands as well to see whether everything is working; for instance, make the
Bumping Pig enemy bump into a wall to see whether it will turn and move in the opposite direction,
and so on and so forth.
In this section, using the Command class, we’ve created a means to create an AI for our Bumping Pig
actor. We used the paradigm of sensors, controllers, and actuators to abstract the approach in which
we would design its behaviors and add layers of intelligence and decision-making. We also saw how
we can queue Command objects to mix and match them and create more complex behaviors.
At this point, you already understood how the Command pattern can be a powerful ally to create dynamic
systems that can be easily re-arranged without being worried about changes in the target object, or
rather, the receiver object interface. Using the same principles and the CommandButton node,
I mapped the move left, move right, jump, and attack methods on the KingPigPlayer2D scene,
effectively adding on-screen controls to the character. Please, do check it in the res://Actors/
KingPig/KingPigPlayer2D.tscn scene.
With this, we wrap up this chapter! So, let’s take a look at what we’ve learned in the next section.

187

188

Designing Actors with the Command Pattern

Summary
In this chapter, we learned about the implementation of actors in our game using the Command
pattern, which is a powerful design pattern that decouples the sender of a request from its receiver.
This decoupling allows for more flexible and maintainable code, especially as the complexity of
interactions in the game increases.
We began by discussing the fundamentals of the Command pattern, including how commands are
created and executed, and the advantages of using this pattern, such as the ability to queue, log, and
undo actions. The chapter provided practical examples to help you grasp these concepts and illustrated
how to apply them within the context of a game developed using the Godot Engine.
The Command pattern was then applied to control the actions of different actors in the game, such
as player characters and enemies. We explored how this pattern can be used to manage actions such
as moving, attacking, and interacting with objects, which are crucial to gameplay. By implementing
commands as objects, we can dynamically assign and execute actions, leading to a more versatile and
scalable game architecture. This approach also allows for greater flexibility in designing the game’s
user interface and controls, as commands can be easily mapped to different inputs.
On top of that, the chapter discussed the role of commands in creating a more interactive and dynamic
game environment. We examined how commands can be used to trigger events, interact with game
objects, and influence the behavior of other actors. This allows for a richer gameplay experience where
the actions of the player and Non-Playable Characters (NPCs) are more intertwined and responsive
to the game world. The Command pattern was shown to be a key tool in creating these interactions,
enabling us to design more engaging and complex scenarios.
This chapter laid the groundwork for implementing more sophisticated game mechanics and AI behaviors
in subsequent chapters. In the next chapter, we will extend the AI system we began developing in the
Designing the Bumping Pig brain section by implementing AI with the Strategy pattern, enhancing
the intelligence and adaptability of our game’s actors. See you there!

Part 3:
Advanced Design Patterns

At this point, we are already familiar with what design patterns are and how we use them to solve
issues that we find in our project. Previously, we relied a lot more on Godot Engine’s built-in features,
but now we are going to implement design patterns directly into our code, learning how to create class
instances without depending on nodes, wrapping objects, and working with class mediation and data
structures to achieve the project goals.
This part includes the following chapters:
• Chapter 10, Implementing AI with the Strategy Pattern
• Chapter 11, Creating a Power-Up System with the Decorator Pattern
• Chapter 12, Cross-Fading Transitions with the Service Locator Pattern
• Chapter 13, Improving Game Feel with the Event Queue Pattern

10
Implementing AI with the
Strategy Pattern
The Strategy pattern is the simplest yet most useful pattern we can learn. I consider the Strategy pattern
to be the mother of all patterns and the concretion of the composition over inheritance principle.
By applying the Strategy pattern, we can decouple the algorithms from the user class, allowing other
classes to mutate the algorithm they want to be executed in at runtime. In this chapter, we’ll note
some similarities between the Strategy pattern and other patterns we’ve seen so far, especially the
other behavioral design patterns.
With the Strategy pattern implemented, our code base will have a safe framework to extend. Similar
to the Command and State patterns, it turns elements of our class into interchangeable objects that we
can inject and mutate at runtime. With that, we can dynamically compose object behaviors depending
on the events that happen in our game.
Using the Strategy pattern adds yet another layer of flexibility and protection to our code base. Since
we encapsulate the object’s algorithms into individual classes, these classes ensure that changes in the
algorithm don’t affect the code base, thus promoting resilience and maintenance while allowing us
to extend our code base.
In this chapter, we’ll take advantage of the Strategy pattern to create an AI for the Bumping Pig enemy
so that it can pick up and throw multiple objects, depending on the current strategy it’s using. This
will pave the way for us to implement new pickable objects in the game.
In this chapter, we’ll cover the following topics:
• Understanding the Strategy pattern
• Spotting use cases for the Strategy pattern
• Implementing the Strategy pattern in Godot
Get yourself ready, and let’s get started!

192

Implementing AI with the Strategy Pattern

Technical requirements
To work through this chapter, open the project files available in the 10.implementing-aiwith-strategies/01.start/ directory. If you face any confusion, errors, or bugs while
following the steps in the Implementing the Strategy pattern in Godot section, please refer to the files
in the 10.implementing-ai-with-strategies/02.finished/ directory. Any issues
can be reported via the repository’s issue tracker: https://github.com/PacktPublishing/
Game-Development-Patterns-with-Godot-4/issues.
If you haven’t downloaded this repository’s files yet, you can obtain them here: https://github.
com/PacktPublishing/Game-Development-Patterns-with-Godot-4.
Now, let’s dive into understanding the core concepts of the Strategy pattern. Comprehending its
purpose, characteristics, the problem it addresses, and typical implementation methods will enable
us to find suitable use cases and integrate them efficiently into Godot while leveraging its built-in
features and avoiding technical pitfalls.

Understanding the Strategy pattern
To understand the Strategy pattern, we need to understand the main advantage of using the Objectoriented programming (OOP) paradigm. In Chapter 1, we learned that this paradigm presents a
data structure called objects that bundles data and behavior together to allow its algorithm to have
direct access to the data and mutate it according to its responsibilities. We also learned that one of
OOP’s main features is inheritance, but instead of abusing it, we should use it purposefully and always
favor composition over inheritance. By doing that, we decouple the object’s functionalities from its
class, whereas by using inheritance, we always bind – or rather, couple – a subclass with its superclass,
instead of turning them into individual classes that can be composed by having them become users
of different other classes.
In Chapter 8, we learned how to turn the object’s states into interchangeable classes that we can
dynamically change at runtime, instantaneously mutating an object’s state to predefined states that
encapsulate the object’s behavior depending on its current state. In Chapter 9, we learned how to turn
requests to an object’s method into objects themselves, allowing us to serialize them, pass them around,
reference them, mutate the reference, and even combine multiple requests to create more complex
behaviors. In Chapter 7, we learned how to turn the instantiation of an object into an object itself,
allowing us to dynamically create an object in our game without having to add new lines of code to
our code base. Instead, we simply pass the reference object serialized as a PackedScene interface.
With that, I want you to notice that, fundamentally, design patterns turn elements of our code into
objects, allowing us to quickly instantiate, mutate, serialize, reference, store, and combine them. The
Strategy pattern is the root of this approach.

Understanding the Strategy pattern

Essentially, the Strategy pattern is a behavioral design pattern that takes an object’s algorithm and turns
it into a family of interchangeable classes that execute different versions of the same main algorithm.
It may sound complex, but it’s the simplest and my favorite pattern.
To understand the Strategy pattern better, imagine that you’re at a festival, and you have a date set with
another person. You plan to arrive early at the festival to secure a spot before all the seating areas fill
up. Since there are several reference points, you decide to create a code with the bartender because
you won’t know where you’ll settle until your date arrives. You instruct the bartender to tell your date
you’re near the angel statue if they ask for a Negroni. If they ask for a Margarita, the bartender will
direct them to the food trucks. For an Old-Fashioned, they’ll be told you’re near the stage. Wanting to
keep things a bit mysterious, you wander around, looking for the perfect spot away from the crowd. As
the festival becomes busier, you decide that the area near the angel statue is best and tell your date to
grab a Negroni when they arrive. 10 minutes later, they find you at the table and bring you a Negroni.
In this analogy, each location paired with a specific drink represents a different strategy that the
bartender will use based on your date’s request. This helps us understand how each element of the
Strategy pattern functions.
The Strategy pattern is composed of a context object, an execution method, and a user class. Does it
remind you of other patterns we’ve already seen?
Using our analogy, the context object is the bartender, the execution method is the drink request, and
the user class is the person dating you. Based on the request, the bartender changes their strategy,
adapting their behavior.
That’s exactly how the Strategy pattern works – we take the possible branching statements from an
object’s algorithm and turn them into interchangeable classes that a user class can inject, depending on
events in our application. In our analogy, the event is the change in the place where you’ll be waiting
for the person you’re dating.
One good indicator that the Strategy pattern may be a good fit to implement in our code base is
places where we have switch statements. Similarly, match statements and if statements followed
by elif statements are also good candidates. Note that binary branching – in other words, if
statements followed by a single else statement or elif statements – aren’t good candidates. The
idea of the Strategy pattern is to support further logic branches, allowing us to extend our class by
simply creating new strategy classes instead of breaking the open-closed principle by directly changing
the implementation details of a class.
Note that a positive side effect of the Strategy pattern is that it ensures that we’ll subscribe to the
open-closed principle since instead of directly changing the class’ code to implement new conditional
statements with their respective logic branching, we create a completely decoupled class that will ensure
that the context object’s interface is left intact when we extend its functionalities.

193

194

Implementing AI with the Strategy Pattern

With all that said, we can start to think about situations where the Strategy pattern would fit perfectly
in a game’s code base. In the next section, we’ll see some common use cases for this pattern and also
elaborate on other possible use cases that can benefit from this pattern.

Spotting use cases for the Strategy pattern
The Strategy pattern is by far one of the most versatile patterns. Since it essentially conveys a framework
to implement the principle of favoring composition over inheritance, we can extrapolate it to create
whole systems and even code bases for our game project or even to create a custom engine. One
close example that we have in this direction is Godot Engine’s Area2D and CollisionShape2D
relationship. The Area2D region is composed of multiple CollisionShape2D classes but each
CollisionShape2D can be composed of different Shape2D interfaces: CircleShape2D,
RectangleShape2D, CapsuleShape2D, and so on.
In that example, the Shape property of CollisionShape2D supports multiple strategies; every
single strategy inherits the Shape2D interface and implements its methods, such as collide(),
draw(), and get_rect(), in different ways. So, CircleShape2D may implement it by calculating
the circle’s radius, whereas RectangleShape2D may calculate it using the rectangle’s size instead.
This could be a field in the CollisionShape2D class with multiple options and a switch statement
to calculate the collision or drawing, depending on the option selected. However, by implementing
the Strategy pattern, we delegate each of these scenarios to the strategy in the shape field, leaving
the CollisionShape2D class cleaner and adaptable.
Note that CollisionShape2D doesn’t decide which strategy it’s going to use; it’s provided from
outside. This is important to understand because the Strategy pattern would lose its purpose if we
still had to check for specific parameters within the class to decide on the strategy. This would mean
modifying the class’s code every time a new strategy is introduced. However, that’s not the case. The
Strategy pattern allows us to extend the context class without altering its original code while adhering
to the open-closed principle. This is one of the main advantages of the Strategy pattern.
Now, let’s consider use cases directly related to games. Picture the following scenario: you’re making
a role-playing game (RPG) and you have various skills and spells a character can use and cast.
Depending on the environment, these skills can cause different damage and effects. For instance, if you
cast a wind spell in a humid level with fog, the fog object could inject a new strategy into the object
that instantiates the wind spell, telling it to cast a lightning spell instead. The same goes when you’re
within a volcano dungeon and cast a water or ice spell that turns into some steam. Remaining within
the realm of RPGs, imagine PVP combat where we have some cool visual effects of blood spilling
when a sword slashes through a character’s flesh. But if the character’s wearing iron armor, this visual
effect wouldn’t reflect the damage accurately. So, what if the armor object injects the damage visual
effect strategy upon hit instead? The iron or steel armor could emit some sparks when hit by a sword.
The possibilities are endless!

Spotting use cases for the Strategy pattern

Moving away from RPG games, let’s see how the Strategy pattern can be useful for first-person shooter
(FPS) games. Let’s say your game has a weapon system where weapons have multiple firing modes,
such as single shot and rapid-fire. The weapon logic itself is simple – it shoots when you press the left
mouse button. But everything changes depending on which firing mode the player selects, such as
the animation played, the amount of bullets shot, and the amount of ammo that gets used. We can
create two firing strategies, SingletShotStrategy and BurstShotStrategy, and within
these classes, we can state exactly what happens in each mode. Then, using the Controller class,
we can pass the new strategy to the weapon based on the mode selected by the player. The weapon
algorithm stays intact. This allows us to extend this behavior if we want to, such as by adding more
shooting modes as our design expands.
Now, let’s consider some good use cases for our project. The Strategy pattern is amazing for implementing
AI. Let’s say we’re making a real-time strategy game where neutral units wander around the map or
a specific spawn point. But we don’t want to be concerned with how they wander or their movement
pattern just yet, so we don’t waste time implementing each movement pattern for enemies that we
don’t even know about yet. We can create a class called MovementStrategy and work with its
interface and maybe create a LinearMovementStrategy class to test some things. Once we have
the main logic all set, we can start to design new units that use different movement strategies, such as
ZigZagMovementStrategy or CircularMovementStrategy. All we have to do is change
which strategy it uses in its movement logic, leaving the AI code intact.
Now, imagine that we’re making a rogue-like game where the player fights small amounts of really
smart enemies and the player has to defeat all of them to move on to the next room of a dungeon.
The enemies may have different strategies to interact with the player, depending on their core goal.
Initially, the goal is to prevent the player from progressing by defeating them. However, if they sense
that the player is stronger than them (since the player’s goal is to defeat them so that they can move
to the next room), they can still perform their antagonist role by fleeing from the player, preventing
the player from killing them. Effectively, this prevents the player from progressing. In that sense, we
can create a family of EngageStrategy algorithms. When the enemy detects the player within
its engage area and they’re strong enough to fight against the player, they use a FightStrategy
algorithm. However, as soon as their health drops below 30%, the strategy changes to a FleeStrategy
algorithm so that whenever the player gets close to them, they run away from the player until their
health heals above 30%, changing their strategy back to the FightStrategy algorithm.
At this point, you may have noticed that the Strategy pattern is similar to the Command pattern. It all
boils down to intent. The Strategy pattern intends to encapsulate behaviors based on logic branching
within a class, whereas the Command pattern intends to encapsulate a method call request. Besides
their structure being similar, their benefits are unique. We use the Strategy pattern when we have
multiple ways to perform the same task and we want to switch them at runtime based on user classes,
whereas we use the Command pattern when we want to decouple the sender and the receiver of a
given method request. In the next section, we’ll learn how to apply the Strategy pattern in practice
by implementing an interaction system in our Bumping Pig enemy so that we can rely on a single
detection area and allow objects it detects to dictate how the Bumping Pig will interact with them.

195

196

Implementing AI with the Strategy Pattern

Implementing the Strategy pattern in Godot
Once our project progresses and reaches a stage where the game designer can fully express their ideas,
the code base has matured into a healthy state. We’re now at a point where implementation details
are merely that – details. The game designer made many improvements alone and they managed the
code very well. This is one of the most important byproducts of making good code bases. When the
code base is well structured, the team can follow up with its architecture by themselves, promoting
less work on our end.
At this point, the game designer is thinking about making the Bumping Pig enemy smarter and the
game world more alive by allowing the Bumping Pig to interact more with the environment. Well,
let’s take a look at their current request so that we understand what they want and how we can help
them solve this.
“Hello! It’s your friendly neighborhood game designer.
Our project is finally taking shape as a game and I’m very proud of our teamwork. The work you’ve done
adding that Command pattern is amazing! I made some improvements to the debug interface so that I
can click on the enemy I want to debug and the interface will appear. It’s pretty nice; take a look when
you have some time.
I also managed to create more commands and states! I’m really liking the process. I don’t have to be
concerned about how things will take shape. I can just follow the framework you created: make new
animations, set their transitions, create new states, and use the commands to keep them more generic
instead of coupling the Brain class to the BumpingPig methods.
In the meantime, I decided that the AI I was creating was too primitive. The Bumping Pig just... bumps
around and hits the player when they interact. I saw that our artist provided some objects that we can
expand upon. Since I implemented the bomb-picking and throwing behavior, I thought that it would be
a good idea to also use the art of the pig carrying a crate and lighting a match to fire a cannon. I’m really
looking forward to implementing this cannon thing.
The problem is that the Brain class became a mess! I had to keep on creating new exclusive VisibleArea2Ds
for each type of interaction I wanted, including attacking the player. If we keep on doing that, every time
I want to add a new type of interaction, I’ll have to create a new method to support a new VisibleArea2D
and use a new exclusive Collision Layer. I don’t think this will scale nicely. Not to mention the filtering
I have to do using conditional statements for each type of interaction.
I think that if I keep doing that, I’ll break the Brain code at some point. Please help!”
There’s some really good information we can take out from this request. The first thing to note is
that the game designer is trying to support multiple types of interactions for the Bumping Pig, each
of which triggers a slightly different behavior: attacking the player, picking up a bomb, picking up
a crate, and lighting and firing a cannon. Fundamentally, these are all interactions. They just have
different implementations.

Implementing the Strategy pattern in Godot

The second important point to notice is that the game designer is struggling to keep up with all the mess
caused by trying to filter which interaction the Bumping Pig should perform. This may be because it’s
hard to keep up with how each conditional will interact with each other and with the whole context
of what’s happening in the Brain class.
The third problem is that our game designer, very wisely, is afraid that by modifying the Brain class
every time they want to add a new object that the BumpingPig class can interact with, the Brain
class will break at some point. This is exactly why we try to keep up with the open-closed principle
as much as we can. If the class is working, we shouldn’t modify it.
Taking all these signals into account, it’s safe to say that we can use the Strategy pattern to help our
game designer have a safe tool to work with and expand their design, adding yet another piece to our
platformer development framework. The Strategy pattern will help them add all the behaviors listed
without having to modify the Brain class code. We’ll create a family of InteractionStrategy
classes that are interchangeable so that the Brain class can simply tell the current instance to execute
its algorithm, leaving the Brain class unaware of the implementation details. This will also reduce
the scope of the class, moving it closer to the single-responsibility principle – that is, the Brain class
should only be concerned about executing a behavior based on an interaction, not about what the
behavior is or how this behavior is implemented.
Since we’re going to use the Strategy pattern, the Brain class in itself doesn’t need to select an
algorithm to execute. Instead, whatever object VisionArea2D interacts with will provide what
it’s interacting with and the proper InteractionStrategy class to interact with it, unbloating
the Brain class from conditional or switch statements. This is excellent and some programmers
would defend that this is ideal.
There’s a branch in programming that advocates that the fewer conditional statements we use, the
better. They say that service classes should inject algorithms into the user class, which, in turn, would
use polymorphism to implement multiple possible algorithms that would be provided by the service
class. Doing that would get rid of unnecessary – if not all – conditional statements. Their motto is to
use polymorphism over logic branching. I would be as extremist as they are, but less logic branching is
always better because doing so facilitates thinking about the application structure and communicating
it to other team members. Think about it – isn’t it simpler to say “The proper interaction behavior is
provided by the crate” than to say “In the brain, there’s a method that checks if the enemy is interacting
with a crate. If it is, we call the interacting with crate method”?
Another reason to use the Strategy pattern is that it will unbloat the Brain class from conditional
statements, allowing us to clearly understand what it’s doing at a high level, without being concerned
with implementation details and how each one of them can or can’t lead to a specific behavior. By
using the Strategy pattern, all we need to do is know that the context class will execute a strategy. If
we want to understand the implementation details, we can check the available strategies.

197

198

Implementing AI with the Strategy Pattern

Since the Strategy pattern essentially forces us to subscribe to the composition over inheritance
principle, our code base becomes more flexible and open to extension. The game designer will be
able to extend the Brain class without being afraid of messing up the code that already works. All in
all, the Strategy pattern is excellent. I decided to add it alongside advanced patterns – not because it’s
complex, but because it’s a pattern that advanced programmers mastered to the point it’s natural for
them to use it. You’re about to add it to your toolbelt as well. In the next section, we’ll create our very
own family of algorithms that follow the Strategy pattern so that we have the necessary framework to
adapt our project’s code to support this new architecture and explore the new possibilities that it allows.

Creating the InteractionStrategy family
The Strategy pattern is maybe the simplest pattern to exist. Some programmers may even say that
OOP was supposed to be made by implementing the Strategy pattern. This statement alone illustrates
the importance of mastering this pattern. In this section, we’ll understand why its simplicity is so
beautiful to the point it’s considered must-have knowledge for any serious programmer. We’ll start by
opening the 10.implementing-ai-with-strategies/01.start/ project and creating
the first Strategy family of algorithms in our project. Follow these steps:
1.

Create a new GDScript and save it as r e s : / / A c t o r s / B u m p i n g P i g /
InteractionStrategies/InteractionStrategy.gd.

2.

Open the script. The first thing we’ll do is remove the Node inheritance line. By doing so,
it will be a plain script that won’t be coupled to any superclass other than GDScript itself.
This is important because, being a strategy, it works as a code snippet that complements the
context class. Then, use the class_name keyword followed by InteractionStrategy
to make sure that other classes know that this class exists and to make it clear that this is an
InteractionStrategy class:
class_name InteractionStrategy

3.

Then, we’ll create a variable to store the context object. Remember, the Strategy pattern is made
up of three major elements. The first item is a context object – that is, the object that will execute
the strategy instead of implementing the algorithm replaced by the strategy. The second item
is an execution method that the context will call. The third item is a service class that will tell
the context object which strategy it should use. In that sense, let’s call this variable context
and make it of the BumpingPigBrain type:
class_name InteractionStrategy
var context: BumpingPigBrain

Implementing the Strategy pattern in Godot

4.

Next, we’ll create a variable to store the VisibleArea2D node, which will provide this strategy
to the Brain class. Note that this step isn’t necessary to implement the Strategy pattern, but it
will be useful for us to have a reference to the VisibleArea2D node that the Bumping Pig
interacted with, especially to access its parent:
class_name InteractionStrategy
var context: BumpingPigBrain
var interacted_area: Area2D

5.

Finally, we’ll create a method called execute() to serve as an interface to execute this strategy.
With that, we have our InteractionStrategy interface:
class_name InteractionStrategy
var context: BumpingPigBrain
var interacted_area: Area2D
func execute() -> void:
    pass

Congratulations – you’ve just acquired one of the most essential pieces of knowledge you need.
Remember, with great power comes great responsibility. Use the Strategy pattern wisely, but abundantly.
This is one of the patterns that I would advocate that you can use without much moderation as it will
help you more than not. To be honest, specifically regarding the Strategy pattern, you should think
about reasons to not use it instead of to use it.
With our InteractionStrategy class in place, the next step is to understand how we’re going
to make it known to the VisibleArea2D node so that it can provide the proper strategy to the
Brain class moving forward. The next section will explain that. We’ll also understand the caveats of
using the Strategy pattern in Godot Engine.

Using the target object to provide a strategy
The main advantage of the Strategy pattern is that the algorithm that the context class will use isn’t
provided by the context class itself but by a service class.
To understand how this works, imagine that you’ve been selected to cook some meals in a local
Japanese restaurant, but you don’t know anything about that particular cuisine, as Italian food is
your specialty. The person who hired you said that you don’t need to be concerned about what and
how to cook as this is part of the experience, just be at the restaurant by 7 P.M. So, at 7 P.M., you go
to the restaurant, enter the kitchen, and wait to be taught how to cook the restaurant’s main dish.
But instead, the restaurant opens and customers start to arrive. You look around and you see all the
ingredients in place, pans of all kinds, and utensils. You have everything available to cook – you just
don’t know what and how to cook.

199

200

Implementing AI with the Strategy Pattern

As the customers arrive, you start to get some orders, but instead of getting the order with the name
of the dish the customer wants you to cook, every order itself is a recipe, with all the ingredients and
the preparation instructions provided. All you have to do is follow the recipe to deliver the meal the
customer wants to eat.
This is an excellent analogy for why the context object doesn’t need to know how to implement each
strategy. Since the service classes will provide them to the context object, all the context object needs to
do is execute them. That said, in this section, we’ll understand how we can provide such a recipe – or
rather, strategy – to the Brain class. For that, let’s open the res://Recipes/VisionArea2D/
VisibleArea2D.tscn scene. With the scene open, follow these steps:
1.

Attach a new script to the VisibleArea2D node and save it as res://Recipes/
VisionArea2D/VisibleArea2D.gd.

2.

Open the script and start by exporting a variable that will store the path to the GDScript file
alongside the InteractionStrategy class that the Brain class will use to interact with
whatever object will use this VisibleArea2D node. Here, we’ll use an export annotation
specific to get file paths – the @export_file annotation. It allows us to add a filter using a
String value in parenthesis to only allow files that match the filter. In our case, we’ll filter files with
"*InteractionStrategy.gd" in their name. Note that * means it will accept anything,
so long as it ends up with whatever comes after *. Let’s call this variable interaction_
strategy_file:
extends Area2D
@export_file("*InteractionStrategy.gd") var
  interaction_strategy_file

3.

After that, we’ll create a variable that will hold a new instance of the InteracctionStrategy
class we pointed out in the interaction_strategy_file variable. But before we
instantiate, we need to load the instance. Since the VisionArea2D class doesn’t know the
exact path to the file until the game starts, we’ll use the load() keyword to load the file at
runtime and the @onready annotation to ensure that it will only create the instance when it’s
ready inside the SceneTree area. This will prevent loading and instancing errors:
extends Area2D
@export_file("*InteractionStrategy.gd")
  var interaction_strategy_file
@onready var interaction_strategy:
  InteractionStrategy = load
    (interaction_strategy_file)

Implementing the Strategy pattern in Godot

4.

Then, to create the actual instance, we just need to append the .new() method at the end of
the following line:
@onready var interaction_strategy:
  InteractionStrategy = load
  (interaction_strategy_file).new()

5.

To ensure we don’t have any null instance errors when we load the game, let’s set a default
InteractionStrategy class using the Inspector area. Left-click on the file icon that
appears on the Interaction Strategy file property slot under VisibleArea2D.gd:

Figure 10.1 – The VisibleArea2D.gd Interaction Strategy File property slot in the Inspector area

6.

From the pop-up menu, look for the r e s : / / A c t o r s / B u m p i n g P i g /
InteractionStrategies/InteractionStrategy.gd file. You’ll notice that as
you search for it in the project’s folders, no other files appear. This is our filter working!

201

202

Implementing AI with the Strategy Pattern

Figure 10.2 – Selecting the InteractionStrategy.gd file from the Open a File menu

This is all we have to do to inject the proper InteractionStrategy class into each type of object
we want the Brain class to interact with. Talking about the Brain class, we can now clean up the
mess that’s been made by the designer to support multiple interactions and replace it with a simpler,
cleaner strategy-based approach. We’ll do that in the next section!

Cleaning up the Brain class with strategy executions
Now, it’s time to clean up the Brain class and remove the conditional statements that will only
get bigger as the game designer adds new objects that the Bumping Pig enemy can interact with. In
this section, we’ll use the extract class method to take the multiple interaction approaches that the
Brain class currently has when the Bumping Pig enemy’s VisionArea2D node overlaps with a
VisibleArea2D node and put them into distinct strategies. For that, open the res://Actors/
BumpingPig/Brain.gd script and perform the following steps:
1.

Right before the declaration block, which contains variables to store the references to the
commands, create a variable where you’ll store the current InteractionStrategy class:
extends Node
class_name BumpingPigBrain

Implementing the Strategy pattern in Godot

@export_node_path("BumpingPig") var actor_path
@onready var actor = get_node(actor_path)
@export_node_path("Node") var commands_path
@onready var commands := get_node(commands_path)
var interaction_strategy: InteractionStrategy

2.

Then, we will move on to the _on_vision_area_2d_area_entered() signal callback
method. The game designer ensured that only one VisionArea2D node was used instead
of creating separate instances for each type of interaction. This is a significant improvement
over our previous approach, where we had one VisionArea2D node for detecting the player
and another for detecting bombs. However, this still results in a multi-conditional statement,
with the interaction behaviors divided among each conditional branch. From here, we’ll do
the following:
I.

Create a new script that inherits from InteractionStrategy and save
it as res://Actors/BumpingPig/InteractionStrategies/
PlayerInteractionStrategy.gd.

II.

Copy the lines inside the if area.owner is KingPigPlayer2D statement.

III.

Open the PlayerInteractionStrategy script and override the execute() method,
paste the lines of code we copied, and prepend the context variable when necessary:
extends InteractionStrategy
func execute() -> void:
    context.attack_command.execute()

IV.

Let’s do the same for each conditional branch. The CannonInteractionStrategy
node should look like this:
extends InteractionStrategy
func execute() -> void:
    context.light_cannon_command.cannon =
      interacted_area.get_parent()
    context.light_cannon_command.execute()

203

204

Implementing AI with the Strategy Pattern

V.

As for BombInteractionStrategy and CrateInteractionStrategy, we’ll
have to access interacted_area instead of directly accessing the area variable
since the area variable was passed to the signal callback and we don’t have access to it in
the InterationStrategy classes. At this point, BombInteractionStrategy
should look like this:
extends InteractionStrategy
func execute() -> void:
    context.pick_command.object =
      interacted_area.owner
    context.actor.picking_object_type = "bomb"
    context.actor.throwable_factory
      .product_packed_scene = preload
        ("res://Objects/Bomb/Bomb.tscn")
    context.actor.throwable_factory
      .target_container_name = "Bombs"
    context.pick_command.execute()

VI.

The CrateInteractionStrategy node should look like this:
extends InteractionStrategy
func execute() -> void:
    context.pick_command.object =
      interacted_area.owner
    context.actor.picking_object_type = "crate"
    context.actor.throwable_factory
      .product_packed_scene = preload
        ("res://Objects/Crate/Crate.tscn")
    context.actor.throwable_factory
      .target_container_name = "Crates"
    context.pick_command.execute()

3.

Back to the Brain class, we can delete all the conditional statements inside the _on_vision_
area_2d_area_entered() callback method. Here, we’ll set up the interaction_
strategy variable by setting its value to area.interaction_strategy:
func _on_vision_area_2d_area_entered(area: Area2D) ->
  void:
    interaction_strategy = area.interaction_strategy

Implementing the Strategy pattern in Godot

4.

Then, we’ll inject the Brain instance into the interaction_strategy.context
variable by using the self keyword:
func _on_vision_area_2d_area_entered(area: Area2D) ->
  void:
    interaction_strategy = area.interaction_strategy
    interaction_strategy.context = self

5.

At this point, we’ll inject the V i s i b l e A r e a 2 D node that passed the current
InteractionStrategy class to the Brain class in the interaction_strategy.
interacted_area variable:
func _on_vision_area_2d_area_entered(area: Area2D) ->
  void:
    interaction_strategy = area.interaction_strategy
    interaction_strategy.context = self
    interaction_strategy.interacted_area = area

6.

Finally, we’ll call the execute() method on the interaction_strategy instance, effectively
executing the proper InteractionStrategy class provided by the VisibleArea2D node:
func _on_vision_area_2d_area_entered(area: Area2D) ->
  void:
    interaction_strategy = area.interaction_strategy
    interaction_strategy.context = self
    interaction_strategy.interacted_area = area
    interaction_strategy.execute()

From now on, all we have to do to create new interaction behaviors for the Bumping Pig enemy is
to create a new InteractionStrategy subclass, override its execute() method, and pass
its file to the VisibleArea2D node of the object that we want the Bumping Pig to interact with.
To understand how this works, in the next section, we’ll set up all the necessary VisibleArea2D
nodes inside the current objects that the Bumping Pig can interact with.

Implementing interaction strategies
We currently have the bread and butter to fulfill our task. If you test the res://Levels/Level1/
Level1.tscn scene, you’ll note that everything is working, with no errors or crashes, but the Bumping
Pig enemy simply doesn’t interact with anything – it passes right through the Bomb, Crate, Cannon,
and even the KingPigPlayer scene objects. This is because the current InteractionStrategy
class they’re using has nothing implemented inside its execute() method.

205

206

Implementing AI with the Strategy Pattern

As a quick tip, if you want to avoid this kind of situation and risk losing hours trying to understand
why your implementations aren’t working, I recommend that you add a breakpoint to the main
methods in the abstract classes that we use as base classes for our patterns. For instance, in the
InteractionStrategy class, you should add a breakpoint to the line where the pass statement
is inside the execute() method.
You can do the same thing for the Command class. As for BumpingPigState, you can add a
breakpoint in the enter() and exit() methods’ pass statement. By doing that, you ensure that
you’ll use the concrete classes and not the abstract class. If you use the abstract class, Godot Engine
will trigger the breaking point to remind you of that.
Was that an anecdote for an experience that I had while writing this very chapter? We’ll never
know. The fact is, in this section, we’ll add the final touches to the scenes, setting up the proper
InteractionStrategy classes they’ll provide to the Brain class. Let’s start with the player.
Open the res://Actors/KingPig/KingPigPlayer2D.tscn file and follow these steps:
1.

Use the Scene’s dock Filter area field to find the VisibleArea2D node:

Figure 10.3 – The KingPigPlayer2D VisibleArea2D node

2.

Then, using the Inspector area, select the PlayerInteractionStrategy.gd file from
the Interaction Strategy File property pop-up menu:

Implementing the Strategy pattern in Godot

Figure 10.4 – Selecting PlayerInteractionStrategy from the Open a File menu

3.

Save the scene!

That’s it. You can test the res://Levels/Level1/Level1.tscn scene and move close to a
Bumping Pig enemy to see if it will attack you. If everything goes well, you should see it attacking the
King Pig Player scene, as shown in the following figure:

Figure 10.5 – The Bumping Pig enemy attacking the King Pig Player
scene, confirming that PlayerInteractionStrategy is working

207

208

Implementing AI with the Strategy Pattern

This means our framework is working! Naturally, we already had the appropriate commands, states, and
animations established for the successful implementation of the Strategy pattern. As new interactions
appear further on in the development process, we’ll have a good architecture ready to support them.
All we’ll have to do is create a new InteractionStrategy class to implement the Brain class’
new behavior and, if necessary, new commands and states. By implementing these patterns for the
BumpingPig scene, we now have a reliable workflow with a pipeline that can be a bit tedious to
work with but ensures that we don’t waste time figuring out new ways to solve each problem. We now
have a tested and reliable architecture to scale our Bumping Pig actor. At this point, it’s time to move
on to other aspects of our game.
Feel free to set up the Cannon, Bomb, and ThrowableCrate scenes as well. All you have to do is
replicate the steps outlined in this section by choosing the proper InteractionStrategy file. If you
want to, take a look at the project inside the 10.implementing-ai-with-strategies/02.
finished/ repository folder, where we already have everything in place. You can use this as a
reference. Now, let’s wrap up this chapter by recapping what we learned!

Summary
In this chapter, we learned how to implement AI behaviors using the Strategy pattern, which is one of
the simplest yet most versatile design patterns. The Strategy pattern allows us to encapsulate algorithms
within individual classes, making them interchangeable and enabling dynamic behavior changes at
runtime. By decoupling the algorithms from the classes that use them, this pattern offers flexibility
and scalability, allowing us to extend and modify behavior without altering the underlying code base.
This approach aligns with the principle of composition over inheritance, making it a fundamental
tool for building scalable and maintainable game architecture.
We applied the Strategy pattern to enhance the AI of the Bumping Pig enemy in our game, enabling
it to attack, fire, pick up, and throw objects based on the current strategy. By doing so, we created a
modular and flexible system that allows the AI to adapt its behavior depending on the game’s context.
The Strategy pattern was particularly useful in managing different interaction types, such as attacking
the player or using objects such as bombs and crates. Each interaction type was encapsulated in its
own strategy class that the AI could execute without the need for complex conditional logic in the
Brain class.
This chapter also highlighted the importance of reducing logic branching in our code. By using the
Strategy pattern, we were able to simplify the Brain class, making it easier to understand and maintain.
Instead of relying on multiple conditional statements to handle different interactions, the Brain
class simply executed the appropriate strategy provided by the object it interacted with. This not only
made the code cleaner but also ensured we adhered to the open-closed principle, guaranteeing that
the Brain class could be extended without modification.

Summary

We also explored multiple use cases for the Strategy pattern, both within our game and in other game
genres. From handling different movement patterns to creating diverse combat strategies, the Strategy
pattern proved to be a powerful tool for building sophisticated AI systems. This chapter provided
practical examples of how to implement these strategies in Godot, reinforcing the pattern’s utility in
real-world game development scenarios.
As we move forward to the next chapter, we’ll explore how to create a power-up system using the
Decorator pattern. This system will allow us to stack score points in the Diamond object, creating a
combo system where collecting multiple Diamond objects within a short time frame yields increasing
points. After picking up five Diamond objects, the player will become invulnerable for a brief period,
adding an exciting new layer of gameplay to our project.

209

11
Creating a Power-Up System
with the Decorator Pattern
Sometimes, we may want to add new behaviors for our objects but we don’t want this behavior on
all instances of a class. They may even be just temporary behaviors that are added and removed
dynamically. It may be a punctual feature triggered by a specific event. Or we may want our object
to carry out its usual responsibilities with extra features during the game run. Well, usually when we
face this kind of situation where we want to add new behaviors to an object in runtime, instead of
having them statically set, we use the Decorator pattern.
The Decorator pattern is a structural pattern that allows us to wrap an object inside a decorator, and
people often refer to it as a wrapper. The wrapper, or decorator, looks exactly the same from the client
class perspective but it carries a reference for the decorated object and delegates requests to it, altering
the behavior of the decorated object, or wrappee, either before or after delegating the request.
This may sound a little bit too abstract, right? Well, in this chapter, we will get our hands dirty with a
concrete case to use the Decorator pattern. We will take our project’s Diamond class and give it the
ability to behave as power-ups by altering the player character’s attributes such as movement speed,
jump height, attack strength, and more.
The Decorator pattern is a powerful solution that follows the composition over inheritance principle in
depth, as most design patterns tend to do. However, with the Decorator pattern, we will note that inheritance
is not the solution most of the time, especially when we want to simply add new behaviors for a class that is
already in production and should have its code closed, adhering to the open-closed principle. So, without
further ado, let’s understand what exactly this pattern is, the problem it typically solves, and when to use it.
We will cover the following topics in this chapter:
• Understanding the Decorator pattern
• Spotting use cases for the Decorator pattern
• Implementing the Decorator pattern

212

Creating a Power-Up System with the Decorator Pattern

Technical requirements
To follow this chapter, access the project files in the 11.creating-power-ups-withdecorator/01.start/ folder. If you run into any confusion, bugs, or errors while working through
the Implementing the Decorator pattern in Godot section, refer to the files in the 11.creatingpower-ups-with-decorator/02.finished/ folder. Any issues can be reported via the issue
tracker at https://github.com/PacktPublishing/Game-Development-Patternswith-Godot-4/issues.
If you haven’t downloaded the project files yet, you can get them here: https://github.com/
PacktPublishing/Game-Development-Patterns-with-Godot-4.
Let’s start by diving into the Decorator pattern’s core concepts, functionality, advantages, and
common use cases in Godot, ensuring we leverage Godot’s built-in capabilities efficiently and avoid
unnecessary technicalities.

Understanding the Decorator pattern
The Decorator pattern is a structural design pattern used to dynamically add behaviors to an object
without altering its original class’ code. It provides an alternative to subclassing by allowing you to
“wrap” objects with additional responsibilities. This can be useful when you need to extend the behavior
of a class in a flexible and reusable manner without affecting the code base or introducing inheritance
complexities. The main idea is that the object itself doesn’t change; instead, additional functionalities
are stacked over it through decorator objects.
This pattern typically solves the problem of adding features to objects in a way that adheres to the
open-closed principle, which states that software entities should be open for extension but closed for
modification. Picture a situation where you have a base class representing a game character, and you
want to add multiple features such as new skills, attributes, or magical effects. Without the Decorator
pattern, you might be tempted to create subclasses for each combination of these features, leading to
a bloated and hard-to-maintain class hierarchy. The Decorator pattern solves this by letting you add
features dynamically, without the need for numerous subclasses.
You would typically use the Decorator pattern when you want to add functionality to individual objects
at runtime, rather than to a whole class or through inheritance. This is particularly useful in scenarios
where different combinations of behaviors are needed. For instance, in a game, a player could gain a speed
boost or shield power-up, and these enhancements can be applied in different orders and combinations.
The decorator allows these features to be mixed and matched, applied, and removed flexibly.
The way the Decorator pattern works is by defining a decorator class that implements the same interface
or inherits from the same base class as the object it decorates. Inside this decorator class, you store a
reference to the original object and implement additional functionality that can be executed before or
after calling the original object’s methods. This allows you to modify or extend the object’s behavior
seamlessly while keeping the core logic intact.

Spotting use cases for the Decorator pattern

The structure of the Decorator pattern consists of a few key components. At its core, there is a base
interface or abstract class that defines the behavior common to both the original object and the
decorators. The concrete component, which is the object being decorated, implements this interface,
providing the default behavior. Decorators also implement this same interface and wrap the original
object, allowing additional behavior to be introduced. Each decorator stores a reference to the object it
wraps, which could either be the base object or another decorator. This composition allows decorators
to add or modify functionality without affecting the underlying object’s code.
In a typical implementation, the client class is responsible for applying the decorators to the base
object. First, the client creates an instance of the original object, and then it dynamically decorates
the object by wrapping it in one or more decorator instances. The decorator, in turn, holds a reference
to the object it wraps, or decorates, allowing it to call the original object’s methods while extending
or altering the behavior as necessary. Since each decorator also implements the same interface as the
base object, they can be stacked, with each decorator adding its own functionality while still allowing
the decorated object’s methods to be invoked. This approach provides a lot of flexibility, as the client
can control how many decorators to apply and in what order.
The Decorator pattern is ideal when you need to add or enhance the functionality of an object in a
modular and dynamic way. It avoids the pitfalls of deep inheritance trees, making your code base more
maintainable and flexible. It’s particularly beneficial in game development, where object behaviors
often need to be modified or extended at runtime based on power-ups, effects, or other gameplay
mechanics. By using decorators, you can combine these behaviors efficiently, ensuring that your system
remains scalable and adaptable to change.
It sounds too abstract at this point, right? Well, in the next section, we will explore some concrete use
cases so we can see, with real-world examples, how this pattern can be used to implement game systems.

Spotting use cases for the Decorator pattern
The Decorator pattern is a powerful tool for solving a wide range of design challenges in game
development. It shines particularly in situations where objects need to be extended or modified
dynamically, allowing us to avoid rigid inheritance hierarchies and instead compose behaviors in a more
flexible, modular way. However, knowing when and where to apply the pattern can be tricky, especially
in such a complex field as game development. The key to spotting good use cases is understanding how
often behavior changes and extensions are needed without altering the core functionality of objects.
In many games, such as platformers, dungeon crawlers, or RPGs, objects such as characters, weapons, or
enemies need to adapt their behavior based on the player’s actions, environmental effects, or temporary
power-ups. These objects often share common behaviors but require varying enhancements over time.
This is where the Decorator pattern becomes an essential tool. By wrapping objects in decorators
that apply new functionalities, we can ensure that these behaviors evolve without the need for clunky
inheritances or hardcoded solutions.

213

214

Creating a Power-Up System with the Decorator Pattern

In this section, we will explore some concrete use cases for the Decorator pattern, focusing on common
scenarios in game design where dynamic behavior extensions are essential. From adding power-ups
to characters to handling score multipliers and weapon enhancements, these examples will show how
the pattern can be applied in practice to make games more dynamic, scalable, and maintainable. Each
use case will demonstrate how decorators provide a clean solution to complex behavior management,
ensuring that objects can be extended without rewriting or complicating existing code.
For instance, imagine a player character in a platformer game that can pick up various power-ups
such as speed boosts, shields, or double jumps. Instead of creating multiple subclasses for each
possible combination, you could use the Decorator pattern to apply these power-ups dynamically.
For instance, when the player collects a speed boost, a SpeedBoostDecorator object can be
applied to the player object, increasing movement speed for a limited time. If they collect a shield,
a ShieldDecorator object could be stacked on top of that. Once the effects expire, the decorator
is removed, restoring the original behavior.
One important thing to keep in mind is that a limitation of the Decorator pattern is the difficulty in
removing specific decorators from a stack once they’ve been applied. Since they are all linked together,
it is hard to maintain the decoration stack working without the interdependency of the decorators. For
instance, in this example, the player character could hit a trap that removes its speed boost power-up.
How will you remove it without messing up the whole decoration stack? Another downside of the
Decorator pattern is that designing decorators usually leads to behaviors that depend on a specific
order of the decoration stack. This is not mandatory, and we can find new ways to avoid it. However,
it’s not a problem if done well and mindfully. Now let’s see more examples.
In a dungeon crawler game, such as Torchlight 2, players can enhance their weapons and armor by adding
enchantments or embedding gems. Instead of subclassing every weapon or armor type to account for
different combinations of effects (for instance, fire damage, life steal, or defense boosts), this can be
another use case for the Decorator pattern. For example, a FireEnchantmentDecorator object
could be applied to a sword to add fire damage, and a LifeStealGemDecorator object could
be applied to steal health with each hit. Players can mix and match enchantments and gems, stacking
multiple decorators onto the same weapon or piece of armor, giving it new abilities and effects. These
decorators modify the behavior of the base item dynamically, adding and removing enchantments and
gems, allowing for diverse and customizable equipment to allow players to explore multiple builds!
Another good use case is strategy and RPG games. In these games, certain enemies might receive buffs
or debuffs, such as increased damage or reduced movement speed, as a result of spells or environmental
effects. Instead of hardcoding these changes into the enemy classes, we can use decorators to modify
their behavior dynamically. For example, a FrozenDecorator object could reduce an enemy’s
movement speed, while a RageDecorator object could increase its attack power. These effects can
stack and be removed as conditions change, providing more flexibility for balancing game mechanics
and allowing players to play with multiple strategies.

Implementing the Decorator pattern in Godot Engine

In games with combo-based scoring systems, such as in fighting games or platformers such as Super Mario
World, the Decorator pattern can be used to handle combo streaks and multipliers. When a player defeats
multiple enemies in succession without taking damage or landing, a ScoreMultiplierDecorator
object can be added to the player’s score system. With each successful hit, the multiplier increases. If
the player continues the combo, additional decorators stack, and after reaching a certain threshold, for
instance, eight enemies, they earn an extra life. If the player fails to continue the combo, the decorators
are removed, and the score returns to normal.
Finally, and this one is particularly interesting for us, in games where the player’s state frequently
changes, such as gaining invincibility after collecting a star in a platformer, gaining boosted movement
speed, or temporary stealth effect in a stealth-based game, the Decorator pattern can manage these
transitions. When the player becomes invincible, for instance, an InvincibilityDecorator
object could be applied, modifying how damage is handled and allowing the player to pass through
enemies. Once the invincibility period ends, the decorator is removed, reverting the player to their
normal state. In the next section, we’ll be implementing a power-up system using the Decorator
pattern, applying it to the Diamond objects in our game!

Implementing the Decorator pattern in Godot Engine
In many games, power-ups play a crucial role in enhancing the player’s abilities and providing a sense
of progression and excitement. Whether by increasing the player’s speed, boosting their attack strength,
or granting extra lives, power-ups can add layers of strategy and fun to the gameplay experience. In this
section, we’ll delve into a flexible system for managing power-ups in your game using the Decorator
pattern, which allows for dynamic changes to player stats in a clean and modular fashion.
The Decorator pattern is particularly well-suited for handling temporary or stackable power-ups because
it allows us to extend the functionality of the player’s core stats without modifying the underlying
code. By creating Decorators that “wrap” the player’s stats, we can easily introduce new power-ups
that modify attributes such as speed, jump height, and attack power. These power-ups can be applied
when the player collects specific items, such as our project’s Diamonds, and will automatically expire
after a given duration, one after the other until they return the player’s stats to their original values.
Godot Engine’s architecture presents specific challenges for implementing the Decorator pattern,
especially due to the way our project was also designed. Nodes have their own virtual methods and
callbacks running in the background, and the very way they are processed through the SceneTree
object also makes it difficult to wrap them, especially their life cycle and how their position in the node
hierarchy is important. The same happens to resources, which, as we will see, have their own challenges
as well, especially due to initialization and deserialization procedures. These are not problems exclusive
to Godot Engine, and there are certainly better situations to implement the Decorator pattern, which is
a powerful and useful pattern. I decided to put the Decorator pattern in Part 3 of this book, where we
talk about advanced patterns. I made this choice because of the way it is implemented in our project,
which demands an extra layer of abstraction and understanding of both the engine and the pattern
itself, and also about how object-oriented design and programming work.

215

216

Creating a Power-Up System with the Decorator Pattern

In this section, we’ll implement a power-up system step-by-step. We’ll cover how to abstract the player’s
stats as an object that we can pass around and wrap, how to create Decorator classes that modify these
stats, and how to manage the life cycle of power-ups using a singleton to apply and remove them over
time. We will have power-ups that are easy to implement, extend, and maintain, making it a perfect
fit for games with a variety of player abilities and pickups.
With all that said, let’s take a look at how we came out with this system because you can bet that it didn’t
come from a deliberate desire! It came as a request from our beloved game designer. I believe they
want the best for our game, but the guy is surely demanding, as you can see in the following request:
Hi, there! I have an idea and I need your help!
I love how we were able to make our Bumping Pig intelligent and alive in the game, allowing it to interact
with everything in the environment. I’m really excited to test it out, that strategy thing works wonders!
I think we can change our focus now to the player’s character, poor King Pig got abandoned as we were
focusing on polishing the enemies.
As I played the game I noticed that there are no real incentives for the player to rush through levels, and
the action aspect of our game is lagging behind. Players can score points, sure, but they can carefully craft
strategies that lead them to the most optimal outcome in terms of score, without any attrition. And our
game is supposed to be mainly an action game.
Since action-based games are closely related to player’s reaction time and hand-eye coordination, I want
to use time in our favor to promote a sense of urgency in players. But I don’t want to punish them, instead
reward them as they use their time well. So instead of having something like a timer that would make
the player fail the level if they don’t finish the level within a given amount of time, I want a power-up
system that gives players some status buffs, like increasing their movement speed, jump height, and attack
strength. Particularly I thought about adding these power-ups as bonus effects when collecting diamonds,
but not every diamond, and each diamond can give different buffs.
These buffs have a time span, though. So players must use them as much as they can before they go away!
To compensate for this, I want these power-ups to stack. So if players pick two movement speed buffs,
they will have double the effect, until the first buff disappears.
Thinking about it…this can be a really cool statuses system! Depending on how you do it, try to make it
so that I can make negative effects as well, like debuffs. For instance, making the player move slowly and
dizzy when they get hit by an enemy, hehe. This sounds fun!
Thanks in advance,
Yours truly, Game designer of the fictional studio
Good, the game designer is having some fun playing with the strategies we implemented previously,
I’m glad about that as it is my favorite design pattern and it’s good that it was useful. This is the most
important aspect of any implementation: its usefulness. Optimization and performance are nice when
they are necessary, but knowing that you helped someone and they enjoyed your work is the most
rewarding aspect of being a programmer. Now to the analysis of the request.

Implementing the Decorator pattern in Godot Engine

Our game designer wants us to create a power-up or status effect system, as they also want us to support
negative effects. Note that one of the fundamental aspects here is that these effects can stack. All of
these effects mess with the player’s attributes: movement speed, jump height, and attack strength. So,
we are talking about altering some properties of the KingPigPlayer2D class, more accurately,
in the BasicMovingCharacter2D class, which the KingPigPlayer2D class inherits from.
Another important aspect is that these effects will be provided by another object, the Diamond
nodes in this case. However, it’s not their responsibility to manage status augmentations on the
player, especially due to their life cycle. Note that the buffs are supposed to disappear after some time,
whereas Diamond nodes disappear as soon as the player picks them. Thus, we would have to keep
them stored in memory to manage their buff ’s duration, which is nonsense as this would explode
the memory very quickly, or we delegate that to a single object that would manage all these statuses.
This object should be globally accessible to all Diamonds and probably for the player, as it will need
a reference to the player.
Well, we can see two problems with distinct solutions here. The most obvious one is, you guessed it, a
globally accessible class that manages power-ups. We can create a singleton to solve that. The second
problem is a way to stack objects, which should be treated as being of the same class, but with different
behaviors. Not only that, they must be interchangeable and alter each other behavior in run time,
since instead of providing just the plain attribute, for instance, speed, they will alter this speed before
the final user class uses it. There may be many different types of alterations involved. For instance, we
can add more speed, or multiply the speed. Maybe for a debuff, we would need to set the final speed
to a specific value, such as being dizzy. In the dizzy effect, the player character could always move at
a fixed slower speed instead of a fraction of its final speed.
All of this points to a wrapper class, but not only a wrapper but a wrapper of the same type of what
it wraps. This class must use the same interface as its wrappee so that the wrappee user classes don’t
recognize if they are dealing with a wrapper or with a wrappee. From this description, it sounds like we
need a Decorator, but what is it supposed to decorate? The player? How? The Diamond? The Singleton?
You are about to see Object-Oriented Programming (OOP) at its finest. In the next section, we will
create a new class to represent all the player character’s attributes, allowing us to treat them as objects!

Turning properties into the Stats class
One of the advantages of working with programming languages that support OOP is the ability to
turn anything into objects. You may be asking yourself what the advantages of doing that are, right?
Well, as we saw throughout this book, by using objects, we can reference them, pass them around
to other objects, encapsulate, and abstract our thoughts. Think about objects as we did in Chapter 1:
concrete instances of abstractions for problems we are solving.
Currently, we are dealing with a problem related to the player character’s attributes such as speed,
attack strength, and jump height. So, using an OOP paradigm, in other words, a way to think in
terms of objects, let’s turn these attributes into an object so that we can treat it as such. Remember,
the Decorator pattern is essentially a wrapper object that wraps an object of the same base type. So

217

218

Creating a Power-Up System with the Decorator Pattern

if we need to add layers of power-ups that mutate these attributes, the best approach is to wrap these
attributes directly, and to do that, we can turn them into an object itself. For that, open the project
available at the repository’s creating-power-ups-with-decorators/01.start/ folder.
From there, let’s follow these steps:
1.

In the FileSystem dock, right-click on the res://Recipes/BasicMovingCharacter2D/
folder. From the drop-down menu, select +Create New | Script… to create a new GDScript.

Figure 11.1 – Creating a new script from the FileSystem drop-down menu

2.

This script will inherit from the Resource class and we will call it Stats as it will represent
the actors’ stats.

Implementing the Decorator pattern in Godot Engine

Figure 11.2 – The Stats script settings

3.

In this script, we will transfer all the properties related to the BasicMovingCharacter2D
behavior and its subclasses, as instead of carrying the data themselves, they will access the Stats
instance. We will export all the properties in the Stats class so that we can create new instances
with serialized values that we can configure through the Inspector tab on each instance of the
BasicMovingCharacter2D class. The properties include the following: gravity, speed,
jump_strength, max_lives, lives, attack_strength, wall_jumpstrength,
slide_gravity_factor, horizontal_gravity, and max_slide_speed:
extends Resource
class_name Stats
@export var gravity := 2000.0
@export var speed := 500.0
@export var jump_strength := 800.0
@export var max_lives := 3
@export var lives := 0
@export var attack_strength := 1
@export var wall_jump_strength := Vector2(800, -800)
@export var slide_gravity_factor := 0.2
@export var horizontal_gravity := 8000
@export var max_slide_speed := 200

219

220

Creating a Power-Up System with the Decorator Pattern

4.

The first thing we will do after that is to override the _init() callback method and initially set
the lives variable to the max_lives variable value. We do that because since the values will
be serialized, the max_lives variable value may have a different value. Also, as the lives
variable should initially have the same value as max_lives, we will ensure that in the _init()
callback, which is called by Godot Engine as soon as an instance of the class is created:
func _init() -> void:
    lives = max_lives

5.

Now we will use setters and getters to encapsulate these values into methods and create an interface
that we can use in the Decorator class to add new behaviors to the Stats class. This approach
ensures that any class using the Stats class will invoke the setter and getter methods whenever
accessing these properties. We will take advantage of that to manipulate the accessed values:
extends Resource
class_name Stats
@export var gravity := 2000.0 : set = set_gravity,
   get = get_gravity
@export var speed := 500.0 : set = set_speed,
  get = get_speed
@export var jump_strength := 800.0 :
  set = set_jump_strength, get = get_jump_strength
@export var max_lives := 3 : set = set_max_lives,
  get = get_max_lives
@export var lives := 0 : set = set_lives,
  get = get_lives
@export var attack_strength := 1 :
  set = set_attack_strength, get = get_attack_strength
@export var wall_jump_strength := Vector2(800,
  -800) : set = set_wall_jump_strength,
  get = get_wall_jump_strength
@export var slide_gravity_factor := 0.2 :
  set = set_slide_gravity_factor,
  get = get_slide_gravity_factor
@export var horizontal_gravity := 8000 :
  set = set_horizontal_gravity,
  get = get_horizontal_gravity
@export var max_slide_speed := 200 :
  set = set_max_slide_speed, get = get_max_slide_speed

Implementing the Decorator pattern in Godot Engine

6.

After that, we will implement the setters and getters methods. In this implementation, they will
essentially do nothing really impressive. The setter method will set the variable value to the new
value, and the getter will return its current value. In the following code, I’ll use the gravity
variable’s setter and getter methods as a reference so we don’t get confused and save some space.
However, you should replicate the same approach on every other setter and getter method we
declared in the previous step. You can refer to the same script in the 11.creating-powerups-with-decorators/02.finished project for reference:
func set_gravity(new_gravity: float) -> void:
    gravity = new_gravity
func get_gravity() -> float:
    return gravity

This wraps up our Stats class, but this is not everything yet. We now need to refactor our classes so
that they use the Stats class instead of handling their attributes themselves. For that, we will have
to revisit several classes in our code base, starting with the BasicMovingCharacter2D class.
Open the res://Recipes/BasicMovingCharacter2D/BasicMovingCharacter2D.
gd file and let’s do the following:
1.

Let’s start by removing the variables that we extracted from the Stats class, namely the
gravity, jump_strength, and speed variables. Then, export a variable that will carry
the reference to an instance of the Stats class instead:
class_name BasicMovingCharacter2D
extends CharacterBody2D
signal direction_changed(new_direction: int)
signal jumped
@export var stats: Stats
@export var direction = 0:
    set(new_direction):
        direction = new_direction
        direction_changed.emit(new_direction)

221

222

Creating a Power-Up System with the Decorator Pattern

2.

Then, we should fix all the errors pointing out the missing variables. To fix them, we will prepend
the stats variable. The _physics_process() callback and the jump() methods should
look like the following code:
func _physics_process(delta):
    velocity.y += stats.gravity * delta
    velocity.x = direction * stats.speed
    move_and_slide()

func jump() -> void:
    if is_on_floor():
        velocity.y = -stats.jump_strength
        jumped.emit()

3.

Now, we need to look at other classes. Moving on to the r e s : / / R e c i p e s /
WallJumpingCharacter2D/WallJumpingCharacter2D.gd file, we will do the
same, removing the slide_gravity_factor, horizontal_gravity, max_slide_
speed, and wall_jump_strength variables. Just as in the previous step, we will fix the
errors that will appear by prepending the stats variable where there were only references to
these variables we deleted.

My padawans, I will allow you to do the tedious job of refactoring the following classes by implementing
the same approach I highlighted in the previous instructions, removing the variable declarations of
the properties we extracted to the Stats class when necessary, and prepending the stats reference
where there were direct references to the variables carried by the Stats class. For that, I recommend
you use the built-in text editor Find in Files feature. Look for references to the variables declared in
the Stats class and fix the ones that don’t use the stats property reference yet. In the following
figure, you can see that we have references to the lives property in the KingPigPlayer2D class,
for instance. Note that references to this variable appear in other classes as well, but they are not related
to the BasicMovingCharacter2D class, so we don’t need to refactor them.

Implementing the Decorator pattern in Godot Engine

Figure 11.3 – The search results in every GDScript file in the project for the “lives” keyword

By doing that, we now have a refactored system that uses the Stats class to access attributes used to
perform their behavior. Now, instead of carrying the reference to the movement speed, jump height,
attack strength, gravity, and other variables, the BasicMovingCharacter2D classes will be able to
access these values from an encapsulated Stats object. This is fundamental for the implementation
of our Decorator class, as we will now be able to change the reference to this Stats object, allowing
us to point it to a decorated version of the Stats object. For that, in the next section, we will create
the StatsDecorator class, which is our project’s implementation of the Decorator pattern to
create a power-up system.

223

224

Creating a Power-Up System with the Decorator Pattern

Creating our StatsDecorator class
We use our abstraction capabilities to understand that we can treat the various attributes of our
BasicMovingCharacter2D class and its subclasses as objects instead of primitive types such as
integers, strings, Booleans, and floats. Of course, at some point, we will have to use these types as they
are the building blocks of programming. However, as we add layers of abstractions, we can encapsulate
them into object types that we can have more control over. By doing that, we were able to create setter
and getter methods for the properties and encapsulate them, leaving the user classes of our Stats
class unaware of what happens when they set or get a value. This is important because, with that, we
maintained the previous contract. In this section, we will take advantage of this new interface and
implement the Decorator pattern, adding new behaviors in runtime to our Stats objects.
The whole idea now is that we will create a subclass of the Stats class that will use polymorphism to
override the setter and getter methods doing extra procedures before setting or returning the Stats
properties. Since we will implement the Decorator pattern, we will wrap an actual Stats object and
delegate the call to this object either before or after the extra procedures.
There’s a small caveat due to how game engines work and to the approach we used of overriding setter
and getter methods. In Godot Engine, these methods are called when the object is deserialized and
instanced. The problem is that nodes are only ready and available once they are inside the SceneTree
object being processed, or in other words, after Godot Engine runs its _ready() callback method.
This is not in sync with the step where the setter and getter methods are called. Every time we use
a node inside a setter or getter method, it will throw a null instance error, because the node object
won’t be available. As a result, we will need to not only delegate calls to the decorated Stats object
but also check whether one is available. If a decorated object is not present, we will access and return
the properties of the StatsDecorator instance instead. This will ultimately allow it to function
as a simple Stats object, which goes slightly beyond the intended scope of the Decorator pattern.
However, with that said, you will understand that the pattern itself is simple. We just had to adapt
it to our context, which is pretty much what we always have to do with all patterns. We just need
to understand their concept and then abstract and implement them for the specific problem we are
solving, if the problem gives signs that it can be solved by implementing a given pattern.
With this disclaimer, let’s get started! Open the project inside the 11.creating-power-upswith-decorators/01.start/ folder and let’s implement the following steps:
1.

Using the FileSystem dock, create a new folder inside the res://Actors/ folder called
Decorators. We will do that inside this folder because both the BumpingPig and
KingPigPlayer2D classes will be able to use Decorators.

2.

Then, inside the res://Actors/Decorators/ folder, we will create a new script that
will inherit from the Stats class and we will call it StatsDecorator.

Implementing the Decorator pattern in Godot Engine

Figure 11.4 – Creating the StatsDecorator script

3.

Within the StatsDecorator script, we will first declare its trademark property, which
is a property that holds a reference to another instance of its superclass. In this case, that’s a
Stats instance. Yep, a Decorator is an object that carries a reference to an object of the same
type. This can be confusing to some people, but at this point you already understand why we
do that, right? We need to wrap an object but keep all its user classes thinking they are still
interacting with it, so our wrapper needs to maintain all the contracts of the wrapped object.
For that, we make it inherit the wrappee’s class. Let’s call this variable decorated_stats:
extends Stats
class_name StatsDecorator
var decorated_stats: Stats

4.

Now comes yet another bit of tedious work. We now need to override all the setter and getter
methods we created in the Stats class and make them delegate their call to the decorated_
stats object. Remember that we have a caveat here: if the decorated_stats variable is
currently set as null, we will perform the procedure on the StatsDecorator instance.
Otherwise, we delegate to the object wrapped in the decorated_stats variable. Again, I’ll
use the setter and the getter method that encapsulates the gravity property as an example,
but you can replicate the same idea on every other setter and getter method. For the setter
methods, we will check whether decorated_stats is populated with an object. If it isn’t,
we will use the super() method, passing the same arguments to use the Stats class setter

225

226

Creating a Power-Up System with the Decorator Pattern

procedures instead. This will maintain the StatsDecorator behavior consistent with its
superclass. Otherwise, we delegate the call to the decorated_stats object:
func set_gravity(new_gravity: float) -> void:
    if not decorated_stats:
        super(new_gravity)
    else:
        decorated_stats.gravity = new_gravity

5.

As for the getter method, we will use a ternary operator to return the decoratated_stats
variable’s value if there’s a decorated_stats object; otherwise, we call the super()
method. We use a ternary operator here to avoid having a conditional statement with two
returning variables explicitly declared, which is ugly and usually a bad practice. An alternative
would be to create a new local variable that would store the value of the decorated_stats
object’s variable or the value returned by calling the super() method and then returning
this variable at the end. However, I personally prefer to use ternary operators for simplicity in
this specific case:
func get_gravity() -> float:
    return decorated_stats.gravity if
      decorated_stats else super()

Well, again to save space, I’ll ask you to implement steps 4 and 5 on all the remaining setter and getter
methods to ensure the proper behavior for our StatsDecorator class. Again, I want to emphasize
that this is not a necessary step to implement the Decorator pattern. Usually, we would just create an
abstract or an interface class to override the necessary methods on its wrapped object.
The main reason we are doing all that is because the main use of Stats objects is accessing their
properties, as they don’t have any concrete method. Since we will wrap the Stats objects, we need
their user class to access the Stats object properties’ values, and not the decorator object’s values.
This is a way to bypass the StatsDecorator object default values unless we access a variable that
has its value altered by the StatsDecorator behavior.
For instance, if a character currently has one life and we wrap its Stats object with a StatsDecorator
instance, failing to delegate the getter method call to the original Stats object would result in the
character suddenly having three lives, even if we are only decorating its movement speed. Got it? I
hope so because after overriding all the setter and getter methods from the Stats class, we now have
our very own first decorator. Congratulations! With that, we can start to play around and test whether
our system will work. In the next section, we will create a class that will use the StatsDecorator
object to decorate Stats. By doing that, we will maintain the user classes of the Stats class
unaware of the existence of the StatsDecorator class since a brand new class will be responsible
for decorating Stats objects.

Implementing the Decorator pattern in Godot Engine

Wrapping Stats with the power-ups Singleton
Remember our friendly neighborhood Singleton pattern? We are going to revise it. In the game
designer’s request, they mention we need to manage the duration of the power-ups, and this is not a
responsibility of the KingPigPlayer2D, Diamond, or StatsDecorator class. So we will create
a new class for that, which the Diamond class can use to add power-ups to the player’s character. To
make that, every Diamond node must refer to the same instance of the power-ups manager class
because the power-ups are supposed to stack. The Singleton pattern is the perfect solution for that.
This is what we will do in this section! So let’s open the project inside the 11.creating-powerups-with-decorators/01.start/ folder and perform the following steps:
1.

Create a new scene and use a Node instance as the root node. Rename it to PowerUps.

2.

Add a Timer node as a child of the PowerUps node. We will use this timer as the buff duration.
We are using a default duration for every power-up so it’s safe to use a global timer with a default
duration. However, if the game designer requires that each buff has its own duration, we will have to
add a duration property to the StatsDecorator class. Set the Timer Wait Time property to 3.

3.

Save the scene as res://Game/PowerUps/PowerUps.tscn and attach a new script to
the PowerUps node, saving it as res://Game/PowerUps/PowerUps.gd.

4.

Then, in the script, let’s start by creating a variable to store a reference to the Timer node
using the @onready annotation:
extends Node
class_name PowerUps
@onready var timer := $Timer

5.

It should also store a reference to the KingPigPlayer2D instance. It will wrap the Stats object:
extends Node
class_name PowerUps
@onready var timer := $Timer
var player: KingPigPlayer2D

6.

Since we will need to manage the StatsDecorator life cycle, we need to store them in an
array so we are able to order and remove them accordingly:
extends Node
class_name PowerUps
@onready var timer := $Timer
var player: KingPigPlayer2D
var decorators_list: Array[StatsDecorator] = []

227

228

Creating a Power-Up System with the Decorator Pattern

7.

With that, we can create a method that user classes can use to add a new power-up to the
player. Let’s call this method add_power_up(). It will ask for a decorator as an argument:
func add_power_up(decorator: StatsDecorator) -> void:

8.

Inside the add_power_up() method, we will first inject the player’s current Stats instance
as the decorator object’s decorated_stats property value. This effectively wraps the
Stats object inside the decorator instance:
func add_power_up(decorator: StatsDecorator) -> void:
    decorator.decorated_stats = player.stats

9.

However, part of what constitutes the Decorator pattern is also substituting the wrapped object
with the wrapper decorator object, making it so that the object using the previous wrappee
instance will now use the Decorator instead, without even realizing it. For that, we set the
player.stats variable to become the decorator instance instead:
func add_power_up(decorator: StatsDecorator) -> void:
    decorator.decorated_stats = player.stats
    player.stats = decorator

10. After that, we append the current decorator to the decorators_list variable and call the
start() method on the timer instance, so when it times out, we remove the power-up:
func add_power_up(decorator: StatsDecorator) -> void:
    decorator.decorated_stats = player.stats
    player.stats = decorator
    decorators_list.append(decorator)
    timer.start()

11. Speaking of removing the power-up, we need to create a method for that as well. Let’s call
it remove_power_up():
func remove_power_up() -> void:

12. Inside the remove_power_up() method, we will check whether there is any power-up in
our decorators_list array by checking whether its size is greater than 0:
func remove_power_up() -> void:
    if decorators_list.size() > 0:

Implementing the Decorator pattern in Godot Engine

13. If there are any decorators in the list, we will pop the first one using the pop_back() method.
In other words, we will remove the power-ups in a first-in first-out fashion. We will store the
popped decorator in a variable called decorator as well:
func remove_power_up() -> void:
    if decorators_list.size() > 0:
        var decorator := decorators_list
          .pop_back() as StatsDecorator

14. Then, we must unwrap the decorated Stats object. For that, we will set the player.stats
variable to decorator.decorated_stats, effectively resetting the wrapping. At this
point, you must have realized that we can wrap the StatsDecorator object with another
StatsDecorator object since they also inherit from the Stats class, right? This is exactly
what the Decorator pattern allows us to do. By wrapping wrappers, we can add virtually infinite
extra behaviors to the wrappee in runtime. Ultimately, our remove_power_up() method
will set the player.stats variable back to the original Stats object:
func remove_power_up() -> void:
    if decorators_list.size() > 0:
        var decorator := decorators_list
          .pop_back() as StatsDecorator
        player.stats = decorator.decorated_stats

15. If there’s nothing inside the decorators_list array, we will call the stop() method on
the timer node so we don’t try to remove decorators when there are none:
func remove_power_up() -> void:
    if decorators_list.size() > 0:
        var decorator := decorators_list
          .pop_back() as StatsDecorator
        player.stats = decorator.decorated_stats
    else:
        timer.stop()

16. Speaking of the timer node, we will use its timeout signal to call the remote_power_up()
method. For that, let’s use the Inspector and connect the timeout signal to a callback method
called _on_timer_timeout().

229

230

Creating a Power-Up System with the Decorator Pattern

Figure 11.5 – Connecting the timer’s timeout signal to the PowerUps’ _on_timer_timeout() method

17. Then, in the _on_timer_timeout() method, let’s call the remove_power_ups()
method. With that, our PowerUps class is done:
func _on_timer_timeout() -> void:
    remove_power_up()

18. With the PowerUps class in place, we now have to turn it into a singleton that both the
KingPigPlayer2D and the Diamond class can access. For that, let’s open the Project Settings
menu. In the Globals tab, let’s create a new Autoload in the Autoload tab by loading the res://
Game/PowerUps/PowerUps.tscn scene. Instead of calling it PowerUps, which would generate
some errors because the class name is already PowerUps, we will call it PowerUpsSingleton.

Implementing the Decorator pattern in Godot Engine

Figure 11.6 – Creating PowerUpsSingleton using the Project Settings | Autoload menu

Well, with that, we have our power-up system in place so that other classes can use it. We have a class
that is capable of wrapping the player’s attributes and changing them as we wish. For that, we first need
to inject the player into it. So, let’s open the res://Actors/KingPig/KingPigPlayer2D.
gd script and add inside its _ready() callback method a line setting the PowerUpsSingleton.
player variable to be the KingPigPlayer2D instance using the self keyword:
func _ready() -> void:
    for command in $Commands.get_children():
        command.receiver = self
    PowerUpsSingleton.player = self

With the PowerUps and KingPigPlayer2D classes ready, we can wrap the KingPigPlayer2D
class’ Stats instance with decorators, stacking them up their effects. We can also remove them as
their buff duration ends. Now we need to add this functionality to the Diamond class, allowing it to
pass any type of power-up, or rather StatsDecorator objects, to the PowerUps class, and that’s
what we are going to do in the next section!

231

232

Creating a Power-Up System with the Decorator Pattern

Using Diamond objects to add power-ups
The missing piece in our puzzle is how we are going to use the power-up system we just built. It’s all
set and any class can use it. The game designer asked us to add this functionality to the Diamond
objects first, so let’s start there. In this section, we will give Diamond objects the ability to wrap the
player’s Stats object with a StatsDecorator by using PowerUpsSingleton. Then, we will
create some power-ups to test the system! To do that, let’s start by opening the res://Objects/
Diamond/Diamond.tscn scene and following these instructions:
1.

Open the Diamond node script. Let’s start by creating a variable that we will use as a reference to the
StatsDecorator instance that this Diamond node will request the PowerUpsSingleton
object to apply on the player’s Stats instance. For that, we will use the @export annotation
and make sure this variable will only accept StatsDecorator objects by typing it as such:
extends Node2D
class_name Diamond
@export var decorator: StatsDecorator

2.

Then, inside its func _on_interactive_area_2d_interaction_available()
callback method, we will add a line calling the PowerUpsSingleton.add_power_up()
method, passing the Diamond object’s decorator object before performing the other
procedures in this method:
func _on_interactive_area_2d_interaction_available():
    PowerUpsSingleton.add_power_up(decorator)
    score_points.increase_score()
    queue_free()

3.

Then, we will create a default StatsDecorator resource to prevent getting null reference
errors. For that, we will use the Inspector. Right-click the Diamond Decorator property and
from the drop-down menu, select the New StatsDecorator option.

Implementing the Decorator pattern in Godot Engine

Figure 11.7 – Creating a new StatsDecorator instance using the Decorator property drop-down menu

4.

There’s something we need to do to prevent getting a stack overflow error. Remember, the
Decorator pattern wraps an object that is of the same type as its own. In Godot Engine, objects
of the Resource type have shared references unless we make them unique. This means that if
we leave things as they currently are, we will run into the situation where a StatsDecorator
object will wrap itself as soon as the player collects two Diamond objects. Since we delegate
calls to the decorated_stats object inside the StatsDecorator object, it will be
delegating calls to itself in an infinite loop. To prevent that, we will make the Decorator
variable’s StatsDecorator object unique to every instance of the Diamond scene. For
that, left-click the newly created StatsDecorator resource and in the Resource category,
toggle on the Local to Scene property.

233

234

Creating a Power-Up System with the Decorator Pattern

Figure 11.8 – Checking the Diamond object’s StatsDecorator Local to Scene property

With that, our system is working, but we won’t see any concrete changes in the gameplay as we pick up
Diamond objects. So let’s create some concrete power-ups! In res://Actors/Decorators/,
create a new script that inherits the StatsDecorator class. Let’s call it SpeedStatsDecorator,
as in the following figure:

Implementing the Decorator pattern in Godot Engine

Figure 11.9 – Creating the SpeedStatsDecorator script

Inside this script, we will make sure that we declare its class_name field so that we have it available
as an option on the Diamond Decorator property’s drop-down menu. Then, we will serialize a property
that will represent how much the player’s movement speed will be multiplied when they pick this
power-up. Let’s call this variable speed_multiplier:
extends StatsDecorator
class_name SpeedStatsDecorator
@export var speed_multiplier := 1.1

Then, since the speed is a variable the player will retrieve from its Stats instance, we can intercept this
request using the get_speed() getter method, returning the decorated_stats speed multiplied
by the speed_multiplier variable. Here, we need to use the same approach we did before where
we return the value with the effect applied if we have an object referenced in the decorated_stats
variable. Otherwise, we call the superclass’ implementation using the super() method:
extends StatsDecorator
class_name SpeedStatsDecorator
@export var speed_multiplier := 1.1
func get_speed() -> float:
    return decorated_stats.speed * speed_multiplier
if decorated_stats else super()

235

236

Creating a Power-Up System with the Decorator Pattern

That’s it! Our first power-up is done. Now, how can we implement it in our game? Well, there are
several ways. For instance, you can create a new inherited scene using the Diamond scene as the
base scene and instead of using an abstract StatsDecorator object on its Decorator property,
it uses a SpeedStatsDecorator object. However, we will use a simpler method here. Open the
res://Levels/Level1/Level1.tscn scene and pick a Diamond node. From there, create
a new SpeedStatsDecorator object on its Decorator property, as in the following figure:

Figure 11.10 – Creating a new SpeedStatsDecorator object using
the Diamond2 Decorator property drop-down menu

I will suggest that you pick at least three Diamond instances and do the same so we can see the effects
of stacking. Now, if you test the scene, you will see that the KingPigPlayer2D instance’s Stats
node gets wrapped when it touches Diamond instances. You can feel its movement speed increasing
when it picks up the Diamond object with the SpeedStatsDecorator instance. Pretty nice, right?
Well, this is a very versatile system. For instance, in the project available in the 11.creatingpower-ups-with-decorators/02.finished repository folder, we can see other examples
such as the AttackStatsDecorator object that adds a bonus to the player’s attack_strength
variable. In particular, the InvulnerabilityStatsDecorator object is interesting because
it uses the set_life() setter method, overriding it only to change the life property if the new
value is greater than the current value, ultimately preventing the player from losing health as long as
the power-up is running.

Summary

That said, experiment a bit with this system, and try to create some debuffs as well. Maybe prevent the
player from hitting the enemies to simulate a ghost form? Remember, you can add multiple effects!
Maybe you can create some basic effects and then combine them to create more complex effects
depending on what you want to achieve. Try to attach StatsDecorator objects to other game
objects, such as a burning effect when the Bomb objects explode and hurt the player. The burning
effect could make the player move slower and jump lower while also making it deal more damage. Be
creative! However, it’s time to wrap up this chapter. In the next section, let’s see what we learned and
highlight some core concepts we saw throughout this chapter.

Summary
In this chapter, we learned about the Decorator pattern and its application in creating dynamic
power-up systems for games. The Decorator pattern is a structural design pattern that allows us to
wrap objects with additional functionalities at runtime without altering their underlying code, as we
learned in this chapter. This approach adheres to the open-closed principle, which promotes extending
functionality while keeping the original class intact. By applying this pattern, we learned that we can
flexibly add or remove features to an object during the game, such as modifying player attributes,
including movement speed, jump height, and attack strength when power-ups are collected.
We explored how the Decorator pattern works by wrapping a base object, in this case, the Stats
class, with new behaviors through decorator objects. The decorators act as wrappers, allowing us to
stack multiple power-ups and apply their effects in different combinations. For instance, when a player
picks up a Diamond object that grants a speed boost, we can apply a SpeedStatsDecorator
object to modify the player’s speed. If the player collects multiple power-ups, these decorators stack,
allowing us to increase the effects dynamically. We covered this in detail in this chapter.
A key challenge we addressed was managing the life cycle of these power-ups, particularly their duration
and stacking effects. To handle this, we implemented a singleton based on the PowerUps class that
tracks and manages active power-ups. The PowerUpsSingleton object ensures that buffs such as
increased speed or invulnerability are applied and removed in an orderly fashion, preventing overlap
and conflicts between multiple decorators. This system makes it easy to scale the power-up system
and manage the player’s attributes without burdening the game’s core logic.
We also tackled some common pitfalls of the Decorator pattern, such as maintaining the integrity of
the decorator stack and preventing recursive calls that could lead to stack overflow errors. By making
each decorator unique to its respective instance, we ensured that the system behaves consistently
without errors. The flexibility of the Decorator pattern also allowed us to experiment with various
power-ups and debuffs, making it a highly versatile system for our game project.
As we finish this chapter, we have a solid foundation for implementing power-up systems in games
using the Decorator pattern with the available features in Godot Engine. In the next chapter, we will
create a cross-fade background music singleton that seamlessly cross-fades between the current and
next background music track.

237

12
Cross-Fading Transitions with
the Service Locator Pattern
In games, many classes use a single class to perform common procedures. This is known as a service
class. For instance, in Godot Engine, we have the Input class, a singleton that offers services related
to input that any class can access. Another example is the Engine class, which provides data about
the very engine itself to any class interested in knowing it; the Engine class is also a singleton. When
we have singletons that provide services, especially if these services are provided through layers of
indirection to other classes, we call them service locators. Well, this is not precisely what a service
locator is, but it’s a way of understanding its purpose.
In this chapter, we will implement a common case for implementing the Service Locator pattern:
audio, specifically, music. There is no reason to implement multiple instances of a class that plays
music. This is undesirable, as multiple songs overlapping each other is, usually, unpleasant. At the
same time, music is an aspect of the game that changes all the time based on multiple events, so a
variety of classes need to access this service. This is a good use case for the Service Locator pattern.
We will discuss the difference between the Service Locator pattern and its cousin, the Singleton pattern,
by first understanding what the Service Locator pattern is and how it can be implemented. While the
Singleton pattern is often used to implement the Service Locator pattern, the two are not exactly the
same, and we’ll explore why that’s the case.
To make things less abstract and help us visualize the value proposition of the Service Locator pattern,
we will see some common use cases that we can spot in games so we can have some scenarios to
compare it and gain insights about its usefulness.
After that, we will implement it in our project by understanding our fictional game designer’s request,
pinpointing the core issues, and abstracting them to find potential solutions.

240

Cross-Fading Transitions with the Service Locator Pattern

In this chapter, we will cover the following topics:
• Understanding the Service Locator pattern
• Spotting use cases for the Service Locator pattern
• Implementing the Service Locator pattern in Godot

Technical requirements
To follow along with this chapter, open the project files in the 12.cross-fading-withservice-locator/01.start/ folder. If you face any difficulties or come across errors or
bugs while working through the Implementing the Service Locator pattern in Godot section, consult
the files in the 12.cross-fading-with-service-locator/02.finished/ folder. Any
issues can be reported on the repository’s issue tracker via this link: https://github.com/
PacktPublishing/Game-Development-Patterns-with-Godot-4/issues.
If you haven’t downloaded the repository files yet, you can find them here: https://github.
com/PacktPublishing/Game-Development-Patterns-with-Godot-4.
Let’s start with exploring the essential concepts of the Service Locator pattern, including its purpose,
features, and common use cases in Godot, ensuring we make full use of its built-in functions while
adding our own custom touch to achieve the chapter’s purpose.

Understanding the Service Locator pattern
The Service Locator pattern is a creational design pattern, similar to the Singleton pattern. It provides
a centralized point of access where user classes can obtain services without being tightly coupled to
the specific classes that implement those services. This allows for more flexibility and decoupling in
the system’s architecture.
For instance, instead of instancing AudioStreamPlayer2D nodes to play sound effects, a node
could rely on a SoundEffectService class that would instantiate, play, and handle the life cycle
of the AudioStreamPlayer2D node that would play the requested sound effect. This adds a
layer of indirection between the user class and the concrete service class, effectively decoupling them.
By providing a centralized registry where any class can retrieve a given service, the Service Locator
pattern allows for loose coupling between different components in the system. It’s especially useful if
you think about protecting your code base from external changes in an API. For instance, if Godot
Engine changes the interface of the AudioStreamPlayer2D node instead of updating many
classes, we would only have to change the implementation details of our sound effect’s service locator
class, maintaining its interface and its contract with other classes.

Understanding the Service Locator pattern

This approach is also interesting to remove common responsibilities from classes and centralize
them into a single one. For instance, instead of each object in our game’s code base knowing about
the AudioStreamPlayer2D.play() method and the AudioStreamPlayer.finished
signal to handle playing a sound effect and freeing the instance once the sound effect finishes playing,
we can move this responsibility entirely to a service locator that would handle everything and would
offer a simpler interface for user classes, encapsulating the implementation details about how the
sound effect life cycle works, for instance.
One common discussion about the Service Locator pattern is in regard to how it differs from the
Singleton pattern, as both centralize access to shared resources. However, they differ a lot when you
understand their foundations, principles, and intent. While the Singleton pattern aims to provide a
unique instance of a class to user classes, so that they all mutate the same object’s state and are all
aware of such state, the Service Locator pattern aims to provide a single point of access to a given
service. Typically, the easiest way to do that is by using a singleton as such a point of access, but it can
be a static class, or we can even achieve that through dependency injection, by injecting instances
of a service locator on user classes. Note that, differently from the Singleton pattern, having a single
instance of a service locator is not mandatory, as long as the class itself can be used as a centralized
provider of a service.
For instance, the Input and Engine classes in Godot Engine are good examples of the Service
Locator pattern implemented using the Singleton pattern. They offer specific services globally to any
class interested in their services without having to pass references around. At the same time, different
from a singleton, their state, especially the Engine instance, with very rare exceptions, is not meant
to be mutated. In that sense, they just provide a service to user classes, and don’t necessarily alter their
state and don’t necessarily need to know about their current state. To make it clearer, there is no reason
why we need to mutate the Input class state if we use it as a hub to access the state of input methods.
On top of helping us with decoupling classes and centralizing services, the Service Locator pattern
also helps us by simplifying tests and modularity. By centralizing services within a single class, we can
test different implementation approaches and new behaviors to the system knowing that this won’t
affect other classes and that the ServiceLocator class itself will be the only class we will need to
fix or update. This also allows us to make logging easier; for instance, if we want to create a custom
monitor in Godot Engine to monitor how many sound effects we create throughout a play run, we
can make it in a single place and remove it in a single place as well.
Now that you understand the differences between the Service Locator and the Singleton patterns, how
we typically use the Service Locator pattern, and its value proposition, let’s try to find some good use
cases for it so that it becomes clear in our heads when it is applicable. In the next section, we will spot
some common features in games that can benefit from implementing the Service Locator pattern.

241

242

Cross-Fading Transitions with the Service Locator Pattern

Spotting use cases for the Service Locator pattern
As a versatile pattern, the Service Locator pattern can be implemented in many systems in our game.
Since it is meant to be a centralized point of access to a given service, we can apply it to a variety of
situations. Something we should keep in mind is that making many classes rely on a single instance of
a class, like in the Singleton pattern, can be dangerous. For instance, if, for some reason, this instance
is removed at some point, all the other instances of classes that depended on it will be broken. This is
less likely to happen when we have multiple instances with short life cycles. Also, the fact that many
user classes rely on a single class is a double-edged sword since if we decide to make a change to said
class, we will break all its user classes. That said, in this section, we will explore common use cases
for the Service Locator pattern in games.
Localization is an interesting system in games. We need to ensure that every element that needs to be
localized will fetch its appropriate version upon loading the game and also update dynamically if the
player decides to change the language settings while playing. This is a good use case for the Service
Locator pattern; when a class initializes, it fetches its data, and in Godot Engine’s case, this can be a
Resource object, containing all the localized versions of its content, including image, text, and audio.
In this example, LocalizationService could be the class providing the localized files to all other
classes that could simply use a LocalizationService.get_localized_resource()
method, passing a string or integer as an ID to get the specific resource for the requesting class.
As we saw previously, handling inputs is another good use case for the Service Locator pattern, as
Godot Engine itself does that. But we could go a little bit further and make a class, maybe a singleton,
that would be customized for our game. For instance, I do that to check for specific mouse events to
check for gestures that are relevant to entities in my game. This allows me to create and emit signals
and subscribe some entities to events such as Gestures.swiped_left, Gestures.cricle_
drawn, and Gestures.pinched_inwards. In this case, the service of recognizing gestures is
located by the Gestures locator, which uses the built-in Input singleton to detect when the player
managed to draw a relevant gesture.
In many game engines, such as Godot and Unity, we have multiple game states that we typically call
scenes. To transit between these scenes, we can make use of a Service Locator pattern to handle all the
necessary steps that such transition needs, such as a loading screen or specific transition effects such as
fade in and out. In Godot Engine, I used to implement that for my games as well: an Autoload node
that uses a CanvasLayer node to play transitions and load the next scenes using get_tree().
change_scene_to_file().
Saving and loading game data is a fundamental feature to implement if we want to maintain the player’s
progression through game sessions. Usually, save files are populated with thousands of pieces of data
about the game state that must be replicated once the player loads the game again. This is done by
allowing objects to feed the saved files with relevant data, and for that, they need a central point of
access that will perform the service of handling and managing the saved file, ultimately storing it in the
player’s disk. As you can imagine, this is yet another excellent use case for the Service Locator pattern.

Implementing the Service Locator pattern in Godot Engine

Finally, and this is our hook, handling audio is stereotypically a good use case for the Service Locator
pattern, especially when it is used to handle music. Playing multiple songs at the same time is usually
not desired in games. But making transitions between songs is! For instance, if the player engages in
battle, we can change the current background music to match the fast-paced battle. Or if the player
enters an area where it’s necessary to perform stealthy actions, we can change the music in runtime
to adapt to that. Changing music to play the current level’s theme is also common. And for all that,
we use different parts and components of the game, but all of them need to use the same service to
handle music transitions and management, thus a good opportunity for a service locator!
Now that you have had a glance at some concrete use cases for the Service Locator pattern, it’s safe
to assume that the concept is starting to take shape in your head, right? Well, fear not; if this isn’t the
case, with the next section, it will be! We will get yet another feature request from our game designer
and we will understand how to implement the Service Locator pattern in our project to allow the game
designer to make background music transitions that will allow the game to adapt its atmosphere to
the feeling that the designer wants to convey using the proper music!

Implementing the Service Locator pattern in Godot Engine
The Service Locator pattern is a simple pattern conceptually, as we saw in this chapter. It essentially provides
a wrapper class for common services in our game’s code base, allowing user classes to decouple from
repetitive procedures, delegating them to the Service Locator. To make it clear again, this pattern can be
implemented in many ways: as a static class, as a dependency injected on the user class upon initialization,
and as a globally accessible instance. In this section, we will take our fictional game designer’s request and see
the proper approach to solve their demand, and, based on that, we will use Godot Engine’s built-in features
to implement this useful pattern in our project. That said, let’s take a look at the game designer’s request.
“Hey hey!
It’s your friend, the game designer!
You know, that power-up thing was amazing! It took me some time to understand that it’s like one of
those matryoshka dolls, or an onion, where we keep on adding layers of the same thing to stack properties.
Pretty clever!
As I was playing with those diamonds, I figured that we are about to get into some world design, adding
some multi-layered atmosphere to the game. I thought about that because I was playing with the Doors
system and I made a secret room, to which I thought it would be cool to have a stealthy song playing as
we enter it.
This led me to the realization that we don’t have any background music yet! It’s fundamental to create
a living world for our game that we have themed music playing. Not only that, I think we will need to
have multiple pieces of music playing based on different situations in our game: when players engage in
combat with a boss enemy, when players enter a secret room, when players reach specific areas of a level
such as the end of the level, even different kinds of music depending on the very level itself; each level
needs its own theme, and each screen needs its own screen as well!

243

244

Cross-Fading Transitions with the Service Locator Pattern

But we can’t just make music play out of nowhere; since we will be changing music a lot based on different
situations, we will need a system that makes smooth transitions between these songs. Something like a
cross-fade, you know? Where the current music slowly fades out and the next song fades in.
Yeah, that sounds great!
That’s it, but I need that to happen in the simplest way possible, because if I have to manually animate
these transitions on each place where we will change the background music…it will be troublesome if I
decide to change how that works.
Let’s do it! We are close to having a functional prototype to promote some playtest sessions!
Thanks, yours truly.”
Isn’t it cute how the game designer is always pushing the project to new milestones with new features?
That matryoshka doll analogy for the Decorator pattern was very cool by the way. But let’s focus on
the current request.
Our game designer needs a system that they can use to make some kind of cross-fading between current
and newer songs. Well, if the request was just about playing background music, we would already have
this done by using an AudioStreamPlayer singleton. In this case, it needs to be a singleton due
to the cleanup that Godot Engine does when we load new scenes. We talk about that in Chapter 5.
However, the requested feature is more complex than simply playing songs. It also needs to fade them
in and out. On top of that, many parts of our code base will need to perform such a procedure, which
is a typical example of a service. Well, at this point, it’s not a secret that the Service Locator will be the
solution to this demand. But before we dive into action, there are some things we should understand
about this pattern so we are mindful when using it.
Besides being one of the simplest design patterns around, it can be tricky to use the Service Locator
correctly. Being able to have the discernment about when to use it and when to simply turn a service
into a component and use dependency injection to supply such service to user classes, for example,
is key to preventing abusing this pattern.
One significant drawback of the Service Locator pattern is that it often performs operations that can
interfere with instance creation and the management of instance references, potentially leading to issues
with instancing and storing object references correctly. If we are not cautious with how we play with
that, a user class may reference an instance that got freed from memory for some reason, ultimately
breaking our code. This is due to the typical Service Locator’s life cycle, as it is always available and
locates services on demand.

Implementing the Service Locator pattern in Godot Engine

Because the Service Locator is a creational pattern that takes out the responsibility of handling
dependencies on user classes, we also need to be aware of the fact that we are coupling these user
classes to the Service Locator itself, making it a dynamic dependency that will need to be available
everywhere together with its user classes, this includes other projects. So we should always be careful
about that; this is also true of the Singleton pattern. This is why people usually advocate for dependency
injection over the Service Locator.
So why are we going to use it here? Because the specific scenario of playing music, where multiple
classes can modify the currently playing track, is an ideal case for applying this pattern, as it presents
minimal drawbacks. That said, in the following sections, we will implement our BackgroundMusic
service locator to allow anything in our code base to fade in new songs on our project.

Creating the BackgroundMusic Service Locator
At this point, we already understand that a Service Locator is nothing but a centralized service provider.
Some people go to extremes making a single monolithic service locator class with a variety of services:
UI animation, saving and loading settings, game state management, achievement management, and
so on. Instead, I recommend you create a Service Locator for every service you want to provide to
your code base. This way, porting it and maintaining it gets simpler.
In this section, we will create a service locator singleton that handles music transitions, fading out the
current song, and fading in the next song. For that, let’s follow these steps:
1.

Create a new scene using Node as the root node and rename it BackgroundMusic.

2.

Save the scene as res://Game/BackgroundMusic/BackgroundMusic.tscn.

3.

Add a new AudioStreamPlayer node as a child of the BackgroundMusic node.

4.

Toggle on the AudioStreamPlayer node’s Autoplay property so it starts playing as soon
as we enter the game.

5.

Then, as the default music, let’s pick the res://Assets/Juhani Junkala [Chiptune
Adventures] OGG/Juhani Junkala [Chiptune Adventures] 1. Stage
1.ogg file.

6.

Since the music will be pretty loud by default, let’s change the Volume dB property of
AudioStreamPlayer to -18 dB. The AudioStreamPlayer node settings should
be as follows:

245

246

Cross-Fading Transitions with the Service Locator Pattern

Figure 12.1 – The AudioStreamPlayer node properties in the Inspector

7.

Attach a script to the BackgroundMusic node and save it as res://Game/
BackgroundMusic/BackgroundMusicLocator.gd.

8.

Then, in the script we just created, let’s start by exporting a variable that will represent the
fading time between the current song and the next song with the default value of 0.3 seconds:
extends Node
class_name BackgroundMusicLocator
@export var fade_time := 0.3

9.

After that, we will create a variable to store the current AudioStreamPlayer instance playing
a song. As a starter, it will take the AudioStreamPlayer node we created in the scene, but
after playing a new song, this will change to the most recently created AudioStreamPlayer
instance instead:
extends Node
class_name BackgroundMusicLocator
@export var fade_time := 0.3
@onready var current_player:
  AudioStreamPlayer = $AudioStreamPlayer

Implementing the Service Locator pattern in Godot Engine

10. The major feature of this class is its capability of playing cross-fading songs. This is something
it will do automatically, so user classes only need to pass the AudioStream resource and,
optionally, a custom fade time to get what they need from this service. To do that, we will create
a method called play() that asks for AudioStream as an argument, and it will also accept
a custom fade time, but by default, it will use the fade_time property:
func play(new_song: AudioStream,
  _fade_time: = fade_time) -> void:

11. Inside this method, we will create a new AudioStreamPlayer and configure its stream
property to be the new song, set its volume down to just 10 percent using the linear_to_db()
built-in method, add it as a child of the BackgroundMusic node, and play the current song
by setting its playing property to true:
func play(new_song: AudioStream,
  _fade_time: = fade_time) -> void:
    var new_player := AudioStreamPlayer.new()
    new_player.stream = new_song
    new_player.volume_db = linear_to_db(0.1)
    add_child(new_player)
    new_player.playing = true

12. Then, we will seek the position of the current playing song, so the songs don’t keep on restarting
every time we play them. This will try to help with variety and prevent repetition when fading
songs, especially when fading back to the previous song when necessary:
func play(new_song: AudioStream,
  _fade_time: = fade_time) -> void:
    var new_player := AudioStreamPlayer.new()
    new_player.stream = new_song
    new_player.volume_db = linear_to_db(0.1)
    add_child(new_player)
    new_player.playing = true
    new_player.seek(current_player
      .get_playback_position())

13. At this point, we have two songs playing, which is not desirable. So we need to fade out the
volume of the currently playing song and fade in the newly created AudioStreamPlayer.
For that, we will create a new Tween using the get_tree().create_tween() method.
We will also store the volume of the current playing song to maintain the overall volume of
the songs:
    var target_volume = current_player.volume_db
    var tween := get_tree().create_tween()

247

248

Cross-Fading Transitions with the Service Locator Pattern

14. Then, we will call the Tween.tween_property() method on AudioStreamPlayer
but on current_player, we will tween it down to 0.0 using the linear_to_db()
built-in method and the _fade_time argument:
    var target_volume = current_player.volume_db
    var tween := get_tree().create_tween()
    tween.tween_property(current_player,
      "volume_db", linear_to_db(0.0), _fade_time)
    tween.tween_property(new_player, "volume_db",
      target_volume, _fade_time)

15. Since the old AudioStreamPlayer is essentially muted after this tween is finished, we will wait
for the Tween.finished signal to be emitted and remove the old AudioStreamPlayer
from SceneTree. After that, we inject the new AudioStreamPlayer in the current_
player variable so it now becomes the current AudioStreamPlayer waiting for the next
cycle of cross-fading songs. The complete play() method implementation will be as follows:
    await tween.finished
    current_player.queue_free()
    current_player = new_player

The complete BackgroundMusicLocator class will be as follows:
extends Node
class_name BackgroundMusicLocator
@export var fade_time := 0.3
@onready var current_player:
  AudioStreamPlayer = $AudioStreamPlayer
func play(new_song: AudioStream,
  _fade_time: = fade_time) -> void:
    var new_player := AudioStreamPlayer.new()
    new_player.stream = new_song
    new_player.volume_db = linear_to_db(0.1)
    add_child(new_player)
    new_player.playing = true
    new_player.seek(current_player
      .get_playback_position())
    var target_volume = current_player.volume_db
    var tween := get_tree().create_tween()
    tween.tween_property(current_player,
      "volume_db", linear_to_db(0.0), _fade_time)
    tween.tween_property(new_player, "volume_db",
      target_volume, _fade_time)

Implementing the Service Locator pattern in Godot Engine

    await tween.finished
    current_player.queue_free()
    current_player = new_player

With this done and ready, we now need to make this service available globally so other classes can
take advantage of what we just implemented. For that, we will turn this scene into Autoload called
BackgroundMusic, as shown in the following figure:

Figure 12.2 – Autoload highlighting the newest created BackgroundMusic autoload

With that, we effectively made our class globally available, like a singleton. Here’s a good place to
mention a core difference between the Singleton pattern and the Service Locator pattern, now that
you understand what a service is. In Chapter 5, we implemented the Singleton pattern to be able to
maintain the global states of one specific system of our game per singleton. They were used as a bridge
between classes so that they all had access to consistent data that needed to be carried and available
to user classes of the same domain, for instance, the score-related classes. But the singleton itself (in
this case, the Score singleton) didn’t provide a general commonly used service; it was specific to the
score-related classes of our code base.
The Service Locator pattern, on the other hand, can spread its influence all over our code base as it
provides a centralized hub of commonly used services to many unrelated classes. This will become
clear as we move on to the next section where we are going to use the BackgroundMusic service
locator on multiple classes on our code base.

249

250

Cross-Fading Transitions with the Service Locator Pattern

Using the BackgroundMusic Service Locator
Now that we have a service located, it’s time to use it! In this section, we will make use of the
BackgroundMusic service locator to change the song playing in the background depending on
a variety of situations in our game. Let’s start from the beginning! The MainMenu scene is the first
thing the player will face when playing our game. Let’s get started with the steps:
1.

Open the res://Screens/MainMenu/MainMenu.tscn scene and open the script attached
to the root node. Then, add an exported variable of the AudioStream type so we can pick a
new song for MainMenu. Then, in the _ready() callback, call the BackgroundMusic.
play() method passing the exported variable we just created:
extends Control
const CONTROL_SETTINGS_FILE_PATH =
  "user://control_settings.json"
@export_file("*.tscn") var start_scene_path =
  "res://Levels/Level1.tscn"
@export_file("*.tscn") var controls_scene_path =
  "res://Interface/InputRemap/InputRemap.tscn"
@export var background_music: AudioStream
func _ready():
    $VBoxContainer/StartButton.grab_focus()
    load_input_map()
    BackgroundMusic.play(background_music)

2.

Then, drag and drop a piece of cool music to the Background Music property on the Inspector
panel. You can find a variety of songs in the res://Assets/ folder. I’m going to use res://
Assets/Juhani Junkala [Chiptune Adventures] OGG/Juhani Junkala
[Chiptune Adventures] 1. Stage 1.ogg for MainMenu. The following figure
showcases the new property in the Inspector panel with the song properly set:

Implementing the Service Locator pattern in Godot Engine

Figure 12.3 – The MainMenu scene’s Background Music property populated with an AudioStream file

3.

We can do the exact same thing on the res://Screens/InputRemap/InputRemap.tscn
scene, but, of course, using a different song. I used res://Assets/Juhani Junkala
[Chiptune Adventures] OGG/Juhani Junkala [Chiptune Adventures] 4.
Stage Select.ogg for this one. The changes in the script are as follows:
extends Control
const CONTROL_SETTINGS_FILE_PATH =
  "user://control_settings.json"
@export var background_music: AudioStream
@onready var fade :=
  $CanvasLayer/ColorRect/AnimationPlayer
func _ready():
    find_child("RemapButton").grab_focus()
    fade.play("fade_in")
    BackgroundMusic.play(background_music)

251

252

Cross-Fading Transitions with the Service Locator Pattern

4.

Next up, we can also do that to the Level class, as requested by the game designer, since
each level will have its own theme. Repeat the process and set a default song on the res://
Levels/Level.tscn scene. Since each level will have its own theme, we can change that
using the Inspector panel later on. The changes in the Level class script will be as follows:
class_name Level
extends Node2D
@export var background_music: AudioStream
@onready var player = $PlayerCharacter2D
@onready var fade =
  $CanvasLayer/ColorRect/AnimationPlayer
func _ready():
    player.global_position = find_child(TeleportData
      .target_portal_name).global_position
    player.fade_in()
    fade.play("fade_in")
    BackgroundMusic.play(background_music)

Now, something the game designer also asked for is some way to change the background music on
specific areas of the levels. For that, we can create a new Area2D node that will be responsible for
creating an atmosphere in specific parts of the level. We can call it AmbienceArea2D and all it is
going to do on top of carrying an AudioStream node is carry a reference to the previously playing
song so that when players leave it, the previous song that was playing before the players entered the
area will play again. Well, for that, let’s do the following:
1.

Create a new scene using an Area2D node as the root node and rename it AmbienceArea2D.

2.

Save the scene as res://Areas/AmbienceArea2D.tscn. We put it inside the res://
Areas/ folder because it is going to be used on areas inside a level.

3.

AmbienceArea2D is supposed to only interact with the player’s InteractionArea2D,
node so we will change its Collision Layer and Mask properties so it only looks for collisions
in the Interaction physics layer:

Implementing the Service Locator pattern in Godot Engine

Figure 12.4 – AmbienceArea2D’s Collision settings with no layers
and only the fourth bit of Mask toggled on

4.

Then, attach a new script to the AmbienceArea2D node and save it as res://Areas/
AmbienceArea2D.gd.

5.

In the script, we will export a variable to hold the song that should be played once the player
enters AmbienceArea2D:
extends Area2D
class_name AmbienceArea2D
@export var background_music: AudioStream

6.

We will also create a variable to store a reference to the previous song that was playing before
the player entered the area:
extends Area2D
class_name AmbienceArea2D
@export var background_music: AudioStream
var previous_background_music: AudioStream

7.

Then, we will use the editor to connect its area_entered and area_exited signals’
respective callbacks in the AmbienceArea2D script:

253

254

Cross-Fading Transitions with the Service Locator Pattern

Figure 12.5 – The AmbienceArea2D signals connected to their respective callbacks

8.

Back to the script; in the _on_area_entered() callback, we will store the currently
playing AudioStream node in previous_background_music and then play the new
song passing the background_music variable as an argument in the play() method
of BackgroundMusic:
func _on_area_entered(area: Area2D) -> void:
    previous_background_music =
      BackgroundMusic.current_player.stream
    BackgroundMusic.play(background_music)

9.

As for the _on_area_exited() callback, we will call BackgroundMusic’s play()
method, passing previous_background_music instead, effectively playing the previous
song once the player leaves the area:
func _on_area_exited(area: Area2D) -> void:
    BackgroundMusic.play(previous_background_music)

And that’s it! Now, we can use different songs once players enter specific areas in our game’s levels! If
you are curious about how we can use that, check out the res://Levels/Level1/Level1.
tscn scene where we have multiple AmbienceArea2D instances spread around the level setting
different moods depending on what we want to convey.

Summary

With that, we have multiple user classes all around our code base using the cross-fading background
music service we just created. We will now have to be cautious about how we maintain that throughout
the further development of our project! That said, let’s see what we learned in this important
advanced project!

Summary
In this chapter, we learned how to implement cross-fading transitions in background music using
the Service Locator pattern in Godot Engine. The Service Locator pattern is useful when we need to
centralize access to services in a way that decouples user classes from the specific implementations
of those services. We explored how the pattern provides a centralized access point to shared services,
making it easier for various parts of the game to perform operations such as playing or managing
background music without directly interacting with the underlying AudioStreamPlayer nodes.
The core of this chapter focused on creating a system that can handle smooth transitions between
background music tracks, a feature often needed in games to adapt the atmosphere based on
gameplay events. We began by designing a service locator class, BackgroundMusicLocator,
which was responsible for managing cross-fade transitions. This class dynamically controlled the
AudioStreamPlayer nodes, fading out the currently playing track while fading in the next one,
ensuring a smooth transition without sudden interruptions or overlapping sounds. The implementation
also handled music positioning, ensuring the new track continued seamlessly from where the previous
one left off.
We explored how the Service Locator pattern simplifies code by removing repetitive tasks from user
classes, allowing them to rely on a central service for playing and managing music. This decoupling
allows user classes to call simple methods to handle music transitions without worrying about the
underlying details of the management of AudioStreamPlayer. On top of that, the Service Locator
offers flexibility for future changes, as updating the music transition logic only requires changes in
one place, making it easier to maintain.
We also saw how we could implement specific cases where the service locator was used, such as
transitioning music in different areas of the game, including the main menu, individual levels, and
special locations within levels. For that, we created ambient zones with the AmbienceArea2D
custom node, where background music would change dynamically depending on the player’s location
in the game world. This added a new layer of interactivity and immersion, as music transitions helped
convey different moods and gameplay situations.
In the next chapter, we will explore how to enhance the game’s overall feel. We will implement a system
Event Queue pattern to store a temporary history of keystrokes, allowing for features such as input
buffering. This system will enable players to execute buffered jumps and other actions more smoothly,
preventing frustration if they press a key too early before an action gets registered.

255

13
Improving Game Feel with
the Event Queue Pattern
One fundamental aspect of a platformer game is the player’s movement. It is through this feature that
players can explore the game’s world and maneuver through the game’s obstacles, which is exactly
what a platformer game does.
Games under the action genre, like platformer games, are all about the player’s ability to deal with
time, especially their reaction time and hand-eye coordination. Precisely reacting to events in the
game world is fundamental in this genre and subgenres, but it is tricky to get it right.
Good game design isn’t about punishing players for not following our design exactly. Instead, it’s
about making them feel that they are making progress so that if they do something we strongly
discourage, we can apply appropriate consequences without it feeling unfair. In game design, this is
called forgiving design, where we offer many mechanisms for the player’s mistakes to help them get
into the real challenges.
You’ve probably already heard of the famous coyote jump, also known as coyote time, right? Where a
player can still perform a jump after just leaving the edge of a cliff. It’s inspired by that cartoonesque
moment where Wile E. Coyote from the Looney Tunes series chases Road Runner. At some point,
the character blindly runs off a cliff and floats for a moment until he realizes he is about to fall, and
only then does he fall. Based on that, many game designers implement what is known as coyote jump,
where, after falling from a cliff, the player has a very brief moment to still perform a jump. This helps
players reach further ground and pass through some challenges that were, ideally, meant to be done
by forcing the player to jump from the very limit of the cliff.

258

Improving Game Feel with the Event Queue Pattern

Forgiving design takes the perspective that players are not expected to be perfect but rather it’s
expected that they stay within a tolerance window. This boosts the game feel by allowing a greater
range of actions by the player that will still lead them to success even if they don’t do exactly what
the designers planned.
In this chapter, we will learn how to use the Event Queue pattern to create an input buffer that will
allow us to implement yet another forgiving design feature, known as jump buffering, to allow players
to compensate for small anticipations in their jumps and even compensate for some input lagging.
We are going to cover the following topics in this chapter:
• Understanding the Event Queue pattern
• Spotting use cases for the Event Queue pattern
• Implementing the Event Queue pattern in Godot

Technical requirements
To follow this chapter, access the project files in the 13.improving-game-feel-with-eventqueue/01.start/ folder. If you encounter any confusion, bugs, or errors while working through
the Implementing the Event Queue pattern in Godot section, refer to the files in the 13.improvinggame-feel-with-event-queue/02.finished/ folder. Any issues can be reported using
the issue tracker at https://github.com/PacktPublishing/Game-DevelopmentPatterns-with-Godot-4/issues.
If you haven’t downloaded the repository files yet, you can get them here: https://github.com/
PacktPublishing/Game-Development-Patterns-with-Godot-4.
We’ll start with exploring the key principles of the Event Queue pattern, including how it works, its
advantages, and how to effectively implement it in Godot to enhance game feel and responsiveness.

Understanding the Event Queue pattern
In most applications, it’s a common practice to abstract special “happenings” in the form of events.
For instance, when the player presses keys, when the game loop updates, when a button is pressed,
when a character reaches critical health, when the player talks to a non-playable character, when the
player loots an item, when the player defeats an enemy, and so on. We saw in Chapter 6 that we can
trigger these events as signals, and this is one of the most common approaches. It even leads to what is
known as the Event Bus pattern, another design pattern that uses a singleton to host signals that other
classes can emit. It’s a mix of the Singleton and the Observer pattern for event-driven architectures.

Understanding the Event Queue pattern

But emitting notifications, or signals, is not enough. Sometimes we need to store these events so we
can handle them later on. The Event Queue pattern is made exactly for that. I decided to put this
pattern in the Advanced Patterns part of this book due to its level of versatility. The pattern itself is
very simple; you create an array and store instances of events inside of it. An event can be anything,
as demonstrated in the previous paragraph.
It’s up to us to decide the relevant data that we want to store on each event. One good example of an
event system is Godot’s InputEvent class and subclasses. Since they are meant to represent input
events, there is essentially one main piece of information: the device that emitted the event. When we
get into subclasses, things get more interesting. For instance, InputEventKey provides information
about whether the input event is about the pressing or releasing of a key, which key it relates to, and
even whether it was pressed with other modifier keys, such as SHIFT or CTRL.
By implementing an event queue in our system, we are able to decouple these events’ creation from their
handling. This is crucial in complex systems, especially in games, where various subsystems generate
and respond to events such as user inputs, physics interactions, AI decisions, and rendering. The event
queue not only decouples the events from the classes and systems where the event happened, but it
also decouples them from the time these events happened, allowing us to do all sorts of manipulations
on the chain of events if we need to.
Imagine that you are making a Tactical Role-Playing Game (TRPG) and in the game’s combat
system, players can create a queue of actions that will resolve at the end of the turn, after all actors in
the game have also made their action queues. Now, one of the actor’s skills is to randomize the final
action queue before it resolves. This can easily be solved with an event queue, Players would insert
their actions in the action queue that would be resolved at the end. We check for the presence of any
special actions that need to be resolved in a special order and execute them. In this case, the other
actions should be shuffled before resolving them at the end of the turn. See? We decoupled the time
when the player performed an action from the action execution itself and even decoupled the very
order in which the events happened.
We can also do the opposite of that by ensuring that events happen in a specific order. For instance, it’s
common to use the event queue to correctly process internal engine events, such as physics collisions,
rendering, input handling, and sound playing. This way, we can order the correct sequence of events,
ensuring that we don’t play a sound on the next frame if the collision that generated it happens in
this frame. In that example, we would store and sort physics events first, ensuring that they would be
processed before audio events.
The Event Queue pattern is so common and powerful that it even originated its very own programming
paradigm, known as event-driven architecture, which essentially allows us to create systems that
transmit events through loosely coupled components. This is not a common architecture to create
whole games, but can be useful for specific systems of a game. This is because games are hard to
abstract as a definite sequence of events due to games’ intrinsic dynamic and emergent nature. We
never know what players will do, so we can’t abstract games as a chain of predictable events, with an
immutable chain of cause and effect.

259

260

Improving Game Feel with the Event Queue Pattern

A core advantage of using an event queue in games is that it capitalizes on the speed of event processing.
In many cases, games don’t handle events at the precise moment they occur, allowing the queue to
efficiently manage and process them in quick succession.
So, the Event Queue pattern allows us to handle these events asynchronously. For instance, in action
games, the player may rapidly press buttons to perform multiple actions in quick succession. Without
an event queue, the game could miss some inputs or process them out of order, leading to a frustrating
player experience. The event queue allows these inputs to be stored and processed in sequence, ensuring
that each action is handled as expected, even if there’s a delay between input and processing. We are
going to see exactly that in our game, so keep that in mind.
This pattern is not called a “queue” for no reason. The idea is that as soon as an event gets processed,
it is removed from the queue, typically in first-in, first-out order. This is important because if we have
a one-to-many system where multiple objects handle events from the same queue, each time an event
is handled, the next object should handle the next event in the queue, ensuring that an event is not
handled twice.
Something interesting about decoupling events from the time they happen is that we can also set an
expiration time for them. This allows us to create a range of interesting game mechanics. This prevents
old, irrelevant events from being processed later, maintaining a sense of responsiveness in the game.
Expiring events help keep the event queue manageable and ensure that only recent and relevant inputs
are processed, which is especially useful for online gaming experiences. We don’t need to process that
a player walked left 0.2 milliseconds ago if the player got killed already. Yeah, lag sucks.
Now that you, hopefully, understand how the Event Queue pattern works and its benefits in decoupling
systems and handling events asynchronously, it’s time to dive into some real-world examples. In the
next section, we’ll explore some use cases where this pattern is applied in game development. From
managing player input buffers to synchronizing complex AI systems, these examples will showcase
how the Event Queue pattern can streamline event handling and improve both gameplay experience
and development efficiency.

Spotting use cases for the Event Queue pattern
As we saw in the previous section, there are numerous examples of the Event Queue pattern in game
systems. Since it is a versatile pattern that allows us to create abstract queues of events, where events can
be anything in our game, the usage of this pattern becomes clouded by its potential. In this section, we
will see some concrete use cases so things become clearer for us. Maybe one of the following examples
is exactly what you are looking for in your next project!

Spotting use cases for the Event Queue pattern

The Event Queue pattern plays a core role in games like turn-based strategy titles by making sure that
turn resolution happens in a predictable order. When players in a strategy games issue commands
such as moving units or attacking, these actions trigger a series of events such as animations and
sub-events that occur as a consequence of these main actions. This provides a clear structure for
players’ strategies, allowing the game to resolve each event step by step, from animations to game
state updates, maintaining the pace of their turn system.

Figure 13.1 – XCOM 2 player plotting their strategy during their turn.
Image taken from RabidRetrospectGames YouTube channel. Link:

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wVHO_0PS36A

Similarly, the combat action queue in real-time RPGs allows for fluid combat by queuing up player
and enemy actions based on parameters such as speed or priority. In games such as Final Fantasy
XII or Dragon Age: Origins, both players and AI characters engage in combat by selecting abilities,
techniques, magic spells, and other actions, which are placed into a queue, sorted, and processed in
sequence. This makes combat remain fluid while maintaining a sense of order, as characters’ actions
unfold in a way that respects their speed and attack timing. This queue system also allows players to
issue commands while other actions are still being resolved, which improves the pacing of combat,
especially in real-time systems where immediate reaction may not be feasible.

261

262

Improving Game Feel with the Event Queue Pattern

Figure 13.2 – Final Fantasy XII’s combat with members of the player’s party queueing their
actions for execution based on their speed. Image taken from 30 Something Gaming’s YouTube
channel. Link: https://youtu.be/Eq_1LSDDGpg?si=ALDBp7Ui89JNI0qH

In crafting systems, especially those featuring conveyor belts, the Event Queue pattern can be a good
approach to resolve the crafting logic. In Rogue Galaxy, players manage a factory where items are crafted
by assembling various components, with conveyor belts transporting materials between machines. As
items are produced, their progress is queued for subsequent crafting steps. In the same way, Factorio
showcases this pattern on a grand scale, as players build extensive factory systems using conveyor
belts to automate the gathering and processing of resources. Events are queued in such systems as
resources arrive at different machines, at different times. The management of these queues and the
timing of production steps are fundamental to implementing this kind of crafting system.

Spotting use cases for the Event Queue pattern

Figure 13.3 – Rogue Galaxy’s Factory system with two ingredients being processed before
getting combined in the assembly line. Image taken from VideoWulff’s YouTube channel.
Link: https://youtu.be/sfvdLaTXXD4?si=q5MtwsdxvM2Nqcp_

Finally, input buffering in fighting games allows for the execution of complex combos by queueing up
input events and processing them in the correct order, even when inputs are given in quick succession.
In titles such as Street Fighter or Naruto Shippuden Ultimate Ninja Storm Revolution, the Event Queue
pattern allows players to input a series of moves that the game will process as the character finishes
each animation. This prevents missed inputs and ensures that combos execute fluidly, even when
timing is tight. Input buffering also allows us to execute special moves, such as casting a special skill
like Hadouken where multiple buttons need to be pressed in a specific sequence. With an input buffer,
we can check for a specific sequence of inputs within an input event queue and cast special moves
accordingly. In these cases, the event queue would also implement an expiration time to prevent
undesired processing of inputs as special moves.

263

264

Improving Game Feel with the Event Queue Pattern

Figure 13.4 – Street Fighter’s tutorial teaching players the input combination
to cast a Hadouken. Image taken from Core-A Gaming’s YouTube channel. Link:

https://youtu.be/b4Kc1p6Iat8?si=tRDhEGBPEDli_5U6

In the next section, we’ll implement an input buffer that can be used for a jump buffer, giving players
a brief window of time before they hit the ground to input a jump, improving our game feel!

Implementing the Event Queue pattern in Godot
As you can see, the Event Queue pattern is a powerful tool to have in our hands. We can use it in many
systems of a game, both locally and globally. For instance, we can create an event queue singleton to
hold events that multiple other classes would process. Or we can create an event queue to handle local
events, such as the character’s next animation in a combo.
Note that, ideally, anything can be abstracted as an event. It will depend on your context. This means
that we could create something like an Event class with relevant properties, or be more specific and
create a MovementEvent class that would create objects that represent the character’s movement
such as if the character jumped, moved left, moved right, stopped, or grabbed something. You could
be even more specific. For instance, in the GrabbedObjectEvent class, we could store a reference
for the object that was grabbed. In these cases, we could create a MovementEventQueue class that
would store these movements in case, for instance, we want to replay them.

Implementing the Event Queue pattern in Godot

In this section, we will rely on Godot Engine’s built-in input system, which provides InputEvent
objects with information about events related to all sorts of inputs. In our case, we are specifically
interested in InputEventKey objects. We are going to store and process them to check whether the
player pressed the jump button moments before landing. In our current implementation, a jump can
only happen if the player’s character is currently in contact with the floor. But our game designer has
an interesting request for us that makes this implementation not ideal. Let’s see the game designer’s
thoughts about it
Ahm, hey!
I was making some playtests lately with our player character, the King Pig. See, recently we’ve been making
some improvements to make the game more action-oriented, right?
One of the things I noticed that can be annoying for the player’s experience is the fact that we are demanding
a lot of accuracy from them, which makes the game unforgiving of players’ minor mistakes. These mistakes
are not relevant to the game experience, so I thought about being less demanding.
One of the things I noticed that could improve the game feel a lot is implementing a jump buffer for when
players miss the timing of a jump. Currently, our game is mostly set on the floor and we don’t have many
acrobatic sessions. For instance, I want to make some moving platforms action puzzles where players
will need to quickly jump from one platform to another.
During one of the tests for the design of such puzzles, I realized I was missing the jump not because I didn’t
press the jump button, but because I pressed it too many times…before landing on the floor.
For an action-based game, it’s better that the player presses the action many times before necessary than
to press it only once when necessary. We are going towards a game with a high actions-per-second count
and accuracy is not a big deal. We want players to press the attack and jump buttons a lot, even though
the game won’t immediately process every action. But it will be as soon as possible! That’s the thing.
So I need you to implement a way to keep those actions stored for a brief moment before we process them
in the game. Can you do it?
From yours truly,
Fictional Game Designer
In this request, two main concerns from our beloved game designer take the spotlight. The first thing
is that the game designer wants to specifically store the player’s input events. We can be even more
specific and say that they want to store when the player presses the jump and the attack buttons. The
reason for that is so that these input events can be processed later on, when the time is right. The
second interesting thing is that they don’t want to keep these events stored for long as this would
cause the player’s character to perform actions at a time that may not be convenient for the player.
This indicates an expiration period for these actions.

265

266

Improving Game Feel with the Event Queue Pattern

Well, implementing the Event Queue pattern with a timer to pop events on a timely basis sounds like
the perfect solution for that! In the following sections, you will see that the pattern itself is simple, but
how we use it and other features that we will aggregate to it can be more thoughtful. In the next section,
we will implement our very own input buffer following the requirements from the game designer!

Storing input events with an input buffer
With the overall abstraction of the problem, we understand that the game designer’s request demands
that we implement something like a custom Event Queue pattern that stores input-related events.
Fortunately, in Godot Engine, we already have an input event system in place, so we can take advantage
of that. In this section, we will implement an input buffer, an object that stores and processes a queue
of input events. Let’s get started! Open the project inside the 13.improving-game-feel-withevent-queue/01.start/ folder and let’s go through the following instructions:
1.

Create a new scene, and add Node as its root node. Rename it as InputBuffer.

2.

Add a Timer node as an InputBuffer child.

3.

Save the scene as res://Actors/KingPig/InputBuffer.tscn as this will be used
specifically by the KingPigPlayer2D class, so we will store it inside the same folder.

4.

Attach a new script to the InputBuffer node and save it as res://Actors/KingPig/
InputBuffer.gd.

5.

Open the script and let’s start by exporting a variable that we will use to represent the expiration
time in which each event will be stored:
extends Node
class_name InputBuffer
@export var expiration_time := 0.1

6.

Then, let’s store a reference to the Timer node so we can use it when an action is stored:
extends Node
class_name InputBuffer
@export var expiration_time := 0.1
@onready var timer := $Timer

Implementing the Event Queue pattern in Godot

7.

Now, it’s finally time. The waiting is over. All that build-up has come to a climax. We will
implement the Event Queue pattern! For that, create a variable that is of type Array and is a
typed array. It will only store InputEvent objects:
extends Node
class_name InputBuffer
@export var expiration_time := 0.1
@onready var timer := $Timer
var event_queue: Array[InputEvent] = []

8.

To store InputEvent objects in our event queue, we will override the _unhandled_input()
callback method. Inside this method, we will first check if the current event being handled
isn’t an InputEventKey object. We don’t want to store every type of InputEvent object;
we are only interested in keys pressing and releasing. So, if we are dealing with anything other
than an InputEventKey object, we return from the function:
func _unhandled_input(event: InputEvent) -> void:
    if not event is InputEventKey:
        return

9.

We also don’t want to store multiple instances of the same event if it’s just an echo. An echo
is an InputEvent object emitted when we hold a key or a button, which essentially means
that between two frames the key was still pressed. To prevent flooding our event queue with
this type of unnecessary information, we will check if the current event is an echo, and if so,
we will also return from the function:
func _unhandled_input(event: InputEvent) -> void:
    if not event is InputEventKey:
        return
    if event.is_echo():
        return

10. Finally, if the current event is something that is actually interesting for the context of our
InputBuffer class, we will append it to the event_queue array:
func _unhandled_input(event: InputEvent) -> void:
    if not event is InputEventKey:
        return
    if event.is_echo():
        return
    event_queue.append(event)

267

268

Improving Game Feel with the Event Queue Pattern

11. Then, we need to start the expiration countdown. Here, we should make sure that we don’t keep
on restarting it because, if we do, it won’t ever expire until the player stops pressing new keys. Is
that a tip based on an empirical mistake I made while writing this code? We will never know.
But the idea is to check if the timer node is already running, or rather, if it isn’t stopped, and
if so, we start it using the expiration_time variable:
func _unhandled_input(event: InputEvent) -> void:
    if not event is InputEventKey:
        return
    if event.is_echo():
        return
    event_queue.append(event)
    if timer.is_stopped():
        timer.start(expiration_time)

12. As a queue, we need a method to obtain and remove – in other words, pop – the first entry of
the array. This is the main difference between a simple array and a queue. In a queue, the items
of the array are always handled in first-in, first-out order. Keep that in mind. We will create a
wrapper method for that to allow user classes to get the first element of the event_queue
variable without knowing it is an array or of its very existence. For the outside world, the
Inputbuffer node will just give the user classes an InputEvent object. Let’s call this
method pop_next_event() and it will return an InputEvent popped object from the
event_queue array using the pop_front() method:
func pop_next_event() -> InputEvent:
    return event_queue.pop_front()

13. User classes need an interface to check a specific action is present on the InputBuffer object.
Remember, InputEvent objects are created on the go. They are events, and each one of them
represents an instance of an event, thus each one of them is a different instance. This means
we can’t, conveniently, check for a specific InputEvent object inside the InputBuffer
object, and even if we did, it would only match this specific instance, even though the player
may have pressed the jump key multiple times. So, instead, we need to check for the presence
of the jump action within the InputEvent objects stored. For that, we will create a method
called has_action(), which will receive a string as an argument representing the action
name and will return a boolean value telling us if the action passed as an argument matches
any InputEvent object:
func has_action(input_action_name: String) -> bool:

Implementing the Event Queue pattern in Godot

14. By default, we will presume that the action is not present in the event queue. Then, we will
loop through all the events in the event_queue array and check if any of them represents
the action matching the input_action_name argument. If we find any, we will change our
assumption, which will now tell us there’s such an action in the queue. Then, we break the loop,
because there’s no reason to keep looking if we already found one instance matching the action:
func has_action(input_action_name: String) -> bool:
    var has_action := false
    for event in event_queue:
        if event.is_action(input_action_name):
            has_action = true
            break
    return has_action

Something important to keep in mind is to ensure that events that were already processed do
not stay in the queue anymore. This means these events may not be at the queue’s front but in
any position. This is because we are not making a queue specifically for handling only jumprelated events. We are storing any InputEventKey object, so we will have many other events
related to other keys in the event_queue array. We could implement an event queue just
for jump-pressed events, but since the designer also wants to check for attack-related events,
let’s keep it generic.
15. For that, we will create another method, called process_by_action_name(), which will
ask for a string argument representing the action’s name and will return an InputEvent object:
func process_by_action_name(input_event_action:
  String) -> InputEventKey:

16. Inside this method, we will first, find the index of the first event representing the action. For
that, we will increment an index variable ranging through the event queue array’s current
size. Then, we will check if the element in the current index relates to the desired input action.
If so, we store the current index and break the loop:
func process_by_action_name(input_event_action:
  String) -> InputEventKey:
    var event_index: int
    for index in range(event_queue.size()):
        if event_queue[index]
          .is_action(input_event_action):
            event_index = index
            break

269

270

Improving Game Feel with the Event Queue Pattern

17. Then, we will return the InputEvent object to the position we found through the loop we
just did:
func process_by_action_name(input_event_action:
  String) -> InputEventKey:
    var event_index: int
    for index in range(event_queue.size()):
        if event_queue[index]
          .is_action(input_event_action):
            event_index = index
            break
    return event_queue.pop_at(event_index)

18. Last but not least, we will use the editor’s interface to connect the Timer node’s timeout
signal to the signal callback in the InputBuffer class called _on_timer_timeout().

Figure 13.5 – The Timer node timeout signal connection on the
InputBuffer node’s _on_timer_timeout() method

Implementing the Event Queue pattern in Godot

19. Then, in the _on_timer_timeout() callback, we will check if there is any entry in the
event_queue array by checking if its size is greater than zero. If so, we pop the next event
from the queue. Otherwise, we stop the timer, as this would mean there’s nothing to expire, so
it doesn’t need to tick anymore:
func _on_timer_timeout() -> void:
    if event_queue.size() > 0:
        pop_next_event()
    else:
        timer.stop()

There we have it! Our very own input buffer that allows us to store and process InputEvent objects.
With this power in our hands, it’s time to use it responsibly. Currently, the only user for this class is
the KingPigPlayer2D class, so in the next section, we will implement the necessary steps to allow
it to take advantage of the features we just implemented.

Buffering and processing jumps
Now that we can check for the presence of input events that match the jump action, we can use that to
buffer the player’s jumps, allowing King Pig to perform a jump if the player presses the jump button
within a time window before landing on the floor. For that, let’s open res://Actors/KingPig/
KingPigPlayer2D.tscn scene and follow these steps:
1.

The first thing we will do is to instantiate the InputBuffer scene as a child of the
PlayerCharacter2D node.

2.

Then, open res://Actors/KingPig/KingPigPlayer2D.gd, and let’s start by creating a
variable to store a reference to the InputBuffer node right before the fall_speed variable:
@onready var input_buffer := $InputBuffer

3.

Then, in the _physics_process() callback, we will look for the conditional statement that
checks if fall_speed is greater than 0.0 and the character is on the floor. This means that
it just hit the floor after falling, which is exactly what we are looking for to execute a jump if
there’s a jump buffered. Inside these conditional statements, we will check if input_buffer
has an instance of the jump action:
    if fall_speed > 0.0 and is_on_floor():
        if input_buffer.has_action("jump"):

271

272

Improving Game Feel with the Event Queue Pattern

4.

If this is the case, we will also check if InputEvent that we found is related to the jump action
being pressed. This is because if it was released, there’s no reason to perform a jump. We will also
check if the jump action is still being pressed, because otherwise, the player may not actually
want to perform a jump. If all these conditions are true, we will execute jump_command():
    if fall_speed > 0.0 and is_on_floor():
        if input_buffer.has_action("jump"):
          if input_buffer
            .process_by_action_name("jump")
            .is_pressed() and Input
            .is_action_pressed("jump"):
                jump_command.execute()

5.

Now, if there’s no instance of the jump action in input_buffer, we will just set the
animation property to "ground" as it was before:
    if fall_speed > 0.0 and is_on_floor():
        if input_buffer.has_action("jump"):
          if input_buffer
            .process_by_action_name("jump")
            .is_pressed() and Input
            .is_action_pressed("jump"):
                jump_command.execute()
        else:
            animation = "ground"

That’s it! We just implemented our jump buffer based on the presence of a jump action being pressed. I
recommend you play a bit with the InputBuffer node’s Expiration Time property on the Inspector
tab so that you can find a good time window for this feature. It can be tricky to find a good spot as
too much time would mean that the player may perform an undesired jump, and if the expiration
time is too short, it would mean the player doesn’t have enough room to mistakenly press the jump
button before hitting the ground.
Now that you’ve implemented your first event queue, and are able to see immediately how it has a
direct impact on a player’s experience, let’s review this chapter, the final chapter of the book!

Summary
In this chapter, we learned about the Event Queue pattern and how it can be used to enhance game
feel, especially in action-based games. We started by exploring the importance of player input and
how precise timing can make or break the experience, particularly in high-action sequences. The
Event Queue pattern allows us to store events, such as player inputs, as a queue to process them later,
ensuring that no inputs are missed, even if they happen slightly before or after the optimal time.
This concept of buffering events allows for forgiving design features, such as jump buffering, making
gameplay more responsive and player-friendly.

Summary

We explored the benefits of decoupling events from the exact moment they happened, which is especially
useful when things happen in quick succession. This pattern ensures that actions are processed in
order without losing important inputs. By implementing an event queue, we also created a system
where the game can handle inputs asynchronously, allowing players to press buttons rapidly without
the game missing their keystrokes.
Another key aspect we covered was the ability to set an expiration time for events in the queue. By defining
how long an input remains valid before it is discarded, we ensured that the game remains responsive
without storing outdated inputs. This expiration system prevents the player from performing actions
that no longer make sense in the game’s context. We saw how this can be applied to other mechanics,
such as combat systems and crafting systems, where the sequence and timing of actions are critical.
We also implemented an input buffer in Godot. By storing InputEvent objects in a queue, we allowed
the player to press the jump button slightly before landing and still perform the jump, compensating
for minor mistakes in timing. This system is especially useful for platformers, where players often
need to time jumps perfectly. The buffer gave the game a smoother feel, as it forgave slight errors in
timing, allowing players to press the jump button within a brief time window before hitting the floor
and still perform the jump.
As we conclude this chapter, the Event Queue pattern proved to be a powerful tool for improving the
overall feel and responsiveness of our games. It allows us to manage player inputs effectively, ensuring
that even fast-paced actions are handled accordingly and in the correct order.
Congratulations on completing this book! You’ve come a long way through the fundamentals of
programming, object-oriented design, and basic and advanced patterns of game development with
Godot, learning how to structure your projects efficiently while also enhancing gameplay experiences.
I hope the concepts and patterns covered in the book will serve as valuable tools in your development
journey, empowering you to create games that resonate with players worldwide. Thank you for
purchasing this book and for coming this far. Your dedication and passion for learning will pay off,
and I hope this book becomes a stepping stone to achieving your dreams.
On a personal note, I want you to think about every line of code you write as being a chance to create
something beautiful, something that can inspire others and bring joy to the world. I hope you continue
on this path of learning and making games. As a Christian, my efforts and success are for the glory of
my Lord Jesus Christ, who surely has an amazing plan for your life too. Keep striving, keep creating,
and may you always find strength and inspiration to pursue your dreams too. And as always, keep
developing. Until the next time!

273

Index
A
abstraction 6
used, for simplifying complex systems 20-22
Autoload feature 62, 75

B
BackgroundMusic Service Locator
creating 245-249
using 250-255
behavior 5
converting, to component 49-52
Brain class
cleaning up, with strategy
executions 202-205
Bumping Pig brain
designing 181-187
BumpingPig commands
creating 168, 169

C
Callable type 156
class 5
code pollution 40
Command pattern 155-158
implementing aspects 157
implementing, in Godot 160, 161

use cases, spotting 158
Command pattern, in Godot
Bumping Pig brain, designing 181-187
BumpingPig commands, creating 168, 169
commands to buttons, mapping 177-180
commands with buttons, using 169-171
concrete commands, implementing 171-176
game designer’s changes, evaluating 161-168
Command pattern, use cases
actions, backtracking in tactical
RPG battles 160
queuing, in real-time strategy games 159
strategic encounters, creating in
role-player games 159
template behaviors, making in RPGs 159
using, as undo/redo in level editors 158
complex scenes
creating, by composing with nodes 48, 49
complex systems
simplifying, with abstraction 20, 21
composition approach 46, 47
Composition Tree design pattern 47, 52
concrete commands
implementing 171-176
container variable 102

276

Index

D
Decorator pattern 212, 213
implementing, in Godot Engine 215-217
use cases, spotting 213-215
Decorator pattern, in Godot Engine
Diamond objects, using to add
power-ups 232-237
properties, turning into Stats class 217-223
StatsDecorator class, creating 224-226
Stats, wrapping with powerups Singleton 227-231
Dependency Inversion Principle (DIP) 36
Diamond objects
used, for adding power-ups 232-237
duck typing 31

E
encapsulation
used, for scoping properties
and methods 22-25
Event Queue pattern 258-260
implementing, in Godot 264, 265
input events, storing with
input buffer 266-271
jumps, buffering 271, 272
jumps, processing 271, 272
use cases 260-263

find_parent() method 102
first-person shooter (FPS) 195
FSM, with animations
Advance expressions, establishing 132
animation transitions, creating 128-131
AnimationTree node, setting up 125-127
implementing 123-125
transition conditions, establishing 132-135

G
game designer
changes, evaluating 161-168
games
creating, by composing with scenes 52, 53
Godot
Command pattern, implementing 160, 161
Observer pattern, implementing 87, 88
player’s health interface, integrating 89-92
State pattern, implementing 121
Strategy pattern, implementing 196-198
Godot Engine
Decorator pattern, implementing 215-217
design, turning into object 10-16
Service Locator pattern,
implementing 243-245
Graphics User Interface (GUI) 37

H

F

hierarchical state machines 162

Factory Method 101
Factory pattern 95-97
implementing, in Godot 99, 100
Node2DFactory class, creating 100-104
Node2DFactory, using 104-112
use cases 97-99

I
inheritance
used, for extending object’s behaviors 25-30
interaction strategies
implementing 205-208

Index

InteractionStrategy family
creating 198, 199
interface segregation principle 36, 49
used, for creating components 40, 41
used, for making high-level
abstractions 41, 42

L
Liskov Substitution Principle (LSP) 36
used, for ensuring compatibility 39, 40
LootBumpingPig
creating 53-56

M
mutation 5

N
nested state machines 162

O
Object-Oriented Programming
(OOP) 19, 35, 217
basics 4, 5
principles, complying with 6, 7
used, for game designing 8-10
objects 5, 192
behavior, extending with inheritance 25-31
Observer pattern 84, 85
implementing, in Godot 87, 88
use cases, spotting 86, 87
Open-Closed Principle (OCP) 35
used, for object extraction and
maintenance 38, 39

P
player’s health interface
integrating, with Observer pattern 89-92
polymorphism
used, for maintaining compatibility 31-34
power-ups Singleton
Stats, wrapping with 227-231
properties 5

R
Real-Time Strategy (RTS) game
commands, queuing 159
strategic encounters, creating 159
template behaviors, making 159
Remote Procedure Calls (RPCs) 157
role-playing game (RPG) 98, 194

S
score system
creating 68-72
diamond’s scoring responsibility 73-78
serialization 157
Service Locator pattern 240, 241
implementing, in Godot Engine 243-245
use cases, spotting 242, 243
Service Locator pattern, in Godot Engine
BackgroundMusic Service Locator,
creating 245-249
BackgroundMusic Service
Locator, using 250-255
shatter() method 111
signals 87
Single Responsibility Principle (SRP) 35
used, for unbloating objects 36-38

277

278

Index

Singleton pattern 62
implementing, in Godot 66
use cases, in games 63
Singleton pattern, in Godot
designer’s request 66-68
multi-door teleporting system,
implementing 78-81
score system, creating 68-73
Singleton pattern use cases, in games
background music, playing
without interruptions 65
engine built-in features, accessing 66
players’ data, maintaining 63-65
third-party APIs and plugins, using 65
Spawners 98
StateMachine 161
State pattern 118, 119
implementing, in Godot 121
use cases, spotting in games 119, 120
State pattern, Godot
designer’s requirements 121, 122
FSM, implementing with animations 123
state-specific behaviors, handling
with State pattern 136-139
concrete states, creating 141-145
context behaviors, extracting 139, 140
damages, dealing with 148-150
dead state, used for killing
character 152, 153
hit state 150-152
runstate, used for navigation 145-148

Stats
wrapping, with power-ups
Singleton 227-231
Stats class
properties, turning into 217-223
StatsDecorator class
creating 224-226
Strategy pattern 192, 193
Brain class, cleaning up with
strategy executions 202-205
implementing, in Godot 196-198
interaction strategies, implementing 206-208
InteractionStrategy family, creating 198, 199
target object, using 199-201
use cases, spotting 194, 195
sub-state machines 162

T
Tactical Role-Playing Game (TRPG) 259
actions, backtracking 160
target object
using, to provide strategy 199-202
Trigger 49

www.packtpub.com
Subscribe to our online digital library for full access to over 7,000 books and videos, as well as
industry leading tools to help you plan your personal development and advance your career. For more
information, please visit our website.

Why subscribe?
• Spend less time learning and more time coding with practical eBooks and Videos from over
4,000 industry professionals
• Improve your learning with Skill Plans built especially for you
• Get a free eBook or video every month
• Fully searchable for easy access to vital information
• Copy and paste, print, and bookmark content
Did you know that Packt offers eBook versions of every book published, with PDF and ePub files
available? You can upgrade to the eBook version at packtpub.com and as a print book customer, you
are entitled to a discount on the eBook copy. Get in touch with us at customercare@packtpub.
com for more details.
At www.packtpub.com, you can also read a collection of free technical articles, sign up for a range
of free newsletters, and receive exclusive discounts and offers on Packt books and eBooks.

Other Books You May Enjoy
If you enjoyed this book, you may be interested in these other books by Packt:

Learning GDScript by Developing a Game with Godot 4
Sander Vanhove
ISBN: 978-1-80461-698-7
• Develop your GDScript 2.0 programming skills from basic to advanced, emphasizing
• code cleanliness
• Harness Godot 4's integrated physics engine to control and manipulate in-game objects
• Design a vibrant and immersive game world by seamlessly integrating a diverse array of assets
• Master the art of processing input from various sources for enhanced interactivity
• Extend the reach of your game by learning how to export it to multiple platforms
• Incorporate simple multiplayer functionality for a dynamic gaming experience

Other Books You May Enjoy

The Essential Guide to Creating Multiplayer Games with Godot 4.0
Henrique Campos
ISBN: 978-1-80323-261-4
• Understand the fundamentals of networking and remote data exchange between computers
• Use the Godot game engine's built-in API to set up a network for players
• Master remote procedure calls and learn how to make function calls on objects remotely
• Enhance your GDScript proficiency to get the most out of this powerful language
• Explore industry-standard solutions for common online multiplayer challenges
• Improve your networking skills and discover how to turn single-player games into multiplayer
experiences

281

282

Packt is searching for authors like you
If you’re interested in becoming an author for Packt, please visit authors.packtpub.com and
apply today. We have worked with thousands of developers and tech professionals, just like you, to
help them share their insight with the global tech community. You can make a general application,
apply for a specific hot topic that we are recruiting an author for, or submit your own idea.

Share Your Thoughts
Hi,
I am Henrique Campos author of Game Development Patterns with Godot. I really hope you enjoyed
reading this book and found it useful for increasing your productivity and efficiency.
It would really help me (and other potential readers!) if you could leave a review on Amazon sharing
your thoughts on this book.
Go to the link below to leave your review:
https://packt.link/r/1835880290
Your review will help me to understand what's worked well in this book, and what could be improved
upon for future editions, so it really is appreciated.
Best Wishes,
Henrique Campos

283

Download a free PDF copy of this book
Thanks for purchasing this book!
Do you like to read on the go but are unable to carry your print books everywhere?
Is your eBook purchase not compatible with the device of your choice?
Don’t worry, now with every Packt book you get a DRM-free PDF version of that book at no cost.
Read anywhere, any place, on any device. Search, copy, and paste code from your favorite technical
books directly into your application.
The perks don’t stop there, you can get exclusive access to discounts, newsletters, and great free content
in your inbox daily
Follow these simple steps to get the benefits:
1.

Scan the QR code or visit the link below

https://packt.link/free-ebook/978-1-83588-028-9
2.

Submit your proof of purchase

3.

That’s it! We’ll send your free PDF and other benefits to your email directly

