OceanofPDF.com

Game Development with Godot 4
Godot is a rapidly growing free and open-source game engine for creating
2D and 3D games, and interactive applications on many platforms,
including desktop and mobile. There has been intense interest in this engine
among game developers worldwide. This tutorial book offers an accessible,
easy-to-follow and fun introduction to Godot Engine 4 for game developers,
both complete newcomers and migrators from alternative game engines,
like Unity and Unreal. This book practically explores the process of setting
up the Godot software for the first time, creating 2D and 3D scenes with
interactive elements, and using the GDScript language to create common
gameplay elements, like first-person controls. Overall, this technical book
offers a structured and friendly introduction to many of Godot’s impressive
features to help you get started at making games as an indie game
developer. This book explores nodes, scenes, hierarchies, import
workflows, scripting, animations, user interfaces, working with resources,
and creating gameplay elements, among others.
Alan Thorn is a game developer, author, and educator. Alan has written 34
books, presented 30 online courses, and created 33 games, including the
award-winning adventure, Baron Wittard. Alan is dedicated to helping
creative people make high-impact experiences. He was Studio Director at
Wax Lyrical Games, and now he is course leader for ‘Indie Games
Development’ at the BAFTA-winning National Film and Television School,
an incubation space for breakthrough gaming talent.
OceanofPDF.com

Game Development with Godot 4
A Complete Introduction
Alan Thorn

OceanofPDF.com

Designed cover image: Shutterstock
First edition published 2026
by CRC Press
2385 NW Executive Center Drive, Suite 320, Boca Raton FL 33431
and by CRC Press
4 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon, OX14 4RN
CRC Press is an imprint of Taylor & Francis Group, LLC
© 2026 Alan Thorn
Reasonable efforts have been made to publish reliable data and information, but the author and
publisher cannot assume responsibility for the validity of all materials or the consequences of their
use. The authors and publishers have attempted to trace the copyright holders of all material
reproduced in this publication and apologize to copyright holders if permission to publish in this
form has not been obtained. If any copyright material has not been acknowledged please write and let
us know so we may rectify in any future reprint.
Except as permitted under U.S. Copyright Law, no part of this book may be reprinted, reproduced,
transmitted, or utilized in any form by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known or
hereafter invented, including photocopying, microfilming, and recording, or in any information
storage or retrieval system, without written permission from the publishers.
For permission to photocopy or use material electronically from this work, access
www.copyright.com or contact the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc. (CCC), 222 Rosewood Drive,
Danvers, MA 01923, 978-750-8400. For works that are not available on CCC please contact
mpkbookspermissions@tandf.co.uk
Trademark notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered trademarks and are
used only for identification and explanation without intent to infringe.
ISBN: 978-1-032-77728-3 (hbk)
ISBN: 978-1-032-75924-1 (pbk)
ISBN: 978-1-003-48452-3 (ebk)
DOI: 10.1201/9781003484523
Access the Support Material: www.routledge.com/9781032759241
Typeset in Minion
by SPi Technologies India Pvt Ltd (Straive)

OceanofPDF.com

Contents
INTRODUCTION
Chapter 1 Introducing Godot: Getting to Know the Engine
1.1 WHAT EXACTLY IS GODOT?
1.2 THE POWER OF GODOT – REASONS TO USE THE
ENGINE
1.2.1 Godot Is Open Source
1.2.2 Godot Is Free Software
1.2.3 Godot Is Cross-Platform
1.2.4 Godot Is for 2D and 3D
1.2.5 Godot Is Tried and Tested
1.2.6 Godot Is Supported
1.2.7 Godot Is Interoperable
1.3 GODOT – ITS BENEFITS AND LIMITATIONS
1.4 DOWNLOADING AND INSTALLING GODOT
1.4.1 Preparation
1.4.2 Installing Godot
1.5 CONFIGURING GODOT
1.6 CONCLUSION
Chapter 2 Getting Started with Godot: Your First Project
2.1 STARTING A GODOT PROJECT
2.1.1 Choosing the Renderer
2.1.2 Choosing Version Control
2.2 EXPLORING THE INTERFACE
2.2.1 Creating Your First Scene
2.2.2 Setting Editor Preferences

2.2.3 Hierarchies and 3D Scenes – Adding an Object
2.2.4 Viewport Navigation – Exploring a Scene
2.2.5 Object Transformations – Building a Scene
2.3 VERTEX SNAPPING – INSTALLING AN ADD-ON FROM
ASSETLIB
2.4 FILESYSTEM DOCK – UNDERSTANDING THE
PROJECT FOLDER
2.5 GIT – VERSION CONTROL FOR GODOT PROJECTS
2.5.1 Installing Git
2.5.2 Getting Started with Git
2.5.3 Tracking Changes to a File with Commits
2.5.4 Undoing Commits with Revert
2.5.5 Using Remote Repositories
2.5.6 Ignoring Files with GitIgnore
2.5.7 Managing Large Files with LFS
2.6 CONCLUSION
Chapter 3 Resources: Textures, Meshes, and More
3.1 IMPORTING YOUR FIRST RESOURCE (TEXTURES)
3.1.1 Exploring Import Files for Textures
3.1.2 Editing Texture Import Options
3.1.3 Textures, Materials, and 2D Scenes
3.1.4 External and Built-In Resources
3.2 TEXTURES FOR 3D OBJECTS, HANDS-ON
3.2.1 Creating Materials for 3D Objects
3.2.2 Assigning Materials to 3D Objects
3.3 MESH RESOURCES: THE EXPORT AND IMPORT
PROCESS
3.3.1 Creating a Mesh in Blender

3.3.2 Exporting a Mesh from Blender Using GLTF
3.3.3 Importing a Mesh to Godot from GLTF
3.3.4 Modifying an Imported Mesh with Inherited Scenes
3.4 BLENDER AND GODOT LIVE LINK EDITING
3.4.1 Creating a Connection between Godot and Blender
3.4.2 Creating a Shared Blend Scene
3.5 THE MESH ADVANCED IMPORTER
3.5.1 Setting the Mesh Scale
3.5.2 Separating Meshes
3.5.3 Separating Materials
3.6 CONCLUSION
Chapter 4 GDScript Introduction: Programming Games
4.1 FIRST STEPS – WHICH LANGUAGE?
4.2 MAKING A HELLO WORLD PROGRAM WITH
GDSCRIPT
4.3 GAME CRITICAL EVENTS IN GDSCRIPT
4.3.1 The _process Event
4.3.2 The _physics_process Event
4.3.3 The _unhandled_input Event
4.4 READING PLAYER INPUT
4.4.1 Configuring an Input Map for Buttons
4.4.2 Reading Button Presses
4.4.3 Creating Axis Controls with an Input Map
4.4.4 Creating Axis Controls with an Input Map
4.5 EXPORTING VARIABLES
4.6 SIGNALS AND THE OBSERVER PATTERN
4.6.1 Creating a Game Timer
4.6.2 Connecting a Signal in Code

4.6.3 Creating Custom Signals
4.7 NODES AND GROUPS
4.7.1 Get Node
4.7.2 Grouping Nodes
4.7.3 Searching Groups
4.8 CONCLUSION
Chapter 5 Building 2D Worlds: Sprites, Cameras, and Physics
5.1 SPRITES AND ANIMATED SPRITES
5.1.1 Making Sprites Move
5.1.2 Sprites and Pixel Art
5.1.3 Making the Camera Follow a Sprite
5.1.4 Animated Sprites
5.2 PHYSICS AND COLLISIONS IN 2D
5.2.1 Configuring a Movable Character with Physics
5.2.2 Coding a Movable Character with Physics
5.2.3 Creating a Static Obstacle
5.2.4 Querying Collisions with GDScript
5.3 REPEATING BACKGROUNDS WITH SPRITES
5.4 TILEMAPS AND WORLD DESIGN
5.4.1 Creating a Texture Atlas for a TileMap
5.4.2 Building Tile Collisions
5.4.3 Painting TileSet Worlds
5.5 2D PATHS AND PATH FOLLOWING
5.6 2D MODULATION
5.7 CLIPPING
5.8 CONCLUSION
Chapter 6 3D Worlds: Meshes, Lights, and Cameras
6.1 PROTOTYPING 3D SCENES WITH CSG

6.1.1 Creating a Room with a CSG Box
6.1.2 Creating a Connecting Hallway and Room
6.2 LIGHTING
6.2.1 Ambient Lighting
6.2.2 Directional Lights
6.2.3 Omni Lights
6.2.4 Spot Lights
6.3 TRANSFORM OBJECTS IN 3D
6.4 PHYSICS AND COLLISIONS IN 3D
6.4.1 Configuring Solid Objects with Colliders
6.4.2 Creating a PlayerController with Physics
6.4.3 RigidBodies and Movables
6.5 AREAS AND TRIGGERS
6.6 PHYSICS QUERIES
6.6.1 Ray Casts
6.6.2 Shape Casts
6.7 TEXT IN 3D
6.8 CONCLUSION
Chapter 7 User Interfaces
7.1 IMPORTING ASSETS
7.2 STARTING THE USER INTERFACE
7.3 CREATING THE BACKGROUND
7.4 ADD A UI TITLE
7.5 CREATING A CURSOR
7.6 CREATING A HERO IMAGE AND SUPPORTING
IMAGES
7.7 CREATING UI BUTTONS
7.8 CREATING BUTTON FUNCTIONALITY

7.8.1 Coding the Close Button – Quitting the Game
7.8.2 Coding the Play and Settings Buttons – Changing
Scenes
7.9 ANIMATING UI ELEMENTS – THE ANIMATIONPLAYER
7.10 AUTOLOADS – THE SINGLETON DESIGN PATTERN
7.11 ADDING BACKGROUND MUSIC FOR THE MENU
7.12 CONCLUSION
Chapter 8 Game Mechanics: Creating a First-Person Controller
8.1 STARTING A NEW GODOT PROJECT AND ASSET
IMPORTING
8.2 BUILDING THE ENVIRONMENT SCENE
8.3 BUILDING THE PLAYER CHARACTER AS A SCENE
8.4 CONFIGURING PLAYER CONTROLS
8.5 CREATING THE PLAYER CONTROLLER SCRIPT
8.6 CODING HEAD ROTATION
8.7 CODING CAMERA MOVEMENT
8.8 CODING CROUCHING BEHAVIOR
8.9 CODING HEAD BOB
8.10 COMPLETING THE FIRST-PERSON CONTROLLER
8.11 FEATURES TO ADD A CHALLENGE
8.12 CONCLUSION
Chapter 9 Godot Tips and Tricks
9.1 MOUSE PICKING
9.2 CUSTOM RESOURCES
9.3 MIXING 2D AND 3D SCENES
9.3.1 Inserting UI Scenes into 3D Scenes
9.3.2 Inserting 3D Scenes into 2D Scenes
9.4 USING CURVES

9.5 LOCALIZATION – TRANSLATING YOUR GAMES
9.6 PAUSING GAMES
9.7 DEFERRED CALLS
9.8 PROCESSING RESOURCES
9.9 EXPORTING PROJECTS
9.10 CONCLUSION
INDEX
OceanofPDF.com

Introduction
The games industry always seems to be in a kind of chaos: a tumultuous
swirl of creation and destruction. In this fast-moving and high-risk context,
many brave people decide to become independent game developers. These
people choose to make their own games, in their own time, and in their own
way, using a variety of powerful tools. An increasingly popular tool of
choice for indies is the Godot game engine. This is a free, open-source, and
dedicated program for building games, interactive applications, VR, mobile
games, and more. This program is an alternative to the many well-known
engines out there, such as Unreal, Unity, and GameMaker. This book is a
dedicated introduction to Godot for the indie developer, an introduction that
shows Godot as a viable alternative to many well-established engines. So,
thank you for choosing this book. I hope it helps you along in your exciting
journey.

WHAT IS GODOT?
Godot is a computer software called a Game Engine. The rest of this book
is dedicated to the larger question of what exactly Godot is and can do. But,
in summary, Godot is designed to be a complete suite of tools for building
video games that run on a wide variety of platforms. Godot is notable for
being a cross-platform tool for making cross-platform games. Godot can not
only make games for desktop, mobile, and consoles, but the engine itself
can also run on Windows, Linux, and Mac. This allows you to develop
games on your chosen operating system, so you can use the tools and UIs
that you prefer. As we’ll see, Godot is free, cross-platform, open-source,

and community-driven. It has been in development for many years now and
remains actively developed by the core team.

WHO IS THIS BOOK FOR?
There are many ways and approaches to learning Godot. This book is one of
them. If most of the following applies to you, then this book is probably a
good match:
1. You’re completely new to Godot. You’ve heard about it and now want
to learn more.
2. Maybe you’ve explored other engines, such as Unity or Unreal. Maybe
you’ve used them before and now want to relate your knowledge to
Godot.
3. You enjoy learning from books. Sure, there are many ways to learn
game development, from video tutorials to in-person courses. But a
book offers you an offline way to consume and enjoy learning at your
own pace.
4. You want to learn enough of Godot to feel confident in the basics, be
able to build your first game, and be prepared to easily learn more for
the future.

HOW SHOULD I READ THIS BOOK?
If you’re completely new to Godot, then this book should be read from
cover to cover, chapter by chapter, in the order you encounter them. I
recommend reading the book through first without being at the software and
then going back and following along in the software on the second reading,
completing the projects and exercises step by step. If you have some prior
experience with game engines, Godot or otherwise, you may find it more
useful to skip ahead to specific chapters of interest.

WHAT OUTCOMES CAN I EXPECT
FROM THIS BOOK?
By reading this book, you will explore an overview of the Godot engine as
a game development tool. The book is written for newcomers to the engine
and doesn’t require any specific pre-knowledge. Chapter 4 on Programming
introduces the Scripting Language, GDScript, and assumes a basic
understanding of programming concepts, such as variables, functions, and
loops. You can get this knowledge by learning languages like Python,
JavaScript, or C#. However, you may also be able to pick up these concepts
as you work through the chapters here. Apart from code, I approach each
chapter as an introduction to a specific feature, or set of features, in Godot.
This foundational knowledge will allow you to start using Godot with a
new confidence and fluency that will let you build games. There will
always be more to learn, as with any tool, but the knowledge here can act as
a skeleton, or framework, to which new ideas and new learning can be
attached with greater understanding.

CAN’T I JUST LEARN ALL THIS
STUFF FROM YOUTUBE ANYWAY?
Yes, you can. That shouldn’t be surprising in a fast-paced, tech-driven
industry where people share knowledge with each other all the time. There
is no ‘secret body’ of game development knowledge that unlocks the secrets
of professional game development. Being a professional game developer is
about practicing your skills over time and seeing a game engine as a
problem-solving tool. What this book does, which is sometimes harder to
achieve on YouTube, is package the beginner knowledge into a structured

learning pathway, where different subjects are introduced in a logical order
that allows you to get the most from your learning, saving you time.

DOES THIS BOOK FEATURE
COMPANION FILES?
Yes. Many of the exercises presented in the book feature companion files.
However, I try to keep the projects as empty of assets as possible, so you
can focus on the concepts and ideas themselves. For this reason, I try to
introduce projects in such a way that you don’t need the files, even though
they are available.

ISN’T THIS BOOK OUT OF DATE
ALREADY?
Well, that depends on when you’re reading this. But, in a fast-paced
industry that changes almost daily, almost every book, article, video, or
resource is in some way out of date. Nonetheless, this book features so
many foundational concepts, which – despite surface changes – have
remained the same in Godot and in game development for a long time. For
this reason, depending on when you read this, the latest version of Godot
may feature UI changes and buttons in slightly different places, but many of
the concepts will be the same. For best results, I recommend using Godot
4.4.
OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER 1
Introducing Godot
Getting to Know the Engine
DOI: 10.1201/9781003484523-1

Welcome to the bustling world of game development, and congratulations
on choosing Godot for making your games. Godot is simply an amazing
piece of software from which you can build nearly any game imaginable.
You’re probably here because you want to make video games
professionally, either as an employee working at an established games
company or as a self-employed independent developer making your own
games in your own way for a niche audience. Either way, this chapter cuts
to the chase about what Godot is in general terms. It further explores the
many excellent reasons to choose Godot for your next game, as well as
some important limitations to be aware of. Making games is a highly
technical and time-consuming process. For this reason, it’s essential to
weigh many broader technical points before investing your valuable time
into creating any games using Godot, or any engine, to ensure that you’re
making the right decisions for the right reasons within the very busy world
that we all live in. I’m very excited to show you the amazing Godot. So,
let’s get started.

1.1 WHAT EXACTLY IS GODOT?
Godot is a game engine. This software is specifically designed to help you
make games, both 2D and 3D. Its features and toolset are purpose-built to
support technically aware people to assemble games in a convenient and
flexible way, striking a fragile balance between ease of use and technical
power. Godot is not an artificial intelligence (AI) for generating games
automatically at the click of a button, nor is it a no-code environment where
cookie-cutter games are customized entirely using the mouse in a drag-anddrop way, requiring no previous game development knowledge. Godot
aspires to neither of these. Rather, Godot assumes some basic, technical
expertise from the user – such as familiarity with 2D and 3D concepts – and
it offers them a hugely powerful and convenient suite of tools for making
professional-grade games through an easy-to-use interface, known as an
Integrated Development Environment (IDE). To learn and use Godot
effectively, you don’t need to have previously used any other engine or to
have taken any classes in game development. However, a basic awareness
of computer programming (in any popular language) and a foundational
grasp of 3D (such as a coordinate system measured in X, Y, and Z) are
assumed by both Godot as an engine and by the rest of this book too (Figure
1.1).

FIGURE 1.1 Godot being used to create a marble runner game. ⏎
Godot’s comprehensive feature set, like that of almost every other game
engine, is designed to support the creation of a game throughout most of its
lifetime. Godot does a superb job of this. Specifically, a ‘typical’ game
developer who is making a ‘typical’ game will use Godot in all the
following four major ways, taken sequentially.
1. Asset Importing. The starting point for building a game inside Godot
is to import ready-made props into Godot. This includes meshes – like
characters, weapons, rocks, and trees – and also music and sound, and
some but not all animations. This represents your full menu of content,
which can be included within the game world. Note that Godot
assumes you have all these things ready-made and also in a format and
medium that it can accept optimally. Godot is not a content creation
tool, like Blender, Maya, or 3DS Max. Content creation tools are used
by artists to begin with nothing and then to sculpt meshes, draw
textures, create rigging, and create other data as a collection of assets.

Those assets themselves are exported from the content creation tool in
a specific format and can be fed into Godot for use inside a game.
Godot therefore supports the import process according to a specific set
of rules, allowing developers to import their assets from content
creation software into the engine, where the assets can finally be used
as-is within a game. If a developer later changes their mind about the
fundamental structure of any imported asset – such as wanting to
change a pine tree into a willow tree instead – then the artist must
return to the content creation software and make the changes there
prior to re-exporting the new version again back into Godot. Later
chapters of this book will explore the import process in more depth in
the context of using Blender as a content creation tool.
2. Scene Construction. Importing assets is about getting content into
Godot in a form that is accessible and usable. Once the import process
is completed, developers may then use the imported content. Most
notably, this happens through level design or scene construction.
Godot offers extensive level design tools, allowing you to place
meshes meaningfully within a 3D space to build both interior and
exterior worlds, from forests to space stations, depending on your
assets. Additionally, Godot offers tools for configuring imported
characters – such as humanoid characters – to behave as intended and
tools for customizing how the surface of meshes are rendered, as well
as many other tools that ultimately affect how the stage is dressed,
made, and behaves. The full breadth of tools offered here is truly
staggering, powerful, and in constant flux in each new release. No
exhaustive list would be possible or even useful. Rather, these tools
collectively are used for building worlds from the ready-made assets
you import. It is also these tools that most readily come to mind when

most people think of a game engine and its value. We will cover a
substantial number of these tools throughout the book.
3. Coding and Testing. After a developer has created at least the basic
template of a world from imported assets, they are ready to make
things come alive by using programming. This includes making the
player character move around and jump in response to player input and
making non-player characters (NPCs) behave with intelligence and
reason. It also includes applying the rules and forces of the game, such
as recognizing physical collisions when they occur, creating gravity
and physical forces that pull objects downwards, and creating a winand-loss condition that allows the player to progress from level to
level. In Godot, such gameplay behavior may be created by a
programmer using one of two languages, namely GDScript or C#. C#
has the widest industry traction generally as a language, but
surprisingly, it is GDScript that is most commonly used in Godot.
More on this subject is discussed later. Unlike many other popular
engines, Godot comes with a complete code editor that lets you write
and debug code directly from the Godot interface, with no external
software required.
4. Exporting. The final tools that developers normally use in Godot are
the export tools. These allow developers at the end of the development
process to take a fully made game inside the engine and to convert it
automatically into a standalone, executable form, which people can
play independently. This exported version of a game is standalone
insofar as it doesn’t require players to have the Godot engine installed
themselves to play the game. The game can simply be played as a selfcontained entity on the player’s computer, like any other application.
The export process is presented to developers through only a limited

set of ‘simple looking’ windows inside Godot, but it is actually a
complicated process in many cases. By default, Godot can export
games for the PC platform, mobile, web, and consoles too. That
sounds exciting. However, each of these export options is attached to
many conditions, limitations, and technical minutiae, some of which
we will visit later in this book. As with most engines, there is a world
of difference between the advertised platforms that you can,
technically, export to and the platforms that, in practice, you will
feasibly be able to export to. This can be a painful area where creative
aspiration can meet the cold, hard reality of limitations – with cost,
time, expertise, law, and regulation being important factors.
NOTE. Before proceeding further, check out some of the excellent
work from the talented Godot community being created by using the
engine here: https://godotengine.org/showcase/

1.2 THE POWER OF GODOT –
REASONS TO USE THE ENGINE
Godot is an incredibly powerful and desirable engine. It unquestionably
holds its own in a fast-paced world where many excellent engines exist.
Developers today are simply spoiled for choice when it comes to game
engines. A quick search online reveals that Unity, Unreal, GameMaker,
RPG Maker, GDevelop, Construct, Stride, and many other engines exist to
help developers turn their dreams into games. And, rest assured, all these
engines are excellent choices. That is why all of them are still being used
today and all have survived for long periods of time, and some through
especially difficult times too. The question as to which engine one should
use for their next game is best met not by finding fault with the competition,

but by understanding the many highlights and strengths of each engine to
see how it connects with your purpose. That is, by understanding the many
different ways that an engine will add value to what you plan to do. Godot
is certainly not alone in being amazing and in having many wonderful
characteristics that we can all enjoy and celebrate as developers. But this
section highlights some key strengths of the Godot engine. It looks at
important ways in which Godot, as an engine choice, can benefit you, your
business, and your games immensely. In short, it looks at some of the
underlying ways in which Godot is so powerful, and why it makes a great
choice in the contemporary world of game development. It is important to
at least understand these reasons, even if not all of them apply to your case
or are especially important to you. By understanding the strengths and
benefits it brings, we can also plan better for the future.

1.2.1 Godot Is Open Source
Open source is basically the idea that a program’s source code is ‘made
public’ such that absolutely anybody (including you) can fully inspect the
code, view it, learn from it, and, potentially, even modify or enhance it for
their own purposes or to contribute back to the community. Being able to
read and understand the source code necessarily requires a certain level of
technical knowledge, but the idea of open source is that any interested
person can access the code of a program at any time. Godot is a fully opensource engine in this sense. You can view its complete source code here:
https://github.com/godotengine/godot. An open-source engine is especially
valuable to a game developer because it means that a developer can see how
their engine is made under the hood, feel confident about what it does, and
be able to amend or enhance the engine to suit their needs if necessary,
including to fix bugs or to add features.

Most comparable engines are not open source. And even if some others
are open source, it’s not usually under the same generous terms as Godot.
Instead, most engines are proprietary, and their source code cannot be
viewed or modified by anybody but the engine developers themselves or
anybody else they grant permission to view. The code is therefore locked up
inside a black box, metaphorically. Such cases mean that you, as a game
developer and a user of the engine, must necessarily trust the vendor (the
engine creator) to fix any substantive bugs that may be found in the engine,
to responsibly maintain the engine code, and to periodically release new
features – including security features – to keep pace with industry
developments, cybersecurity, and general change. Given that the game
engine will be at the core of your business if you choose to use it for game
development, closed-source engines therefore require you to put a lot of
trust into a single engine vendor whose interests may or may not align with
your own. If they do align with your own, it’s possibly only coincidentally
so. It’s worth reflecting on. Now, this kind of implicit trust may be a trust
that you are willing to give to an engine developer for the sake of making
games. After all, we put our trust into many different companies simply to
do our jobs on a daily basis in many areas of life. However, in a bustling
world where high-quality open-source engines are easily available for game
development, it is not a trust that you must give. Nor is it a trust that engine
developers are entitled to. Consequently, open source as a model helps
developers feel like an integral part of the engine development community,
even if they don’t actually modify an engine or even if they simply use it
‘as is’ to make games. It still gives them a level of scrutiny and input into
the engine, and it helps them to understand the engine more deeply.

1.2.2 Godot Is Free Software
Godot is free software, and that’s truly marvelous news for everybody.
However, ‘free software’ is more of a movement than a price issue.
Although Godot is indeed free of any price to download and use, even for
commercial purposes, this is not actually what is meant when it’s said to be
‘free software’. Software is classed as ‘free’ by the Free Software
Foundation (FSF) when it supports four basic freedoms for users
(https://www.gnu.org/philosophy/free-sw.en.html#four-freedoms (Not
accessible as of [08-08-2025])). Namely, the freedom to run the program for
any purpose, the freedom to view the source code, the freedom to
redistribute copies of the original program, and the freedom to redistribute
any modified versions of the program. With Godot, you get all those
freedoms, and it’s free in the common sense of the word too. It literally
costs nothing. You can find out more about how Godot is free software by
viewing the following license page on the Godot website:
https://godotengine.org/license/. Knowing that an engine is free software is
empowering for a developer, because it shifts an important kind of control
from engine developers to users of engines, allowing developers not only
access to the source code, as already mentioned, but also the ability to run
the engine unencumbered by various other restrictions and limitations in
law.
NOTE. You may wonder: if Godot truly is free of charge, then how
does it make money and support itself? After all, there must surely be
costs even in making the engine available to download. One way is by
support from the community in donations. You can find out more and
donate to this excellent community by visiting the following donations
page here: https://fund.godotengine.org/

1.2.3 Godot Is Cross-Platform
Godot stands apart as one of the most cross-platform engines available
today. This is not about the different platforms that you can eventually
export your games to, such as mobile and consoles. That is important, but
that’s not what is meant in this section. Rather, it’s about the different
platforms that Godot, as an engine, can run on during development,
allowing you to develop and work on different types of computers. Godot
runs on Windows, Mac, and Linux. Additionally, there is also a Web Editor
version (https://editor.godotengine.org/releases/latest/), which is Godot
running inside a web browser. Within the world of Linux, Godot can run on
many different flavors, including Ubuntu (https://ubuntu.com/), PopOS
(https://pop.system76.com/), and Mint (https://linuxmint.com/).
Impressively, Godot is not substantially feature-limited on any platform,
and so it looks, feels, and behaves the same on all supported platforms in
most respects. This book does not assume that you’re using any particular
platform. You can use Windows, Mac, or Linux and follow along with the
book successfully. It is, however, worth mentioning that some export
options – such as exporting to iOS or to consoles – do make platform
requirements due to how those platforms work, rather than from any
limitations of Godot. This does not apply to any projects created in the book
but is worth remembering for your own projects in the future. For example,
you may need an iMac to export for iOS platforms or a special
Development Hardware Version of a console (such as a Nintendo Switch) to
successfully build for those platforms.

1.2.4 Godot Is for 2D and 3D
Godot is a general-purpose game engine and resolutely doesn’t, by design,
attach itself to any one style or genre of game, as some other engines may

elect to do, for better or worse. Rather, Godot follows a similar and
praiseworthy line to both Unity and, to some extent, Unreal by offering an
extensive feature set for creating both 2D and 3D games, as well as
allowing interesting hybrids anywhere between. This is reflected in the
naming conventions used throughout the engine, as we will see later, such
as in class names and object names, where many items are post-fixed with a
2D or a 3D designation. In addition, Godot also supports AR and VR
development and can also include live-action videos. In short, Godot
abstracts game development to its widest practicable extent and supports
the maximum kind of creative freedom, allowing developers to build games
in any genre, in any style, and on almost any platform. In theory, this offers
you significant creative freedom at the design stages. As with all engines,
each design choice necessarily comes with its technical limitations at the
implementation stage, often constrained by the hardware on which the game
runs, as well as by your development budget. This marks the collision point
where ideas meet reality. There will always be limits to the number of
polygons renderable on any single frame, the number of objects shown to
any one camera, the maximum size of textures, the capacity of music or
audio that can be played, the totality of post-processing that can be applied,
and so on. These limitations are almost always context-sensitive, and they
happen because computer power is finite and precious and because our
pockets are not bottomless. But all these technical limitations largely
determine only how deep one may go, and not how wide. And that’s
empowering. In terms of width, indeed, Godot allows both 2D and 3D, AR,
and VR, and this is among the widest of all possible widths. We will see
later how to create content in Godot in both 2D and 3D, as well as a mixed
medium.

1.2.5 Godot Is Tried and Tested
A not-unimportant question to ask when choosing any engine is, has the
engine been used previously by anybody to actually make any real,
playable, and finished games? This question is relevant because its answer,
if positive, may give us some reassurance that the engine is battle-tested and
ready to be of service. If the answer is no, you may be dealing with either a
very new engine or a deeply problematic one. This alone need not stop you
from using the engine. After all, the very first game for any new engine
must be made by someone. But it should lead you to ask further probing
questions about why before taking the important leap. Certainly, if you are
very new to game development, I would strongly discourage you from
choosing a brand new, untested, and poorly documented game engine.
Doing so is usually the starting point for a project that ends badly, assuming
it doesn’t get abandoned beforehand. However, with Godot, the entire issue
is muted because the answer here is firmly ‘yes’. Yes, Godot has now been
used by many different developers to power many excellent games in many
genres on nearly every contemporary platform. The Godot showcase page,
with its list of commercially created Godot-powered games, stands as an
impressive testament to the clear momentum that Godot is gaining industrywide as its successful adoption increases. This can be both a cause of
optimism and excitement in making the choice to use Godot. It is also an
indication that community support – such as technical support – for the
engine is sufficiently robust. It’s certainly robust enough to create the
unquestionable climate that we now have where a steady stream of Godot
releases is always flowing.

1.2.6 Godot Is Supported
The concept of ‘support’ in the world of computing is a truly messy one
indeed. Almost no program is released today without ‘support’, and no
sensible company or developer wants to declare their software is ‘totally
unsupported’, even for a lower price. Support as a concept is a ‘warm
blanket’ and a ‘feel good’ word. It feels like the kind of thing that every
program should have. Whenever you choose software, it certainly feels
good knowing that there’s ‘support’ around if you wake up one day and find
yourself unfortunate enough to need it. But what does it really amount to in
practice? What does ‘support’ really look like, especially for a free and
open-source game engine like Godot?
For some, the ideal support option is the corporate dream: a premium and
shiny package that you pay a company handsomely to deliver to get access
to a direct hotline linking you instantly to someone incredibly
knowledgeable with solid answers readily available on demand. Of course,
the reality of that scenario might simply be you asking questions endlessly
to an obtuse chatbot that fails to grasp even the fundamentals before you
scream out for a human who truly isn’t there. But in any case, none of these
methods is normally how support works in free and open-source software
for game developers. It’s simply not what support means, and often this is
for the better. For Godot, support takes two major forms. That is, the act of
getting help to use the software effectively will lead you to one of two
places, and maybe both.
1. Community
Godot, as an engine, is supported by an amazing community of
talented, knowledgeable, and very kind-hearted people who spend a lot
of time online simply helping other developers use the Godot engine to

make games. These people are not employees or paid support workers.
Rather, they are other members of the community who also use Godot
and want it to succeed, and they choose to go online and share their
knowledge to help. The community is a great place for asking
questions, sharing problems, and generally hearing about upcoming
features in the engine. The community is spread across multiple social
channels, which you can access freely here:
https://godotengine.org/community/
2. Documentation
Godot is a well-documented engine. It features a comprehensive online
library of resources to both learn and use the engine, ranging from
how-to tutorials targeted at newcomers to more in-depth reference
documentation for experienced users, such as class API
documentation. During this book and during your career as a Godot
game developer, the documentation will inevitably be your constant
companion and friend. It will help you reference important
information, so you’ll probably have it open and accessible always.
Please don’t fall into the dangerous trap of believing that support is
only for newcomers, as though experienced developers somehow reach
such a point of inward know-how that the documentation becomes
superfluous for them. This isn’t true. Godot is so wide and deep that
you’ll always have a need to look up things. Thankfully, in addition to
the online library, Godot also has an offline built-in version of the
reference documentation directly in the editor. This will be covered
later.

1.2.7 Godot Is Interoperable
Interoperability is an engine’s ability to play nicely with other related
software. In this respect, Godot does an unquestionably great job. Godot
can import lots of different types of data from external sources. As we’ll
see, you can import images as textures in most common formats, such as
PNG and TIFF; you can import audio and sounds as OGG or WAV; you can
import fonts from standard font files like OTF; and you can import 3D
meshes as FBX or GLTF files. If some of those file types are unfamiliar to
you, don’t worry. We’ll cover them later in the book. For now, it is
sufficient to note that Godot can import many media types and can output to
many different platforms. It should be mentioned that one of the historical
reasons why interoperability is so crucially important for a game engine –
including Godot – is because game engines are not, strictly speaking,
content creation tools. As mentioned earlier, Godot is not used by artists to
create 3D models or by composers to make soundtracks. These kinds of
assets are created ex nihilo and externally, in other software such as Blender
or Audacity. Eventually, they are exported from these programs in particular
file formats and then imported into Godot, ready-made and ready to use.
Without this pipeline of interoperability, therefore, Godot would essentially
be near unusable because you couldn’t otherwise import anything.
NOTE. Although you can import meshes into Godot, that doesn’t
mean that Godot supports every feature of your content creation
software. Depending on which program you use to make your 3D
models and which features within that program you use, some data
may export as intended and others not. This can lead to models looking
or behaving slightly differently in Godot compared to the content

creation software. We will discuss this important issue again later in
the book.

1.3 GODOT – ITS BENEFITS AND
LIMITATIONS
There is a true and meaningful sense in which Godot – and any game
engine generally – may be said to have ‘unlimited potential’. Indeed, a
game engine can be used to make almost anything imaginable, whether
that’s Unity, Godot, Unreal, or any engine. This is true enough.
Nonetheless, we find ourselves in a world of many practical constraints –
including hardware and time and budget. We must usually make
compromises in our workflow to accommodate these limits. We take
shortcuts and avoid expensive plans. This is not due to the limitations of
software but because we need to get things done in the shortest time
possible and within the lowest budget possible. Thus, different engines meet
our needs in different ways. Different engines shine for different purposes
and applications. This is because of their development history, where
features are added to serve various kinds of users over time. And so, there
are some types of games for which Godot is ideally suited, simply because
of the features it has, the documentation available, and the way those
features are implemented currently. But conversely, and for the same
reasons, some games are more inconvenient to make in Godot than in other
engines, even though they are not impossible to make. This is true for all
engines, and Godot is no exception. This section therefore takes some time
to explore the general limitations of Godot to help you set your expectations
before starting projects.
1. Assets and Libraries

Assets are props. They include all the ready-made models, textures,
animations, and music that you can simply drop into your game to
assemble a scene. This includes weapons, characters, architectural
elements, trees and foliage, special effects, and whole behavior
systems. Now, you can make your own custom assets from scratch
using additional software, or you can source ready-made assets (free
and commercial) from third parties over online marketplaces. The
Unity and Unreal engines both have truly enormous online
marketplaces filled with assets that you download or buy. This is great
because you can assemble good-looking games quickly by using them,
whether they are production-grade games or early prototypes. The
main creative downside to using these non-exclusive assets is that
many other developers may have used them many times before you, so
your game could end up appearing like a lot of others. But that said,
there are still many ways you could tweak or adjust assets to appear
meaningfully unique. This is about striking an artistic balance and
depends on good judgment more than good software. Godot, however,
doesn’t yet have an equivalent asset store, as we will see. There is a
growing and expanding Asset Library in Godot, which we will
explore, and it contains interesting and useful assets. And there are
other sites too, seeking to become an asset library for Godot. However,
these places do not offer a similar level of choice or sophistication
when compared to some other engines. For this reason, Godot users
don’t have the same immediate access to as big a library of readymade content as Unreal or Unity. This is not necessarily a problem if
you’re making your own assets or are happy with the more limited
choice from the Asset Library. However, if you’re hoping for a

massive library of Godot-specific, production-grade, ready-made
materials, then you could end up disappointed.
NOTE. There are also third-party sites that offer general-purpose
assets for multiple engines, like Godot, such as
https://kenney.nl/assets.
2. Third-Party Integrations
Some popular third-party tools in game development, like FMOD and
wWise – which are used extensively for sound design – have varied
support for Godot. There are many other tools and libraries too, such
as MongoDB, Firebase, and hardware integrations like Arduino. Here,
the support situation is rapidly changing for many tools as Godot gains
wider adoption. However, in several instances, some tools are simply
not built with Godot compatibility out of the box yet. There may be
hacks or workarounds to build this compatibility manually. That’s one
of the great benefits of open source, but it can be time-consuming,
especially if you’re a solo developer. In other cases, some tools may
have either full or partial support, and this may be all that is needed.
Godot is a growing and establishing engine. As such, industry-wide
acceptance is growing, and so is third-party support. It’s important to
recognize and research this issue upfront because, if you’re coming to
Godot from another engine like Unity or Unreal, where third-party
support is wider, you may have expectations around third-party
integrations. Particularly if you’re migrating from another engine and
have a project that uses such integrations already. If these integrations
are crucial to you and your team, please do research about their
compatibility with Godot before starting your next project or migrating
an existing one to avoid any unpleasant (or pleasant) surprises!
3. Language Support

Most engines support a programming language. This language is used
by programmers to code gameplay instructions, which define how a
game should behave when played. For example, how many weapons
can a player collect? Which button makes a character jump? Should
enemies chase you? These are the kinds of questions, among many
others, that are answered with coded solutions. Godot supports two
languages, namely GDScript and C#. You don’t need to know or use
both languages. Typically, you choose just one and use it consistently
throughout a single project. Godot primarily supports GDScript, and
this book features code only in that language. Although C# is
supported, it has sometimes lagged behind in feature support.
GDScript is like, but still distinct from, Python. If you already code in
Python, you’ll probably feel at home with GDScript. It’s a great
language. I detail it further later in the book. But it does pose a
potential limitation. Many engines and tools use other general-purpose
languages, which exist in many industries. GDScript, by contrast, is
domain-specific. You’re only likely to find it in Godot. So, it has a
narrow application.
4. Rendering, Realism, and Performance
Godot features an intricate, versatile, and powerful render engine. The
renderer is the internal engine component responsible for presenting
2D and 3D imagery to the screen in a performant way across devices.
Using the Godot renderer, you can express complete 3D worlds with
detailed lighting, animation, surface details, and much more. It’s truly
amazing indeed. However, in comparison to Unity and Unreal, the
Godot renderer still trails behind in terms of feature parity. There are
still some things that a Unity or an Unreal renderer can do, or do
better, that the Godot renderer cannot do. This is not a criticism of

Godot, but rather an important technical point of difference worth
noting. In practice, this probably means that you’ll find it easier to
make a photorealistic Triple-A game in Unreal or Unity compared to
Godot. But not everybody wants to make such a game. For cartoon
styles, retro styles, illustrated styles, 2D comic styles, and more, you’ll
find plenty of great options in Godot.
5. Console Exports
The dream of ‘build once and deploy everywhere’ still exists in the
game development community. It’s an exciting idea. It’s what most
engines seem to aspire to. It’s the thought of using a game engine to
build your game only once and then using the supplied engine tools to
output that game as a standalone entity, one that runs smoothly and the
same on as many platforms as possible – such as PC, mobile, and
consoles. Unfortunately, the ugly reality with every engine is that
platform-specific work by the developer must happen to make a game
run and run well, on different platforms. And sometimes that work will
be substantial. This is no different in Godot. Godot can, in theory,
export your game to many platforms, including consoles. However, to
achieve that in practice, a lot of work is needed. For consoles, you’ll
probably need to apply for a license with the console manufacturer,
you’ll need to understand how its game controllers work, and you’ll
need to meet various content guidelines and legal requirements. This
can get pretty complicated quickly for a lone developer. And if you
don’t get a handle on those things, then no amount of theory will
deliver your game to those platforms. In sum, therefore, if you’ve
never made a game before or have never worked with Godot before, I
strongly recommend you pick one or two easily accessible platforms

for newcomers and stick with those initially for your first title. This
includes PC, web, and mobile platforms.
6. Career Potential
Throughout the rest of this book, I assume that you’ve chosen Godot
as an engine because you want to make your own games or to work
with friends and colleagues on building a game together of your own
design. Godot is an amazing tool for that. It’s perfect for indies. I think
you’ll love it! But sometimes, people don’t choose to learn an engine
for this end. They don’t choose an engine to make their own games.
Instead, they choose to learn an engine for getting a job at an
established games studio to work in the industry on potentially biggerbudget games designed and led by other people. In this case, these
people learn an engine to add value to their curriculum vitae or
resume, and there’s nothing wrong with that. However, I do not
recommend Godot currently for this purpose. If you scan the job ads
worldwide for most game studios today, they often seek people with
experience in Unity or Unreal. This is largely because studios have
been using those tools for a prolonged period. Godot is very new by
comparison. It truly has lots to offer but has not yet established itself
within the mainstream of game development. That may happen in the
future. Nobody knows. But it’s not being used by big studios yet day to
day, and so there are consequently fewer job opportunities available
for Godot. So, if resume building is your aim, I recommend Unreal,
Unity, or both. But, if making your own games in your own way in
your own time as an indie is your aim, then Godot is great!

1.4 DOWNLOADING AND INSTALLING

GODOT
It’s now finally time to move away from introduction, theory, and potential.
By reaching this point, you’ve decided that Godot is the right choice for
you, and you probably have a wealth of excellent game ideas in mind. So,
it’s time to move forward, using Godot itself in practice. This is the fun
part. The startup process will span several steps in sequence: preparation,
download, installation, and configuration. Let’s get started.

1.4.1 Preparation
Installing development software, like a game engine, is an important step.
Game engines are complex pieces of software that can potentially access
many files and change many settings. For this reason, you should take
important preparation steps.
1. Decide which operating system you will be developing on
throughout the project: Windows, Mac, or Linux. Godot supports them
all. If you’re working in a team, I recommend that all members use the
same operating system throughout the entirety of the project. That’s
not essential, of course. You can have different team members on
different operating systems, and you can even change your operating
system during development if you really want to. However, the choice
of operating system is within your power from the outset, and by
keeping all these factors constant during development (by not
changing them), you are reducing your confounding variables in the
event of any problems. You will be making your life simpler. So, I
recommend it.
2. Backup your system and your data. Your data and time are precious.
Time is non-refundable. Once you’ve spent it, you cannot get it back.

So please invest some time now in backing up your computer prior to
installing any software to have peace of mind. Game development is
complicated. It typically relies on heavy software, lots of files, lots of
revisions and versions, and lots of configuration changes. It’s easy to
make mistakes and for things to go wrong. I can’t tell you how many
good things I’ve lost due to bad backup practices. So, it’s important
that you backup and make copies of all your data and software
rigorously to ensure you don’t lose anything important along the way.
This includes both personal and professional files. And remember, if
you share your computer with others – such as team members or
family members – then be sure their data gets backed up too.
Furthermore, as you progress with this book and game development
more generally, be sure to make regular backups of your work and data
as you go. Build data backup and storage into your habitual working
practice. You will be glad that you did. There are many options for
backing up data. Your operating system will have some built-in
options, and there are many cloud storage products too for retaining
backups and portable hard drives. Be sure to save your data securely. If
you’re using cloud storage, then use a secure username, passphrase,
and multi-factor authentication. If you’re using portable hard drives, be
sure to keep them in a safe location – such as a home safe or a separate
location – and encrypt your data where possible. You can get free
encryption tools with Gnu Privacy Guard (GPG) https://gnupg.org/.
3. Secure your computer with security software. As game developers,
we’re going to be downloading software from the internet and working
with third-party files quite often. Further, some of these assets contain
code. So, it’s very important that your computer is properly secured
with a firewall, antivirus, and general security software prior to

working in games. And further, you adopt good working practices
generally that respect your system security and privacy. Each operating
system has different security suites that you can download or buy, and
I recommend researching these carefully to find the package that best
meets your needs. The UK government has issued some accessible and
friendly guidelines to general security practices online that you may
find helpful. Here: https://www.ncsc.gov.uk/collection/top-tips-forstaying-secure-online.

1.4.2 Installing Godot
1. Download Godot. Godot is a free, open-source game engine, and
there are at least three ways to download it. First, you can visit the
official Godot website here (https://godotengine.org/), click
‘Download’, and choose the relevant build for your operating system
(Windows, Linux, or Mac). From the official website, you have the
option to download two versions of Godot: the Standard Edition and
the .NET Edition. For this book, you should use the Standard Edition.
The .NET Edition is for users who want to code with C#, as opposed to
GDScript.
You can also download Godot from Steam here:
https://store.steampowered.com/app/404790/Godot_Engine/ and from
Itch.io here: https://godotengine.itch.io/godot.
I do not recommend downloading Godot from any location or source
other than any of the three methods mentioned above.
NOTE. You can download earlier versions of Godot from the Godot
archive here: https://godotengine.org/download/archive/. This archive
stretches back to the very first release of Godot in 2014.

NOTE. Projects in this book were made with Godot 4.3, but they
should also work in Godot 4.4. This book was written at the change
point between 4.3 and 4.4, and so the material is relevant to both
versions. I recommend using Godot 4.4. You can download a copy of
either (or both) versions from the Godot download archive. You can
have multiple versions of Godot on your computer. If you use a
different version, some of the projects in the associated book files may
not open or behave correctly, although much of the information and
knowledge from the chapters will still be relevant. In the world of
game development, don’t assume that all later engine versions are fully
backward compatible with earlier ones. Often, your projects break if
you try to open them in later versions of the engine. You should always
stick with the engine version that you used to create a project unless
you have a very good reason not to.
2. Unpack Godot. Godot is packaged in a compressed archive, which
can be extracted onto your computer in a local folder, such as
/MyDocuments/Godot. You’ll need to extract all files and folders
contained in the archive. Unusually, compared to most engines, Godot
doesn’t feature any automated installer. So, you’ll need to manually
create a desktop shortcut on your computer if you want quick access to
the Godot executable. For MacOS, Godot is code-signed and
notarized, which means it should run without issues. However, there is
a troubleshooting guide on the Godot website for all platforms, which
addresses common issues:
https://docs.godotengine.org/en/stable/tutorials/troubleshooting.html.
3. Run Godot for the first time. Double-click the Godot icon to run the
program on your desktop or laptop computer. The first screen to appear
is featured in Figure 1.2. The project list contains a list of recently

opened or used projects. If this is the first time you’re running Godot,
your project list will be empty.

FIGURE 1.2 Startup screen for Godot. ⏎

1.5 CONFIGURING GODOT
So, you’ve now installed Godot successfully on your computer and started
the launcher. You can check out your Godot version number from the
bottom right-hand side of the launcher window. Most important is the full
version number, for example, 4.3. This may be followed by other data,
depending on your operating system. From my screenshot, for example, you
can see that I am using Linux because of the postfix string ‘stable.flathub’.
A Windows or Mac installation would appear differently (see Figure 1.3).

FIGURE 1.3 Checking your Godot version. ⏎
NOTE. Always make a note of your Godot version if you move
between computers and prior to opening your projects. Remember that
it’s important for every team member to use the same version and for
you to retain the same Godot version throughout your project unless
there is an overriding reason not to.
Most of the configuration settings for Godot are embedded deeper
within the software, which we will see in the next chapter. However,
from the launcher, we can adjust important settings that people often
miss in their eagerness to jump into the software immediately. In the
top right-hand corner of the Launcher window, there is a Settings
button (see Figure 1.4).

FIGURE 1.4 Accessing Godot quick settings. ⏎
Let’s consider some of these settings further, as shown in Figure 1.5.

FIGURE 1.5 Godot quick settings. ⏎
Especially important settings here are the top three: Language, Interface
Theme, and Display Scale. Godot supports many languages, and the
Language setting determines how menu options are shown, etc. Be sure to
change this to whichever language you are most comfortable using.

However, this setting affects the Godot Editor interface for the developer
rather than the language of your game for the end user. Localization of a
game is an entirely different subject.
Second, the Interface Theme setting controls the color scheme for the
interface. Again, this is a matter of preference. Normally, I keep to the
default because it keeps the interface dark, making it easier on my eyes for
longer periods and making it easier to focus on the content of the game.
However, not everybody responds to darker themes in this way. I will,
however, be using the Light theme throughout this book because it makes
screenshots, especially in printed form, easier to see and read for a tutorial
book like this.
Third, the Display Scale setting is especially useful to change if you’re
developing on a large screen or an unconventional display – such as a TV.
In this instance, you may want to adjust this setting higher or lower to make
the interface more readable and pleasant to view. Changing this value
requires a restart of the software.

1.6 CONCLUSION
This chapter introduced the Godot engine within the broader context of the
games industry. As a game engine, among many game engines, it represents
a truly excellent choice for indie developers, industry newcomers, and those
seeking to change game engines. As we will see, Godot is a versatile and
powerful tool, capable of building many games in many genres. It is already
a widely used tool, and its user base is growing. In reaching this far, you
now have Godot installed on your computer, which is ready to use. The next
chapter focuses on getting started.
OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER 2
Getting Started with Godot
Your First Project
DOI: 10.1201/9781003484523-2

You’ve now installed Godot on your computer, and you could be using
Windows, Mac, or Linux as an operating system. This chapter explores how
to setup your first project in Godot, and any future projects, as well as how
to customize the Godot editor to best suit your development needs. At
almost every step of the way, Godot will present you with options –
sometimes complicated-sounding options. Often, you can simply settle for
the defaults, but it’s important to understand when and why you should
move away from them. So, we’ll investigate that carefully. This chapter also
explores how to create a scene within a Godot project, which will let you
start building levels. It will also explore using free and open-source Version
Control software so that you can effectively manage and keep track of your
projects over time. Let’s get started.

2.1 STARTING A GODOT PROJECT
Like almost every game engine today, Godot is a project-based application.
This simply distinguishes it from file-based applications like Photoshop,
GIMP, Word, Excel, Inkscape, and others. File-based applications operate
on single files, like an image or spreadsheet, which can be opened and

saved as a single unit. Godot, by contrast, operates on a folder and its
manifold contents, which could include many files and other folders and
subfolders, all being treated as a hierarchical collection held together as part
of a single project. This is important to know because, when backing up
your projects or sharing them with others, you can’t simply work with a
single file; you’ll need to work with many files and subfolders.
For our purposes in Godot, one Project is one Game. Therefore, you
create a new game by creating a new project. That project will contain all
the data needed for the game throughout its lifetime. If you intend to make
multiple games at the same time, jumping from the development of one to
the other, you’d then create one project per game. Creating a project in
Godot is straightforward. From the Project Creation window, simply hit the
Create button, as shown in Figure 2.1. You can also use the keyboard
shortcut Ctrl+N on Windows or Linux or Cmd + N on a Mac.

FIGURE 2.1 Creating a new project from the Project Creation
Window. ⏎

The options from the Project Creation screen are important for many
reasons. First, you should choose a suitable directory location on your
computer where all project files will be stored and maintained. Although
this can easily be changed later at any time, get into the habit of choosing
meaningful and well-organized locations from the start to prevent your files
from getting messy quickly. Poor folder organization can make your work
difficult with generic folder names, hard-to-find folders, and inappropriately
named files.

2.1.1 Choosing the Renderer
Most significant here, however, is the Renderer option. This relates to the
engine component responsible for drawing pixels to the screen. There are
three choices with slightly mysterious names: Forward+, Mobile, and
Compatibility. The default for Godot 4.3 is Mobile. For your first projects,
you’ll probably want to leave this setting as Mobile. However, here I
discuss some of the practical differences, although the Godot creation
window does a good job of explaining the options in an easy-to-understand
way.
Forward+
This is the renderer to choose when you want the best and highest
quality graphical performance from Godot, that is, the more
sophisticated graphics often found on desktop PCs and consoles.
Choosing this option unlocks a range of useful settings and features in
Godot and internally affects how Godot behaves to deliver highperformance graphics. This option gives you the best quality visuals at
the cost of compatibility. It doesn’t work well, or at all in some cases,
on older hardware, mobile devices, or in a web browser. So, you don’t

want to choose this option if your game is supposed to run on a mobile
phone, for example.
Mobile
This is a middle-ground option between Forward+ and Compatibility,
as its location in the options list suggests. Mobile supports a wide
range of performant graphical features, and this allows you to create
visually impressive results on both desktop and mobile. True, Mobile
may not be as comprehensive or as sophisticated as Forward+, but the
key here is whether the chosen mode can deliver the results you need
for the platforms you are supporting. This is a good choice for games
that will be mobile by design or for desktop games that you later port
for mobile.
Compatibility
This looks like the smelly option that nobody is supposed to choose.
However, it’s actually a powerful mode. It’s designed to support the
widest number of platforms and the greatest range of hardware
possible so that your game runs on almost anything, old or new
hardware. It comes at the cost of graphical quality or sophistication,
but it’s important to remember that even the most technically primitive
games can look beautiful under skillful art direction. So, it might seem
that you’re cutting off a load of features if you choose this mode, but
you might just be choosing the simplest option. You should choose this
mode if you’re making games for web browsers, mobile devices, lowend devices, or really old computers.
NOTE. Although you can technically change the renderer settings after
project creation, it becomes exponentially harder to change the further
you progress in development. For example, you may eventually create
a material, shader, or texture that works on desktop but not on mobile.

If you afterward change platforms from desktop to mobile, you’d need
to recreate this entire asset to keep it working. So, the bottom line is:
get the renderer setting correct as early as possible. That’s why you
chose this setting at the project creation stage! Decide early on which
platforms your game is intended for: desktop, console, mobile, web,
etc. Now, if you decide that you want multiple platforms, such as
desktop and mobile, but also want to take advantage of the desktoponly features for the desktop version, then you may need to create two
different projects, one for each version of your game.
NOTE. You can find more information about the Godot renderer
online here:
https://docs.godotengine.org/en/stable/contributing/development/core_
and_modules/internal_rendering_architecture.html.

2.1.2 Choosing Version Control
The Project Creation window features a Version Control setting. Later in
this chapter, we’ll consider version control in more depth. The default
setting is Git, and you’ll almost always leave this setting as-is, even if
you’re not using any version control. Don’t switch it to None. That’s not
going to be very helpful. You should only do that if you either intend to use
a version control system other than Git – such as Perforce – or if you know
that you’ll never, ever be using version control at all for the project, either
now or later.

2.2 EXPLORING THE INTERFACE
After creating a new project, you’ll be directed to the main editor interface
of Godot, where you’ll spend most of your development time. The interface

is not unlike Unity, Unreal, or most other contemporary game engines. So,
if you’re familiar with one or more of those, you’ll probably already feel
familiar with the surroundings here. However, if you’re new to game
development entirely, then we should certainly dig deeper into the interface
layout to help you understand what you’re seeing. Don’t skip this section.
Feeling at home in-engine is very important for your enjoyable use of the
software. See Figure 2.2 for the Godot interface. The interface can be
broken down into Sections 1 to 4, as discussed below.

FIGURE 2.2 The main Godot interface. ⏎
1. Section 1 of the interface, at the top-left side, is called the Scene Dock.
When you first launch Godot with an empty project, it’ll have only a
very limited set of buttons, as shown in Figure 2.2. The Scene Dock is
related to Section 3, the Scene View, which occupies most of the
screen. The Scene Dock updates to show a list of everything that exists
in the active scene (that is, the scene that you are currently viewing). If

you’re opening a newly created project, as we are, then you don’t yet
have any scenes in the project to view. In this case, the Scene Dock
shows you only buttons that are used to create a new scene, as shown
here.
2. The FileSystem Dock is, basically, an embedded Explorer or Finder
interface that shows you all the files contained within the Godot
project folder, as well as all subfolders and their contents. The contents
of this Dock are functionally different from the other Docks. The other
Docks focus on content that you make inside Godot, such as scenes,
player characters, weapons, and enemies. That is, the other docks
operate within the realm of your fiction. The FileSystem Dock, by
contrast, shows you all the files available to your project, such as
meshes, textures, animations, and code. This dock is grounded in the
reality of your computer, and it can be used to rename, move, add, and
delete actual files to and from your project, and, as we’ll see later, it
can be used to build connections in your game between elements that
rely on the files and their content.
3. The Scene View is unquestionably the largest region of space in the
Godot Editor. It can display different types of data, including a
complete Code Editor. However, normally, it shows the contents of the
active scene, that is, the current level or space of your game inside
which you’re working. You’ll be spending plenty of time here,
building 2D and 3D worlds. Now, when you first start Godot with a
new project, the Scene View is deceptive. It initially appears to show a
3D world with a grid, a skyline, and distance fog. It appears as though
content already exists. But, in fact, this is just what Godot shows you
by default whenever no scene is open or available for viewing. It’s a

strange indeterminate state, waiting for you to provide further
instructions.
4. The Inspector Dock is one of the most important. In short, when you
select elements in your project, such as the player character or a
weapon inside a scene, the Inspector will always update its contents to
show key, editable properties for the selected object, such as its
position, size, orientation, name, and much more. Through this tool,
we’re able to change the details of objects. We’ll be using this tool a
lot.

2.2.1 Creating Your First Scene
We could jump into the application settings and start tweaking preferences.
This is important to do. However, let’s first jump into creating a new scene
instead and finally get Godot out of its indeterminate state of emptiness.
You’ll probably find yourself doing this with many projects, as every game
needs at least one scene. It’s not essential to do this first, of course, but it’ll
offer us a clearer picture of how Godot works sooner rather than later. We’ll
explore Scenes in more depth later in the book. There is much to know
about them. Scenes in Godot have a special importance that is not found in
other engines. In short, a Scene is a single Euclidean space inside which
objects exist. Scenes begin as empty spaces, and you need to populate them
with the furniture of the world. Scenes can be 2D, having an X and Y
dimension only, horizontal and vertical. Or they can be 3D, having an X, Y,
and Z dimension. You cannot have a 4D scene. Now, in the practice of
game development, a scene would normally be a single level – as it would
be in a platformer game, like Mario or Sonic. Thus, a game with many
levels often has many scenes experienced in sequence: level 1, level 2, and
so on. There is no strict right or wrong about how to use scenes. They

logically divide the space within a game world into more manageable
chunks for the developer, and you must choose wisely how they do this. In
an open-world style game, with no concept of distinct levels, as we find in
platformers, you may use Scenes differently. In such a case, for example, a
single town exterior might be one scene, and the interior of each building
within the town might be defined in its own scene, one per building. And if
the buildings were large, like a castle, you may even subdivide that interior
space further into multiple scenes, one for the banquet hall and one for the
dungeon, and so on. So now, let’s create a new 3D scene. We’re not making
any particular game in this chapter; we’re just exploring the interface for
the first time by making a scene and taking note of important features. To
create a new scene, click the 3D scene button (see Figure 2.3).

FIGURE 2.3 Create a new 3D scene. ⏎
NOTE. At this point, you may reasonably ask: if a project is only one
game, then why have multiple scenes in a project at all? Why

subdivide the game world into smaller vacuums of unintuitive and
artificial space? Why not just create one massive scene to contain the
world and all its belongings and all its spaces and all its people?
Surely, such a monolithic structure of one scene more closely matches
the real world, in which everything exists in a single contiguous space?
Doing this surely makes things a lot simpler for us too, working with
only one scene rather than multiple separate ones. As we’ll see later in
the book, there are many excellent developmental reasons to contradict
common sense by dividing the world across multiple scenes, even
though the scenes may not be experienced by the player as separate.
There is an important gap between the appearance of the game world
to the player, on the one hand, and how the game is actually made
from scenes on the other.
Once a new scene is created, the Godot interface enters its more ‘normal’
and common mode, where most options are now available to you. You’ll
notice that the Scene Dock immediately shows a Node3D object in the list.
This lists the full contents of the new scene, of which Node3D is the only
inhabitant and is also the currently selected object by default. The
perspective view at the center of the interface shows the selected object in
3D space. The object looks invisible except for three arrows connected to it
in red (X), green (Y), and blue (Z). The right-hand Inspector Dock shows
many properties for the currently selected object, which are divided into
groups for easier access and organization (see Figure 2.4).

FIGURE 2.4 A new scene with a single object. ⏎
The final step of creating a new scene should be to save it so that Godot
understands it as a bona fide asset that belongs to the project, as opposed to
a temporary space. This is easy to achieve; you can choose Scene > Save
Scene or Scene > Save Scene As from the menu (Figure 2.5).

FIGURE 2.5 Saving a new scene. ⏎

2.2.2 Setting Editor Preferences
The previous section explored how to create a new 3D scene. There are
other scene types, such as 2D scenes and user interfaces, and these are
created in a very similar way to 3D. Before we examine scene development
and navigation in more detail, let’s ensure the Godot control scheme and
preferences are suited to your needs. This is especially important if you’re
using Godot on a laptop or multi-monitor configuration because some of the
settings covered here can make a major difference to how you use Godot.
Let’s see. Start by choosing Editor > Editor Settings from the menu to
show the Editor Settings. These settings are specific to the Godot
application on your computer, as opposed to your currently open project.

They do not affect the game that you are making directly. Rather, they
affect the editor tool itself. See Figure 2.6.

FIGURE 2.6 Accessing the editor settings. ⏎
From the Editor Settings Window, choose Editor from the left-hand
menu. From here, there are some high-level interface settings that are
useful. First, Dock Tab Style lets you choose whether to show icons, text, or
text and icons in the titles of interface tabs, such as the Inspector tab. Icon
only can save on-screen space, Text only keeps the interface feeling
minimalist, and Both (Text and Icon) are great for larger screens. I usually
choose both (see Figure 2.7).

FIGURE 2.7 Tweaking tabular display. ⏎
Another useful setting here is the Editor Screen and the Project Manager
Screen option, which appear on the same page. These let you control which
monitor the interface appears in by default if you have multiple monitors
connected. The default setting is Primary Screen. And you should leave it
as is unless you want to display the interface on a different monitor. A
further option to review is Save Each Scene on Quit, which should be
enabled by default. If it’s not, I recommend enabling it. This ensures that
any open scene is automatically saved when you close it either because you
are closing the editor entirely or because you’re opening a different scene
for viewing. Finally, another useful setting to enable is Multi-Window (see
Figure 2.8). This is enabled by default, so you shouldn’t need to activate it.
It allows you to detach some windows from the interface and move them
around separately. As we’ll see soon, this is useful for multi-monitor setups

where you want to display different editor features (such as a Code Editor)
on different monitors.

FIGURE 2.8 Enabling multi-window. ⏎
Later chapters demonstrate how Godot can interface with other software,
such as Blender, for importing content like 3D models and assets directly
into 3D scenes. If you check out the FileSystem > External Programs
option from the Editor Settings menu, you can specify other, related
programs on your computer to Godot. You can choose their file location. By
doing this, Godot will launch the relevant application whenever you try to
open an unsupported file in the FileSystem dock, which Godot cannot edit
directly, such as images and 3D models. As we’ll see, Godot can use images
and 3D models inside Scenes, but it cannot edit the original data. This is
why it’s useful to specify the locations of other software, in case you ever
need to quickly edit the originals while working inside Godot (Figure 2.9).

FIGURE 2.9 Specifying application paths. ⏎
NOTE. Common applications that you would choose here are
Photoshop, GIMP, or LibreSprite for Raster Image Editor; Illustrator
or Inkscape for Vector Image Editor; Audacity for Audio Editor; and
Blender or Maya for 3D Model Editor.
Next, we’ll configure the behavior of 3D scenes from the Editor Settings
dialog. To do this, select Editors > 3D from the left-hand menu. This
section features quite a few options. First, under the Navigation Scheme,
you can choose the keyboard shortcuts and control style for moving around
inside 3D scenes. We’ll see soon how to navigate 3D scenes. If you’re
familiar with other engines like Unreal or Unity or 3D software like Maya,
then you’ll probably want to set this as Maya. I’ll be using this Maya
convention throughout the book because it’s widely used in the industry. So,
let’s change the setting here (see Figure 2.10).

FIGURE 2.10 Updating the control scheme. ⏎
Finally, if you’re using Godot on a laptop with a trackpad rather than a
mouse, then be sure to enable Emulate Numpad (if your laptop doesn’t have
one) and Emulate 3 Button Mouse (see Figure 2.11). This ensures Godot
offers you the full range of navigation features on a laptop.

FIGURE 2.11 Enabling a 3-button mouse for laptops. ⏎

2.2.3 Hierarchies and 3D Scenes – Adding an
Object
Let’s create our first 3D object in a 3D scene. Well, actually, we already
have a 3D object in the scene we created earlier! This was added by default
when the scene was first made: a Node3D. By default, every scene must
have at least one object. That’s not a necessary, philosophical requirement.
That’s just the way Godot works practically. This is called the root Node. In
fact, in Godot, all ‘objects’ are called ‘nodes’. I’ll refer to them as such
from hereon. If you’re coming to Godot from the Unreal Engine, objects are
called Actors. If you’re from Unity, objects are called GameObjects. In
Godot, each object (or each separate thing) is a Node. So, every scene has a
root Node. You can’t delete this node without also destroying the scene
itself. The default Node3D, which was added automatically, is a ‘thing’ that
lives in the scene, but it’s an invisible thing. The player will never see it.

Now, although this node is 3D insofar as it lives within a 3D scene at a 3D
position, it doesn’t have any bulk or dimensionality. It has neither width nor
height nor depth. It is simply an ‘empty’ or a ‘point’, located at the scene’s
origin. It will essentially act as a folder, or a container, for all other nodes
that we may add in future. Therefore, this object is formal, structural, and
entirely conventional. So now let’s add a cube. Let’s add something that a
player could actually see and notice if they lived inside our scene. To do
this, right-click your mouse over the extant Node3D object from the Scene
Dock, and choose Add Child Node from the context menu (Figure 2.12).

FIGURE 2.12 Adding a child object. ⏎
When you select this option, Godot presents a Create New Node Window
(see Figure 2.13). We want to add a cube. However, like many occasions in

Godot, you can’t simply jump straight to the thing you want to add. There’s
no option for it. There is no ‘Generate Box’ button. You need to ‘build’ the
box from the simpler parts that are on offer. This makes Godot powerful
and flexible because you can build complexity. However, it also means that
creating simple objects quickly, like cubes, involves more steps than you
may think necessary or intuitive. To start, we need to add a
MeshInstance3D. Start to type this into the Search Field of the dialog.
Godot will make a match and present it as an option for you to choose from
the list below the search field. A MeshInstance3D is simply the basis, or
starting point, for any 3D model of any complexity: cubes, spheres,
cylinders, etc. Go ahead and select it, and then choose Select or hit the Enter
key to accept it.

FIGURE 2.13 Creating a Mesh Instance as the starting point for a
cube. ⏎

After the MeshInstance3D is added to the scene, you’ll notice that the
Scene dock changes substantially. It now shows the MeshInstance3D in the
list, and it is indented beneath the Node3D object above. The indentation
expresses a hierarchical relationship that exists between the Node3D and
the MeshInstance3D. In being added to the scene, the MeshInstance3D is a
Child Node of the Node3D, and the Node3D is a Parent Node of the
MeshInstance3D. This has practical implications. Specifically, if you delete
a parent from the scene, then you delete all its children too. If you move,
rotate, or resize a parent in 3D space, then the same effects will cascade
downward to all children. That is, children move with their parents, they
rotate with their parents, and they scale with their parents. However, if you
move a child, it will move independently of its parent. Changes to children
do not cascade upward to parents. This hierarchical (top-down) relationship
can be found everywhere in games. It’s powerful. It may seem a mere
formality right now if you’ve not encountered it before, but we’ll see
examples later of this relationship in action and how it can save us lots of
work further down the line (see Figure 2.14).

FIGURE 2.14 Adding a MeshInstance3D to the scene. ⏎
The newly created MeshInstance3D is created in an empty state, without
any dimension or bulk – just like the Node3D. However, from the
Inspector, we can change how this object is configured. From the
MeshInstance3D tab in the Inspector, we can select BoxMesh from the
Mesh drop-down list (see Figure 2.15).

FIGURE 2.15 Choosing a Mesh preset. ⏎
Choosing the BoxMesh preset will fire an internal Godot system to
generate a procedural box (that is, a box mesh based on numerical inputs).
We can even use the Inspector to tweak those inputs after creation if we
want to, such as the height, depth, and width. And that’s it! We’ve made a
box in just a few steps. You might have noticed that the Mesh drop-down
offered other Euclidean solids too; spheres and cylinders, for example
(Figure 2.16).

FIGURE 2.16 Generating a procedural box. ⏎
NOTE. Not everything is as it seems with our newly generated box. If
you were a player who could walk around that scene, for example,
you’d find that you could easily walk straight through the box as
though it were only an apparition – a ghostly box in appearance only.
We’ll see how to fix that kind of issue in a later chapter.

2.2.4 Viewport Navigation – Exploring a Scene
We’ve now made a cube in a 3D scene. That was simple. If we wanted to
build a scene more sophisticated than this, we’d eventually need the ability
to navigate around the 3D viewport and look around the scene to make
better-informed judgments on what to do, and we’d also need the ability to
transform objects in 3D space: move, rotate, and scale them into new
configurations according to our designs. Let’s start with understanding
navigation controls. That is, let’s get familiar with moving the viewport
camera around the scene. These controls will need to be habitual to you for

effective use of the engine. First, let’s be clear about what we’re doing: the
scene view, as shown in Figure 2.17, is our director’s eye view of the scene.
It’s not, however, what the player would necessarily see if they played the
game right now. They could potentially see the same scene but from a
totally different camera angle, perspective, etc. Here, I’m referring only to
our developer view of the scene, as presented in the Godot interface, so that
we – as creators – can move around as users to build our world effectively.
Thus, by changing the angle, view, and location of the perspective camera,
we do not affect what the player would see at all. That’s controlled
differently.

FIGURE 2.17 Navigating a Godot scene. ⏎

First, you can ‘dolly’ the camera forward or backward toward the
viewport center by rolling the middle mouse wheel or by rolling the vertical
line on your laptop trackpad. This scrolls your camera forward or backward
along an imaginary line in the direction that the camera is looking. The
movement is quite smooth. Some people would describe this action as a
Zoom, but that’s not technically what is going on. Zoom implies that the
camera is held stationary while its lens is adjusted to bring further objects
closer to its view. But here we are actually moving the camera toward our
focal point. If you don’t have a mouse wheel, you can also dolly by pressing
Ctrl + or Ctrl – on your keyboard to move forward or backward,
respectively (see Figure 2.18).

FIGURE 2.18 Dolly forward and backward. ⏎

You can also Pan the viewport camera up, down, left, and right. This
essentially slides the camera around a plane without any rotation. It’s like a
sidestep, but also includes an ‘up-step’ and ‘down-step’. To do this, hold
down the Shift key on the keyboard, hold down the middle mouse button,
and then, with both held down, move your mouse around to control the pan
direction. Pan is very useful for previewing a scene from a distance.
You can also Orbit the viewport camera around a specified target, or
focal point. This effectively lets you rotate the camera around a target. And
combined with the Dolly feature, as mentioned, you can easily move closer
to and away from selected objects. To Orbit, first, select the object that
should be at your center of rotation by clicking on it with the mouse. In the
example scene used here, we only have a cube. You select it by left-clicking
on it inside the viewport using the mouse, or you can click on it by name
from the Scene dock. Once selected, press the F key on the keyboard. F
stands for Frame. When you press this, the viewport camera automatically
centers on the selected object in response. Now, by holding the Alt key on
the keyboard, you can left-click and drag your mouse in any direction to
rotate around the selected object. Make sure to hold down the Alt key as
you do this. You can complete a 360-degree Orbit in this mode. It’s a
powerful feature that lets you easily inspect objects in the scene. See Figure
2.19 for an Orbit in action.

FIGURE 2.19 Entering Orbit mode. ⏎
Finally, you can adopt a 6DOF (Degrees of Freedom) style first-person
camera that lets you float around the level and inspect anything. This is
especially useful when working with big scenes that have many interior
spaces. To access this mode, hold down the right mouse button. With the
button held down, you can use the WASD keyboard keys. W walks forward,
S walks back, A side steps left, and D side steps right. And you can also
move the mouse around to control the orientation of your head.

2.2.5 Object Transformations – Building a Scene
Let’s build a simple room: namely, four walls and a floor. You might think
that we already have those with the cube we made earlier. After all, if you

step inside the cube, walking through its outer shell into its interior space,
you already have walls and a floor. Voila! But, if you try that for yourself,
you’ll notice immediately that the cube turns invisible when your camera
steps inside it. Even though the cube continues to exist, it ceases to be
visible so long as you remain inside. Here, you’re experiencing a feature of
game engine renderers called Backface Culling. Game engines make
objects one-sided by default. This began as an optimization strategy so that
an engine doesn’t waste time drawing surfaces that shouldn’t or couldn’t, be
seen, like the other side of a brick wall that the player can never reach
anyway. Now, in our case, we could try adjusting the single box that we
have to make both sides of it visible. But we won’t. It’s more hassle than it's
worth to do that. Instead, we’ll assume that one cube can be resized to make
the floor, and then we’ll add more cubes to make the walls. That approach
is easier, and it’s also the most common approach in game development.
First, position your viewport to get a comfortable view of the space (see
Figure 2.20). To build a room, don’t work too closely to your objects; a
good isometric-style shot works well, elevated above your subject.

FIGURE 2.20 Preparing to make a room. ⏎
Next, select the box mesh. From the Scene dock, right-click on the mesh
and choose Rename from the context menu, or press F2, or you can doubleclick the object to rename it too. Enter the name Floor and press Enter (see
Figure 2.21). It’s good working practice to name all your objects
appropriately so that you can easily determine their function simply by their
name. When you work with scenes full of objects, it can become difficult to
select them in the viewport, as it’s so easy to mis-select something else very
close by. For this reason, selecting objects from the Scene Dock by name is
important.

FIGURE 2.21 Renaming nodes from the Scene Dock. ⏎
Our box is too tall for a floor. We need to flatten it considerably. Given
that we created this box parametrically by using a MeshInstance3D node, as
opposed to importing a mesh from Blender, for example, we have the
luxury of being able to tweak its original height using the Inspector, where
we can change the Size properties (see Figure 2.22). I entered a value of
0.1m for the height.

FIGURE 2.22 Resizing the box to be a floor. ⏎
Most meshes in games will not be of the procedural kind where you have
direct access to the dimensions, as we had with the cube above. They will
be imported as-is from content creation software, like Blender, and you will
have no easy way to type in new values for properties like dimensions. In
this case, you can modify the size of an object by using a Transform.
Transform refers to a collection of three properties grouped together in a
single package of data: Position to define the location of an object in 3D
space in terms of X, Y, and Z. Rotation to define the orientation of an
object in 3D in terms of Pitch, Roll, and Yaw. And finally, Scale, to define a
scaling factor by which an object should be enlarged or shrunk. A scale
factor of 2 means that an object should be stretched to twice the size. A
scale factor of 3 means three times the size, and a value of 1 means the
object should be left unchanged. That makes sense because N x 1 = N. A
value of 0.5 means the object should shrink to half size. A value of 0 means
the object will be compressed to nothing, since N x 0 = 0. Objects with a 0
scale cannot be seen. And finally, negative values (such as –2) will enlarge

the object but also mirror it (flipping it horizontally or vertically around its
center). You can access the Transform for a node via the Transform rollout
in the Inspector when the node is selected (see Figure 2.23). To change an
object’s scale, you can type in new values. By default, the scale values are
1.

FIGURE 2.23 Setting an object’s scale. ⏎
NOTE. You can specify unique values for each dimension of scale if
needed. An object with the same scale for X, Y, and Z is affected by
the Uniform Scale. You can, however, vary the scale in each axis,
leading to a Non-Uniform Scale. For the floor, a non-uniform scale is
appropriate. You would leave the width (X) and depth (Z) unchanged
but reduce the scale in Y to shrink the height of the cube.
NOTE. It’s important to remember that scaling does not technically
change the internal size or dimensions of an object. Scale is a force

applied to an object. For example, an object that is 10m in width
remains 10m even with a Scale Factor of 2. The Scale Factor is
multiplied by the native width to enlarge the object to the doubled size
that is seen. The visible size is a function of those properties. This
means that an object’s visible size is determined by two properties: its
actual dimensions combined with its scale. However, the properties
themselves remain independent variables. This may seem a dry
technical point. But, as we’ll see, it can cause practical confusion
because it means that an object’s visible size cannot be determined
only by its dimensions.
Next, let’s ensure the newly scaled floor object is positioned as we’d like it
to be in the scene. You can easily change the position of any object. Select
the floor and press the W key to access the Translate tool. Or, you can select
the Translate tool via its button in the viewport toolbar. However, since
you’ll be using the Translate tool very, very often, it makes sense to learn
its very easy keyboard shortcut (see Figure 2.24).

FIGURE 2.24 Accessing the Translate tool. ⏎
Once the Translate tools are activated, you can interactively move the
selected object around the scene using the viewport Gizmo. This appears as
three arrows centered on the selected object. These do not appear for the
gamer in Play mode. They are for your reference only. The red arrow
indicates the X axis, the green is Y, and the blue is Z. By clicking and then
dragging on an axis, you will move the object as you move your mouse,
and you will constrain the object’s movement to only the chosen axis. This
is useful for making precise transformations. Similarly, you’ll also notice
smaller red, green, and blue squares close to the intersection of the Gizmo
arrows. By clicking and dragging on these squares instead, you’ll move the
object but constrained to two dimensions instead of one (see Figure 2.25).

FIGURE 2.25 Translating an object with the Gizmo. ⏎
For our example floor, surrounded by four walls, I’m fine with the object
being positioned at the world origin. So, I’ll leave it where it is without
using the Transform gizmo. If it’s not there already, you can use the Gizmo
to move the floor to the origin, and you can also precisely position the floor
from the Inspector by moving to the Transform rollout and typing in a new
position. For the world origin, the location of (0, 0, 0) is correct (see Figure
2.26).

FIGURE 2.26 Specifying the object position to the world origin.
⏎
Now that we’ve made the floor, let’s create the four walls. Godot makes
this easy. Select the floor object and press Ctrl + D to duplicate the object,
or you can alternatively right-click on the floor from the Scene dock and
select Duplicate from the context menu. As with translating objects, I
strongly advise you to remember this keyboard shortcut. You’ll use it often
when level designing. By choosing Duplicate, you’ll create a second, clone
mesh of the original. This is a separate and independent object. It’ll be
listed in the Scene dock as a new object too. You may not initially see the
object in the Perspective view, but this is only because the duplicate is
created on top of the original, and it overlaps in every way (see Figure
2.27).

FIGURE 2.27 Duplicating an object. ⏎
To make a wall from the duplicated floor, you’ll need to reposition and
rotate the floor. You can access the Rotate tool by pressing E on the
keyboard or by choosing the Rotate mode from the perspective view
toolbar. As with Translate, the Rotate Gizmo presents you with three axes
that form a Gimbal: red (X), green (Y), and blue (Z). These are presented
as circles, showing you the three different axes of rotation. You can click
and drag any circle to rotate the duplicated floor into a wall orientation.
Effectively, you need to rotate it by 90 degrees. You can also achieve this by
typing the rotation in the rotation field of the Transform group inside the
Inspector (see Figure 2.28).

FIGURE 2.28 Rotating the wall into correct orientation. ⏎
After rotation, you’ll need to position the wall in the correct location to
stand against the floor properly. To do this, you can use the Translation tool
to position the new piece, or you can type in new values. But here you’ll
run into a problem. By default, the Translate tool lets you move an object
around continuously, with position values potentially running into many
decimal places. The result is that you can never be fully certain that your
object is positioned exactly where it needs to be unless you avoid the
Translate tool and simply type in values instead. Or unless you don’t care!
To solve this precision issue and to make Translate more precise, Godot
offers the Snapping feature. This forces the Translate tool to move objects
in discrete increments or steps. To access the Snapping settings, choose
Transform > Configure Snap from the viewport settings (see Figure 2.29).

FIGURE 2.29 Rotating the wall into correct orientation. ⏎
From the Snap Dialog, the default value for Translate is 1. This means
that, when Snapping is enabled, the Translate tool will lock all movement
into steps of 1 unit (that is, 1 meter). In many cases, this value works fine.
For our wall scenario, however, let’s get more precision. Let’s change this
from 1 to 0.5. Then choose OK (see Figure 2.30).

FIGURE 2.30 Configure translate snapping. ⏎
Next, Enable Snapping for the settings to take effect. To do this, click the
Snapping button from the perspective view toolbar. This is a toggle button,
so remember to press the button again later when you no longer need
snapping (see Figure 2.31).

FIGURE 2.31 Toggling Snap on and off to control the Translate
tool. ⏎
With snapping enabled for the Translate tool, you can now use the Gizmo
to click and drag the wall into the correct, and exact, position (see Figure
2.32).

FIGURE 2.32 Positioning the wall at the correct location. ⏎
Now you can duplicate the wall piece three times to create the remaining
walls. Using a combination of Rotate, Translate, and Snapping, you can
move them all into place to create a box room. Four walls and a floor. See
Figure 2.33 to see the result.

FIGURE 2.33 Completing the box room. ⏎

2.3 VERTEX SNAPPING – INSTALLING
AN ADD-ON FROM ASSETLIB
In Godot, you’ll normally work with many meshes, from power-ups and
weapons to wall segments and statues. It could number in the hundreds or
even thousands. Many of these assets may come from artists in your team,
made to a known specification. But also, they may come from third-party
sources, such as contractors or online asset stores. Perhaps they were made
a long time ago. In these cases, you may not know the exact dimensions of
a mesh, and this can be problematic. You’ll simply be left to drag and drop
the mesh into Godot and start working with it in a scene, however it is
made. However, you’ll also need to align meshes of different sizes and
types together to form a complete world. This can be difficult to do when

they are different shapes and sizes. A common case is aligning together two
or more repeatable wall sections, like building blocks, to form a longer
section and make it look seamless and whole. Hallways and space stations
commonly employ this technique, recombining many smaller elements into
larger patterns to create an expansive world. This approach depends on your
being able to precisely line up meshes so that gaps and overlaps don’t
happen, spoiling the effect of continuity. We’ve seen earlier how Grid
Snapping and typing in values can solve this, in theory. But both methods
are tedious when you have many meshes. For Grid Snapping, for example,
you need to assume that all meshes have a size that conforms to the same
base increment, and for type-ins, you must be prepared to type in the
position for every single mesh involved. That’s painful.
Thankfully, another good solution is available in the form of Vertex
Snapping. Users coming from Unity will likely already be familiar with this
feature. Vertex Snapping lets you automatically move a complete mesh such
that any vertex (point) on the selected mesh will be perfectly overlapped
with a vertex on another mesh. Normally, you use Vertex Snapping to align
corners with corners and edges with edges. Vertex Snapping ensures the
alignment is perfect and exact, and not simply ‘roughly right’. Now, Vertex
Snapping is good news! But it’s not a native feature of Godot. To access it,
we’ll need to install an add-on. But it’s free, open source, and is built into
the Godot editor. Let’s see how we can install this add-on, and thereby
many others that are available too. Consider the following scene in Figure
2.34. It features two simple cube mesh instances that need to be aligned
together.

FIGURE 2.34 Two cube meshes in need of alignment. ⏎
To start importing an add-on, click on the AssetLib button from the topcenter of the Godot interface. This links to an online, communitymaintained collection of assets that you can download and import into
Godot. Some of the assets are intended to be imported into existing
projects, and some of the assets are complete projects themselves (see
Figure 2.35).

FIGURE 2.35 Accessing the Godot Asset Library. ⏎
From the AssetLib, search for Snappy, listed by jgillich. Use the search
term Snappy, and make sure the Category is specified as All. When you do
this, Snappy will appear as an installable option in the list (see Figure 2.36).

FIGURE 2.36 Downloading Snappy from the Godot Asset
Library. ⏎
Double-clicking the Snappy option presents you with a confirmation
dialog. Choose the button Download to install Snappy to your computer
locally within the project. It’s important to note that this download is
project-specific. The add-on will live in your currently open project. You’ll
need to download it again for other projects if you intend to use it there
(Figure 2.37).

FIGURE 2.37 Downloading Snappy. ⏎
Godot may prompt you with a further confirmation dialog, outlining the
location within your project where the newly downloaded files will be
installed. You can change this by clicking the Change Install Folder button,
but for this example, I will accept the defaults. You can accept by clicking
the Install button (Figure 2.38).

FIGURE 2.38 Choosing the Download destination. ⏎
After installation, you can confirm success by viewing the FileSystem
Dock. You should see an addons folder and newly installed files inside. This
will reflect the location shown in the previous step (see Figure 2.39).

FIGURE 2.39 Confirming the installation folder for Snappy. ⏎
If the files are present, then the plugin is almost ready. If you try to use it
now, by moving objects in the scene, it still won’t work. There is a final
activation switch that you need to press. It’s buried in the Project Settings
window. Choose Project > Project Settings from the application menu, and
this displays the Project Settings window (see Figure 2.40).

FIGURE 2.40 Accessing Project Settings. ⏎
NOTE. The Project Settings Window is quite comprehensive. We’ll
have reason to return there later to change many other settings.
From the Project Settings Window, choose the Plugin tab. Then insert a
checkmark in the Enabled box in the left-hand column. This finally enables
the Snappy plugin. Next, we’ll use it to snap together two cube objects (see
Figure 2.41).

FIGURE 2.41 Enabling the Snappy Plugin. ⏎
To use Vertex Snapping, return to the perspective viewport and frame the
view to include both cubes. Select a cube and then hold down the V key on
the keyboard to engage Vertex Snapping mode. With the V key held down,
move your cursor over different vertices of the model. As you do this,
you’ll notice a yellow dot, or ball, latch onto the nearest vertex (see Figure
2.42).

FIGURE 2.42 Engaging Vertex Snap. ⏎
Hover your mouse over the corner vertex of the selected cube – the
vertex nearest the opposite cube. Then, with V still held down, click and
drag this from this vertex to the nearest corner vertex of the opposing cube,
and then release your mouse and the V key. This will align the selected cube
over to the opposite cube, with the corner vertices touching (see Figure
2.43).

FIGURE 2.43 Snapping together two cubes. ⏎

2.4 FILESYSTEM DOCK –
UNDERSTANDING THE PROJECT
FOLDER
Godot is a project-based application. You create a new project to build a
new game, and all data and files related to that game are stored together
inside a single folder named the project folder. The contents of this folder,
and its subfolders, are viewable directly in the editor from the FileSystem
dock. The contents are significant because any files that you add to this
folder, whether it’s via the Godot editor or through Explorer or Finder,
essentially become part of the Godot project (see Figure 2.44).

FIGURE 2.44 Viewing the project folder from the Godot
Interface. ⏎
The project folder corresponds to a real folder located somewhere on
your computer. You may forget where this is or be unsure how to navigate
there. You can easily find your way directly to this folder where needed.
Hover your cursor anywhere over empty space inside the FileSystem Dock
and then right-click your mouse, choosing Open in FileManager from the
context menu. Selecting this will open your operating system’s file browser
at this location (see Figure 2.45).

FIGURE 2.45 Viewing the project folder from the Godot
interface. ⏎
NOTE. To prevent any confusion, errors, or conflicts, I recommend
avoiding any edits to files in this folder while directly using Explorer
when the Godot project is open. Always go through the Godot
interface when making changes to this folder. The FileSystem dock
lets you create folders, drag and drop files, rename files, and delete
files. This ensures that Godot understands what changes are being
made.

Let’s take a brief look at the contents of our project folder when a project is
newly created. You’ll notice that it includes a default Godot icon file in
SVG format, some Git version control files (.gitignore and .gitattributes),
and a project.godot file. The latter is a high-level, text-based configuration
file that Godot generates to summarize the project. The file looks like this:
; Engine configuration file.
; It's best edited using the editor UI and not directly,
; since the parameters that go here are not all obvious.
;
; Format:
; [section] ; section goes between []
; param=value ; assign values to parameters
config_version=5
[application]
config/name="PlatformGame_Book"
config/features=PackedStringArray("4.3", "Mobile")
config/icon="res://icon.svg"
[editor_plugins]
enabled=PackedStringArray("res://addons/snappy/plugin.cfg")
[rendering]
renderer/rendering_method="mobile"

NOTE. These settings define which renderer we are using (Mobile),
and they also list any add-ons or plugins that the project is using
(Snappy).
If you ever want to backup your project or to share your project with
someone else, then you should certainly make a copy of the entire project
folder and all its contents, and not simply specific files within the folder.
They are not supposed to be separated. They function as a single package.
One way to archive everything together in a convenient package is to use a

compression program, such as 7-Zip. Before copying or archiving the
folder, you should close Godot in case it has any changes to make to
metafiles within the project folder. Remember not to store your compressed
archives inside the project folder; otherwise, they’ll be classified as being
part of the project themselves too. So, store your archives elsewhere (see
Figure 2.46).

FIGURE 2.46 The Godot project folder. ⏎
Let’s turn now to an interesting note about file systems. If you right-click
on a file inside the FileSystem Dock and then choose Copy Absolute Path,
paste the result into a text editor and see what you get. You’ll get a fully
qualified system path to the selected file. For example, this is what I see
when I copy the Absolute Path for the Godot icon SVG.
/home/alanthorn/platformgame_book/icon.svg

This may not be surprising. But now, right-click the same file and choose
Copy Path instead. The result should be very different. Here is what I got

for the same file:
res://icon.svg

As you can see, Godot is creating a mapping between two different
filesystems. The Absolute Path refers to the file location that is given by the
operating system (e.g., C:\My Documents\Document01.pdf). This path can
vary from operating system to operating system. It’s a useful path to know
for locating a file on your local computer. The regular path of Godot,
however, is an internal naming system used by Godot to uniquely identify
files internally. This is useful to reference a file within the Godot project,
independently of any name or path an operating system may have assigned
to the file. It will remain consistent across all operating systems. Godot uses
the term resource to refer to a file within its system. Some engines use the
term asset to mean the same thing. An image file is a texture resource, a 3D
model is a mesh resource, and so on. More will be said of this path system
later in the book. You can also find more information about it at the Godot
documentation online here:
https://docs.godotengine.org/en/stable/tutorials/scripting/filesystem.html

2.5 GIT – VERSION CONTROL FOR
GODOT PROJECTS
Game development requires plenty of iteration and refinement in your
workflow. This necessarily means that you’ll be changing, updating, and
editing your project a lot; trying out new ideas, adding in new meshes or
levels, and so on. Some of these changes will remain and become part of
the final game because they worked well, and yet other changes will be
abandoned because they didn’t work at all or simply proved unfeasible
within the constraints that you have, technical or budgetary, for example. In

this case, and to work tidily, it’d be useful if we could achieve the following
things in our workflow:
1. The ability to share the latest version of our project systematically with
all team members, wherever they are
2. The ability for everybody to work on, and contribute to, the same
project and files, but without creating conflicts or without team
members disrupting other people’s work accidentally
3. The ability to keep track of what files have changed in a project and
who is responsible for those changes
4. The ability to test out new ideas and take the project in new directions,
without compromising our existing work, especially if our new ideas
don’t work out
5. The ability to rewind our project to earlier states if needed; to restore
older versions if the newer changes are taking us further from where
we want to be
Sounds good, right? Well, you can already achieve this by just being
incredibly organized and systematic with backups through cloud storage,
like OneDrive, DropBox, Proton Drive, or Google Drive. But that method
will get tedious, time-consuming, and thereby very expensive, very quickly.
You’ll end up spending lots of your time managing files and team member
contributions to ensure that nothing breaks, instead of building a game. For
this reason, we need a better method for managing projects, and version
control can offer this if we embrace it and use it properly. Obviously, if you
don’t embrace it and don’t use it properly, it can become your worst
nightmare too! This is not a reason to avoid it but a reason to learn it. So,
we can learn Git version control to keep track of our Godot projects. Let’s
get started.

NOTE. This section is optional. You can skip it and move to the next
chapter. You don’t need to install or use Git to work with Godot. You
can create Godot projects and make games without Git or, indeed, any
version control at all. This is all true. However, Git can make your
workflow easier and more efficient, and it works on all operating
systems and is free. For this reason, it’s a useful skill to know. I
recommend using it.

2.5.1 Installing Git
Installing Git is straightforward, but the steps vary significantly from
operating system to operating system. So, rather than cover the installation
steps for every scenario in this book, I will direct you to the download page
where instructions can be found for your computer. The download page is
here: https://git-scm.com/downloads
NOTE. The download page sometimes talks about a Git Client. This is
usually an optional mouse-driven visual interface that sits atop Git,
allowing you to use Git without resorting to command-line or terminal
instructions. Examples of Git Clients are GitHub Client, GitKraken,
and SourceTree. More can be found here: https://gitscm.com/downloads/guis. For this book, I recommend using the Git
command line. When starting out using Git, it is helpful to understand
its core commands and how it works. Later, if you prefer visual tools,
you can use a Git client, or you may prefer to continue with the
command line. So, you don’t need to download and install a separate
Git client.
When using Git for game development, it’s also useful to use a Git add-on
called Large File Storage (LFS). This add-on optimizes the workflow when

working with large, binary files, such as image files, mesh files, and music,
as opposed to text files like code. To download and install this add-on, you
should visit this page: https://git-lfs.com/.

2.5.2 Getting Started with Git
The best way to learn Git is probably by using it to track a folder with some
basic files, like text files, and seeing how it works in practice. This
knowledge can then be extrapolated to manage a Godot project folder. So,
let’s do that. Start by creating a new, empty folder on your computer
(outside of your Godot project), and which can be easily deleted when
you’re done practicing. I’ve created a folder called test-git (see Figure
2.47).

FIGURE 2.47 Creating a new folder. ⏎
To start using Git to track files inside a folder, you need to create a new
Repository. Sometimes abbreviated to Repo. This is, essentially, a database
that Git creates to keep track of all changes to files within the folder, and

over time the repo will grow larger and contain more data as your project
progresses. The database is stored inside the project folder itself as a hidden
file. This means that you will delete the repo if you delete the folder. You
need to create a new Git Repo for each project that you want to put into
version control. So, you normally create one Git Repo for each Godot
project, and therefore, one Repo per game. To create a new Repo, you
should first navigate the command line (terminal) to the newly created
folder to ensure that all following terminal commands apply to the selected
working directory. For example, on a Linux command line, this would be as
below. You may need to use a different path and folder name, depending on
where you placed your new folder.
cd Documents/test-git

NOTE. For this example, make sure that you create a new Git repo in a
new, empty folder as I have done. Don’t create it in a directory full of
existing files. And don’t store any valuable data in our newly made
folder. This will be a ‘throw away’ example. We’re going to be using
Git by example here to go back and forth in history, which will lead to
file changes and maybe even deletions of data in this folder and its
subfolders.
To create a new Repo for the working directory, enter the following
command into the terminal and press Enter. Make sure you do this inside
the Working folder (the directory that you created for working with Git):
git init

My terminal replies with:
Initialised empty Git repository in
/home/alanthorn/Documents/test-git/.git/

If you return to the project folder and view hidden files, you’ll notice a new,
special folder. It’s called .git, and it contains all the data needed by Git to
maintain a Repo. If you were to delete this folder, you’d end up deleting the
entire Repo (see Figure 2.48).

FIGURE 2.48 The .git folder contains all repo data. ⏎
During the Git download and installation phase, we also downloaded an
add-on called LFS. Git is normally intended to work with text-based code
files and small binaries so that developers can share work easily. However,
game developers often work with potentially large files that change a lot
over time, such as meshes, animations, videos, textures, and other media. If
you don’t use the LFS add-on, Git will effectively make whole copies of
these files for every change, and this can end up creating large repositories
that take a long time to download, requiring lots of cloud storage to
maintain and entailing high bandwidth use. All these things are bad. So, to

optimize your Repo for storing large files, you can enable the LFS add-on.
You need to do this for each Repo you make. To activate LFS for the
current Repo, enter the following command at the terminal and press Enter.
git lfs install

My terminal replies with:
Updated git hooks.
Git LFS initialized.

Finally, you can check up on the status of Git to ensure things are good. To
do this, enter the following command at the Terminal and press Enter:
git status

The reply should be something like below:
On branch master
No commits yet
nothing to commit (create/copy files and use "git add" to
track)

If so, you’re good to move to the next step.

2.5.3 Tracking Changes to a File with Commits
Let’s see what happens now in our Git repository if we add a text file to our
newly created folder. Git uses the term working tree to simply describe the
contents of your folder. It is the folder itself and everything inside it. It is
the current state of your project on your computer. The working tree does
not include any data in the .git subfolder. That is the Repository and its
associated metadata. Go ahead and create a new .txt file (called mytext.txt)
in the working tree with the following text inside, as below. Also see Figure
2.49.

FIGURE 2.49 Creating a new text file in the working tree. ⏎
This is the original text file!

After saving the file, enter the following command in the Terminal and
press Enter.
git status

This time, the response from the terminal is different because Git has
detected a change within the working tree. The message reads:
On branch master
No commits yet
Untracked files:
(use "git add <file>…" to include in what will be committed)
mytext.txt
nothing added to commit but untracked files present (use "git
add" to track)

When a change is made to a file (or a new file is added), Git detects the fact
but will not automatically take any action. You must then explicitly tell Git
which files you want it to track. That is, which files it should record. The
next step here is to effectively build a snapshot of the contents of the
working tree so that later, potentially, it could be restored to this point, as
you have recorded it. You build this snapshot in two steps. You must first
add all files ‘to be recorded’ into an index, which Git calls the staging area.
You can add or remove files to and from the staging area without affecting
the repository. It’s an intermediary space. The reason it exists is because,
when working with lots of different files, you may want to group sets of
related files together and add them to the repository in separate units. You
can add files to the staging area individually by name, but more commonly
you will add files by type or perhaps add everything in the working tree that
has changed. Let’s add every changed file in the folder to the staging area.
In this case, we only added one file.
git add *

NOTE. If you ran the git status command now, you’d see the new file
highlighted in green rather than red, indicating that the change has
been added to the staging area.
NOTE. If you add a file to the staging area and then afterward decide
to remove it again, you can do so with the command git rm –cached
<filename>.
Next, the file changes have been added to the staging area. If you’re happy
to track these files, you should commit them to the Git Repo. This will add
an entry into the Git database, affecting the taking of a snapshot of the
staged files. To do this, you can write the following command.

git commit –m “first commit”

NOTE. The commit command accepts an –m parameter, which means
‘message’. For each commit you make, you should write a descriptive
message. This normally describes what changes you made or
introduced. Commit messages should be short but descriptive. In this
example, our message is ‘first commit’.
Now run git status; it will now show that there are no changes detected, as
follows:
On branch master
nothing to commit, working tree clean

Let’s modify the text file by appending a second line and saving it. It now
reads:
This is the original text file!
This is a second line

With the file modified, let’s run another git status command. It shows the
following:
On branch master
Changes not staged for commit:
(use "git add <file>…" to update what will be committed)
(use "git restore <file>…" to discard changes in working
directory)
modified: mytext.txt
no changes added to commit (use "git add" and/or "git commit a")

And so, we should now stage and commit these changes. As follows:
git add *
git commit –m ‘added second line’

We have now made two separate commits. Now try running the following
command:
git log --oneline

The output will be:
e3b418f (HEAD -> master) added second line
2ad3714 first commit

You will see that each commit is listed in reverse order, with the most
recent at the top. Each line shows a separate commit in your Commit
History. The text HEAD -> master means that your working tree shows the
contents for the most recent data. The most recent commit is normally
located at the HEAD.
Now go ahead and practice by making some more commits, simply by
modifying the text file several times and then committing each time.
NOTE. If you’re working with many files, your project changes not
only by the addition of new files or by the amendment of existing files
– as we have seen – but by the deletion of files, that is, the entire
removal of one or more files from your project. Git will capture
deletions, as with additions and amendments. However, the git add
command will not ‘add’ such deletions to the staging area by default,
making it hard to commit deletions in the project history. You fix this
by using git add –a *. The –a option means ‘capture all changes’.

2.5.4 Undoing Commits with Revert
Obviously, one of the reasons to version control your work at all is to allow
for the possibility of rewinds. That is, to return your working tree back to an
earlier state. This may be because you want to review or find something
from a while ago, or perhaps because you don’t like the most recent

direction of your project, and you simply want to backstep entirely and
ignore more recent edits. Git offers many ways to ‘rewind’ your work. One
way is the revert command. This allows you to undo one or more commits
in your history. Let’s continue from the previous example. I’ll assume you
made some additional commits of your own, as I have. If I type git log –
oneline, you can see my commits. There are four in total.
b847e07 (HEAD -> master) fourth
5c0a3f5 third
e3b418f added second line
2ad3714 first commit

Now, if you want to ‘undo’ all changes in the most recent commit (fourth),
returning your project back to the previous state (third), you can use the
command git revert HEAD.
You might think that running git revert HEAD multiple times like this in
succession will successively undo more commits going further back in
history. Essentially, you rewind the project commit by commit until
eventually you end up back at the very first commit, beyond which you
cannot revert anymore. However, this understanding of a stepped rewind
approach is actually wrong. It’s not how Git behaves. Each revert action
undoes a commit, but it also creates a new commit in the history, which
becomes the new HEAD. The new commit keeps track of the fact that you
reverted to an earlier commit. Your revert becomes part of the project
history. See the output of my log command here:
f32a562 (HEAD -> master) Revert "fourth"
b847e07 fourth
5c0a3f5 third
e3b418f added second line
2ad3714 first commit

This means that running git revert HEAD multiple times repeatedly just
reverts the previous revert. It undoes the undo. It would be a loop of undo,

redo, etc., for as far as you wanted to go. Your project history would build
up with successive commits, keeping track of the reversion history. Sounds
like a nightmare loop.
If you want to actually rewind across multiple commits, returning the
project back to an earlier state before the most recent or previous state, then
you must first use git log –oneline. Let’s say that I want to return back to
the first state of the project, ‘first commit’. That’s quite a radical reversion,
but it can be done, nonetheless. You can see that this first commit has an ID
of 2ad3714. For you, the ID will probably be different because the IDs are
dynamically generated by Git. Make a note of the ID for the commit that
you intend to return to. You’ll need it. You can use the revert command to
undo a range of commits, not just one commit. The range operator is (..).
Take a look at the following example, which, for me, reverts the head back
to the first commit.
git revert -n 2ad3714..HEAD

After the revert, the original files are restored but are counted as ‘staged
changes’ in need of committing. So, you’ll need to Commit them with git
commit, e.g.,:
git commit -m 'back to first'

Now the log history appears as:
c7eb212 (HEAD -> master) back to first
f32a562 Revert "fourth"
b847e07 fourth
5c0a3f5 third
e3b418f added second line
2ad3714 first commit

And the contents of my text file are:
This is the original text file!

Voila! We can now restore a Git repo backward and forward to any arbitrary
commit. You now have a time machine, effectively. Obviously, there’s more
to learn about Git, such as branches. These let Git sidestep in the project
timeline to alternative histories, rather than just forward-step or backstep as
we’ve been doing in this example. However, here we have enough
information to start version controlling a Godot project.
NOTE. For more information on using Git in-depth, I recommend the
free online book Pro Git, written by Scott Chacon and published by
Apress here: https://git-scm.com/book/en/v2.

2.5.5 Using Remote Repositories
Git is a Distributed Version Control system. It can run just fine on only one
computer if necessary, keeping track of your work fully locally. But when
you combine Git with a server, such as a cloud service like GitHub, GitLab,
or BitBucket, then you can create a Remote Repository. This is, essentially,
a separate ‘Repo in the Cloud’. There are two major advantages to this.
First, your project files are stored at a separate location, in addition to your
own computer, acting as a form of backup. Second, multiple people (such as
team members) can now collaborate, synchronizing their changes together
across multiple computers and locations through a single remote repo,
which acts as a single source of truth. In this section, we’ll setup a remote
repo that works with GitHub, a well-known Git hosting provider. I don’t
have any connection or interest in GitHub as a company; I simply chose this
platform because it is accessible for this example. Please check out the
many options available to you when deciding on a place to host Git. An
alternative way to host is by using your own VPS (Virtual Private Server),
such as Ubuntu Server. The details of self-hosting are beyond the scope of

this book. To access GitHub, you’ll need to sign up for a free account at
https://github.com/.
In this example, we’ll upload our existing Repo on our local computer, as
created in previous sections to manage a text file, to GitHub. To do this,
create a new Repo on GitHub from your web browser. From the Dashboard,
click New. This presents you with the New Repo screen. Fill that in with
some basic details, such as the Repo Name (see Figure 2.50; Press Create).

FIGURE 2.50 Creating a new repo at GitHub. ⏎

After the Repo is created, it will be empty and awaiting contributions
from you. GitHub will also help you by listing how you can access the
Repo remotely to add or change content. The Repo welcome page at
GitHub shows the address for your Repo. It will probably be in the
following structure: https://github.com/<username>/<reponame>.git.
NOTE. Username should be replaced by your GitHub username, and
the Repo Name should be replaced by the name given to your
repository. Remember, the full path to your repo will be listed on the
repo welcome page, where you will be directed after its creation.
Next, run the following command locally for your repo to configure the
remote repo as a destination.
git remote add origin
https://github.com/<username>/<reponame>.git
git branch -M main

Finally, to push your changes from the local to the remote, you can run the
following command:
git push -u origin main

NOTE. You should run this command every time you make a local
change and need to update the remote repository.
Since the Push command writes changes to the Remote Repo, Git will ask
you for your credentials for authentication to protect your Repo from
unauthorized access. You can use your GitHub username and password, but
it may also expect a User Access Token in place of the password. If this is
the first time that you’re using GitHub, you probably won’t have a User
Access token. You can find more information on how to generate one here:

https://docs.github.com/en/authentication/keeping-your-account-and-datasecure/managing-your-personal-access-tokens.
After successfully pushing your branch to the remote, you can return to
GitHub and confirm that this was successful. You will now see your files
uploaded there. You can now download your project and any changes using
the command:
git pull origin

2.5.6 Ignoring Files with GitIgnore
We’ve seen how to version control a simple project with only one text file.
Your Godot projects will contain many files. Some of those files are
system-specific, such as user preferences, keyboard shortcuts, crash logs,
and other kinds of metadata that should not really be shared across multiple
users, especially when they have different preferences. This kind of data,
therefore, does not affect the content of the project or the game. Rather, it
affects only how the Editor behaves for a single user, and this should vary
for each user. For this reason, we don’t want this data being uploaded to the
Repo because it is system-specific. To instruct Git to ignore specific files,
you should use a .gitignore file. This file should be placed in the root folder
of the project (not the .git folder). The developer community has kindly
created an excellent database online of many .gitignore files for common
applications, including Godot. This file contains the common files that
Godot creates, which can be safely ignored by Git. You can download this
file and place it inside your folder for any Godot project that you want to
version control using Git. Here:
https://github.com/github/gitignore/blob/main/Godot.gitignore (see Figure
2.51).

FIGURE 2.51 Adding a Godot GitIgnore file. ⏎
NOTE. You don’t need to stage or commit this file. Simply by its
existing in the project folder, Git will use this file to determine
automatically which files to ignore.

2.5.7 Managing Large Files with LFS
Git is normally intended to version control code or text-based files. It can
manage other file types – namely, binary files – but large binary files, such
as images, can start to slow down a repository over time. This can also
become problematic if you’re using cloud storage that has very specific
limits on the total size of your repository and your bandwidth. You could
use a .gitignore file to simply have Git ignore all images and meshes, but
that represents a lot of important content for games, so you’ll end up
excluding lots of valuable data. Instead, we can use Git LFS, which
effectively stores all images in a separate sub-repository and handles them
differently and optimally. To use LFS, you’ll first need to create a text file
inside the project folder alongside .gitignore, called .gitattributes, which
lists all files to be managed by Git LFS. You’ll need to write the lines using
a special syntax. For Godot, the following .gitattributes file is pretty
comprehensive, as it includes images, meshes, and more:

## git-lfs for Godot##
*.gif filter=lfs diff=lfs merge=lfs -text
*.psd filter=lfs diff=lfs merge=lfs -text
*.ai filter=lfs diff=lfs merge=lfs -text
*.jpg filter=lfs diff=lfs merge=lfs -text
*.jpeg filter=lfs diff=lfs merge=lfs -text
*.png filter=lfs diff=lfs merge=lfs -text
*.ico filter=lfs diff=lfs merge=lfs -text
*.ttf filter=lfs diff=lfs merge=lfs -text
*.bmp filter=lfs diff=lfs merge=lfs -text
*.pdf filter=lfs diff=lfs merge=lfs -text
*.docx filter=lfs diff=lfs merge=lfs -text
*.mov filter=lfs diff=lfs merge=lfs -text
*.avi filter=lfs diff=lfs merge=lfs -text
*.mkv filter=lfs diff=lfs merge=lfs -text
*.zip filter=lfs diff=lfs merge=lfs -text
*.rar filter=lfs diff=lfs merge=lfs -text
*.tar filter=lfs diff=lfs merge=lfs -text
*.exe filter=lfs diff=lfs merge=lfs -text
*.dll filter=lfs diff=lfs merge=lfs -text
*.doc filter=lfs diff=lfs merge=lfs -text
*.xls filter=lfs diff=lfs merge=lfs -text
*.fbx filter=lfs diff=lfs merge=lfs -text
*.blend filter=lfs diff=lfs merge=lfs -text
*.obj filter=lfs diff=lfs merge=lfs -text
*.xlsx filter=lfs diff=lfs merge=lfs -text
*.ase filter=lfs diff=lfs merge=lfs -text
*.aseprite filter=lfs diff=lfs merge=lfs -text
*.flc filter=lfs diff=lfs merge=lfs -text
*.tga filter=lfs diff=lfs merge=lfs -text
*.xcf filter=lfs diff=lfs merge=lfs -text
*.mp3 filter=lfs diff=lfs merge=lfs -text
*.wav filter=lfs diff=lfs merge=lfs -text
*.ogg filter=lfs diff=lfs merge=lfs -text
*.mp4 filter=lfs diff=lfs merge=lfs -text
*.ogv filter=lfs diff=lfs merge=lfs -text
*.otf filter=lfs diff=lfs merge=lfs -text
*.tif filter=lfs diff=lfs merge=lfs -text
*.svg filter=lfs diff=lfs merge=lfs -text
*.gltf filter=lfs diff=lfs merge=lfs -text
*.glb filter=lfs diff=lfs merge=lfs -text
*.dae filter=lfs diff=lfs merge=lfs -text
*.exr filter=lfs diff=lfs merge=lfs -text

After you’ve created this file, you can add any files of these types to your
project. Just use the regular Git commands of git add and git commit. You

can also use the command git lfs ls-files to show a list of all files in the
Repo being managed by Git LFS. And that’s it! Git will manage the rest and
ensure your Repo behaves properly using your binary files too. Excellent.

2.6 CONCLUSION
This chapter focused on getting to know Godot, some of its features, basic
scene design, and finally version control generally to keep track of your
projects. Together, these fundamentals represent a solid foundation for
building Godot games.
OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER 3
Resources
Textures, Meshes, and More
DOI: 10.1201/9781003484523-3

This chapter explores the ‘life blood’, or essence, of any game or interactive
project made in Godot; namely, the resource. Many engines use the term
‘Asset’ instead, but we’ll adopt Godot’s lesser-used terminology throughout
this book. In simple terms, resources collectively refer to all the files and
content on which your project depends, such as images, sounds, code files,
meshes, animations, videos, text files, and more. Each file is a separate
resource, and all of them together constitute the resources of your project.
Most resources, like meshes, are typically made in an external application
(such as Blender) and then imported into Godot for incorporation into a
scene. However, some resources, like Scenes, are made directly inside
Godot using the built-in Editor tools. Resources are not always standalone
and separate from each other, as it may initially seem. There is a
dependency and a hierarchy that holds between them. Although any two
meshes (e.g., the player character and a weapon mesh) live independently
of each other in separate files, some resources depend on and link to each
other by their very nature. For example, a Scene is a resource, but it
depends upon all the other resources, such as meshes and sounds, that are
included within that scene. As a resource, it has connections that reach out
to other resources. This weblike interdependency between resources is

important, as we’ll see, because it means that deleting a resource from the
project, or even changing a resource after import, can have important
implications for other, dependent resources. In the worst case, deleting a
resource can even break or invalidate another resource where a dependency
exists. So, you need to be very careful when working with resources. This
chapter explores that workflow for resources and considers useful tips and
techniques along the way.

3.1 IMPORTING YOUR FIRST
RESOURCE (TEXTURES)
Let’s start by importing an image file into Godot as a resource. One of the
simplest resources to import is the texture, which is a 2D image file in any
traditional image format. Godot can import images from many different
formats, such as JPG, BMP, and TGA. Technically, the original file itself is
not the resource. Rather, by importing the file into Godot, Godot will accept
the file, add some configuration settings, and apply optimizations to it, and
the result is a resource. The result is an adaptation of the originally
imported file, adapted to be more digestible for a real-time game engine.
Importing an image file is straightforward enough. You just drag and drop
the file (or even multiple files) from your file explorer and into the Godot
Filesystem Dock. On releasing your mouse over the dock, the files will be
imported automatically. Depending on how many files you import and the
size of those files, it may take some time (see Figure 3.1). All files used in
this chapter are also included in the book companion files, in the Chapter
03 folder.

FIGURE 3.1 Importing a Resource into Godot. ⏎
NOTE. A lot of technical information on importing images into Godot
as texture resources can be found at the Godot official documentation
here:
https://docs.godotengine.org/en/stable/tutorials/assets_pipeline/importi
ng_images.html
NOTE. If you’re looking for some great and free software to create 2D
textures and images, consider the following applications: GIMP for
editing photos and generating tile sets (https://www.gimp.org/), Krita
for painting illustrations and concept art (https://krita.org/en/),
Inkscape for creating logos, icons, and menu items

(https://inkscape.org/), and LibreSprite for creating retro-style pixel art
(https://libresprite.github.io/).

3.1.1 Exploring Import Files for Textures
After importing your texture file into Godot, let’s check out what’s really
happening under the hood, inside the project file system. Right-click on
your newly imported texture from the Godot dock and choose Show in File
Manager. This displays the files that form part of your project (see Figure
3.2).

FIGURE 3.2 Accessing the texture resource from the file system.
⏎

Notice that, in addition to your originally imported texture file, Godot has
created an additional file with a matching name and a ‘.import’ extension
(see Figure 3.3). This companion file is a text-based configuration file,
which describes to Godot how the image should be imported and
configured.

FIGURE 3.3 Viewing the resource import files. ⏎
Import files can be opened, viewed, and even edited inside any standard
text file editor. This makes it easy to version control, compare, and track
changes. Here is an example import file, as shown in Code Sample 3.1.

CODE SAMPLE 3.1
[remap]
importer="texture"
type="CompressedTexture2D"
uid="uid://chnt06bevrrf4"
path="res://.godot/imported/Char_DracuLotl_01.png186e20dcdba243ece080719d246d39f9.ctex"
metadata={
"vram_texture": false
}
[deps]
source_file="res://Char_DracuLotl_01.png"
dest_files=["res://.godot/imported/Char_DracuLotl_01.png186e20dcdba243ece080719d246d39f9.ctex"]
[params]
compress/mode=0
compress/high_quality=false
compress/lossy_quality=0.7
compress/hdr_compression=1
compress/normal_map=0
compress/channel_pack=0
mipmaps/generate=false
mipmaps/limit=-1
roughness/mode=0
roughness/src_normal=""
process/fix_alpha_border=true
process/premult_alpha=false
process/normal_map_invert_y=false
process/hdr_as_srgb=false
process/hdr_clamp_exposure=false
process/size_limit=0
detect_3d/compress_to=1

⏎

NOTE. Although you can edit an import file inside a text editor, I don’t
recommend doing so because the Godot editor offers you a visual and
validated way of doing so. We’ll consider this in the next section.

3.1.2 Editing Texture Import Options
After importing a file into Godot, you can tweak its import settings.
Adjusting these settings will effectively create a reimport of the file, and it
will change how the resource behaves. Each file type has different and
domain-specific import settings, from images and meshes to audio and

video. You can access the import settings for any resource by first selecting
it inside the FileSystem dock and then switching to the Import Dock. The
settings displayed here will reflect the settings featured in the associated
import file, as shown in Code Sample 3.1 in the previous section (see
Figure 3.4).

FIGURE 3.4 Editing the import settings for a resource. ⏎
Let’s consider some of the key Import Options for textures. The first
option is Compression Mode, of which there are many choices. This option
can affect the visible quality of the texture; that is, the amount of artifacting
that can appear on the texture during gameplay. The first option is Lossless,
which is the highest and most preserving level of quality. This would
normally be used for 2D games, loading-screen backgrounds, user
interfaces, and icon elements. Now, you might wonder why anybody would
ever choose an option other than Lossless, especially if this truly offers the

best quality. After all, who doesn’t want their textures shown at the best
quality possible? The answer is Nobody. So, the reason for other options is
less about quality and more about technical necessity and balance. Games
often feature lots of large images and textures. That’s a huge amount of data
with many choices. This option can affect the visible quality of the texture;
that is, the amount of artifacting that can appear on the texture during
gameplay. The first option is Lossless, which is the highest and most
preserving level of quality. This would normally be used for 2D games,
loading-screen backgrounds, user interfaces, and icon elements. Now, you
might wonder why anybody would ever choose an option other than
Lossless, especially if this truly offers the best quality. After all, who
doesn’t want their textures shown at the best quality possible? The answer
is Nobody. So, the reason for other options is less about quality and more
about technical necessity, more about balance. Games often feature lots of
large images and textures. That’s a huge amount of data when considered in
totality. Processing it in real-time, as games do, can significantly impact
performance, especially when run on older hardware. One way to optimize
performance in this complex balancing act of resource usage is to
strategically accept some degradation in the quality of textures. For this
reason, other choices for the Compression option become incredibly
important for resource-heavy games, which includes most games! Lossy is
useful for 2D games with many large textures, such as Hidden Object
games or an epic side-scrolling platformer game. And there is VRAM
Compressed, which is useful for 3D games, like first-person shooters, with
lots of textured meshes. See Figure 3.5 for the Compression Import options.

FIGURE 3.5 Compression import options. ⏎
Another option is whether to Generate Mipmaps. This is a Boolean, true
or false, option. This option is not something you would normally activate
for 2D games. It’s mostly for 3D games, and especially 3D games like firstperson shooters, where the same texture (like a brick wall) will be viewed at
many different angles and distances by the player during gameplay. By
enabling Mipmaps, Godot automatically generates multiple and differentsized versions of the texture at incrementally smaller sizes from the
original. This happens at the time of import. Godot will then dynamically
choose which version of the texture to use during gameplay, depending on
the camera angle and distance to the texture. This ensures that the best-sized
texture is chosen to minimize artifacting and boost performance. In short,

you should enable this option for 3D games that feature moving cameras
and then disable it for other types of games (see Figure 3.6).

FIGURE 3.6 Enabling Mipmaps. ⏎

3.1.3 Textures, Materials, and 2D Scenes
Standard textures, on their own, only represent image data – namely, pixels.
Usually, lots of them. The Import Options that accompany textures, as we
saw previously, give Godot more information on how textures should be
used practically within a Godot project. However, none of this pixel data
actually displays the texture of an object in a scene, such as on a 2D Sprite
or a 3D mesh. For this step to happen, an additional resource type is
necessary, namely the material. The material resource defines an object’s

surface (either 2D or 3D), including how shiny and smooth or how dull and
rough a surface is. It also defines how textures relate to that surface, as
we’ll see. It defines whether the pixels are a skin for the object, wrapping
around its surface, or whether they define its bumpiness, among other
things. Materials, therefore, are a connecting resource in that it is through
materials that textures can be shown on in-game objects at all. Textures
represent a source of data, and materials define a destination for that data.
For this reason, materials are attached to objects in a scene and can, in
theory, differ on a per-object basis – one material per object; for example,
different materials for different 3D characters. Although, in practice, many
different objects share the same material, such as collectible power-ups in a
platformer game. In this section, we’ll see how to create a material resource
and then how to apply it to a 2D object.
NOTE. The basic principle of recycling is critical to optimization. For
this reason, you should try to use as few materials and textures as
possible. Reuse and share these resources wherever it is appropriate to
do so.
Let’s explore how textures relate to 2D scenes and objects. Let’s create a
new 2D scene, which uses the same principles we saw in the previous
chapter for creating 3D scenes (Section 2.2.3). From the Scene Dock,
choose 2D Scene (see Figure 3.7).

FIGURE 3.7 Creating 2D scenes. ⏎
Now, the easiest and fastest way to get a texture into a scene is simply by
dragging and dropping the texture from the FileSystem Dock into the 2D
Scene view. When you do this, Godot makes some assumptions about your
use case. It creates a 2D Sprite object named after the texture and then
configures that object to display the texture, which you dragged and
dropped. In many cases, these Godot assumptions will be appropriate (see
Figure 3.8).

FIGURE 3.8 Creating 2D Sprites from a Drag and Drop. ⏎
Although the drag-and-drop method is certainly convenient, we surely
want to understand how things work under the hood. Let’s delete the newly
created Sprite and try this process again the manual way. This will be more
revealing about how Godot works. To do this, create a new, empty 2D
scene. Select the root node, and then right-click and choose Add Child Node
from the context menu (see Figure 3.9). This displays the Node creation
menu.

FIGURE 3.9 Creating a new 2D node. ⏎
From the Create New Node menu, choose Sprite2D and then hit the
Create button. A Sprite2D is a Node dedicated to showing a single image
texture within a 2D scene. Like most Game Objects, it can be procedurally
moved, scaled, and rotated to create animated transformations in code. But
it’s not the best choice for showing frames of animation. That is, animated
sequences of images. AnimatedSprite2D is a better choice for that. But here,
we’ll focus on the single frame, Sprite2D. So, let’s add this to the scene (see
Figure 3.10).

FIGURE 3.10 Creating a Sprite2D node. ⏎
The Sprite Node is created in the scene as an empty object insofar as it
exists, but it has no visibility or width or height. To add a texture to the
object, we should first select it in the Scene Dock and then from the
Inspector use the Texture field. Click on the drop-down arrow for this field
and then choose Quick Load from the context menu to pick an existing
texture inside the project (see Figure 3.11).

FIGURE 3.11 Configuring the texture field for a Sprite object. ⏎
From the Quick Selection dialog, you should choose any texture that
you’ve loaded into your project already. Then click Open to confirm, and
the texture will be assigned to the Sprite, looking just as it did when Godot
auto-configured the object for us by dragging and dropping earlier (see
Figure 3.12).

FIGURE 3.12 Selecting a texture to assign onto the Sprite. ⏎
In reaching this far, we’ve managed to display a texture in the scene
using a Sprite without any reference to a material resource. And yet, despite
appearances, a material is being used. Godot has created an internal, default
material that it’s now using to show the texture in the Sprite. But we can
still see that materials are relevant here by selecting the Sprite in the scene
and then scrolling down inside the Inspector to the Material section.
Expand this section to reveal a variety of adjustable properties (see Figure
3.13).

FIGURE 3.13 Exploring material properties for a Sprite. ⏎
Let’s create our own new, material resource. To do this, find the material
field in the Inspector and click on the drop-down arrow next to ‘<empty>’.
From here, choose New CanvasItemMaterial. This is a material dedicated
to 2D objects (see Figure 3.14).

FIGURE 3.14 Creating a new material from the Inspector. ⏎
When you do this, some interesting things happen. First, the Sprite’s
appearance in the scene remains completely unchanged. That is, it looks
just as it did before. Second, the material field now becomes populated with
a completely new value – specifically, a new material resource. It’s no
longer empty, as it was. And third, you can view more information and
properties for this material by clicking on the material field itself (see
Figure 3.15).

FIGURE 3.15 Viewing material properties via the Inspector. ⏎
To confirm that this material influences the Sprite, let’s change some of
its values and see what it does. Click the drop-down for the Blend Mode
field and change from Mix to Add. This radically changes how the Sprite
appears in the scene, seeming to be much brighter. You can try the other
values too. These changes confirm that the material does indeed control
how the Sprite is rendered (see Figure 3.16). In the next section, we’ll
continue to explore this resource type to see what else we can learn.

FIGURE 3.16 Changing a Sprite Blend Mode. ⏎

3.1.4 External and Built-In Resources
This section continues from the previous in exploring the material resource
specifically, but in so doing we’ll also examine a distinction that Godot
makes generally across all resources, including materials. Let’s select the
Sprite object that we created previously and duplicate it to create a second,
identical version. This will be revealing. To do this, select the object in the
Scene Dock and press Ctrl + D on the keyboard, or else right-click the
object and choose Duplicate from the context menu (see Figure 3.17).

FIGURE 3.17 Duplicating a Sprite. ⏎
At first sight, you may not notice that two Sprite objects exist from the
duplication, because they’ll initially both be stacked atop each other in the
scene, in the same location. You can simply use the transform tool, however
(covered in Chapter 2, Section 2.2.5), to move one of them beside the other.
Now, with both objects side by side for a visual comparison, select any one
of them in the scene and change its material Blend mode back from Add to
Mix by using the Inspector (see Figure 3.18).

FIGURE 3.18 Changing the material for a single instance. ⏎
When you change one of the materials on one of the Sprites, you’ll notice
that both Sprites change in appearance simultaneously. This is not because
the Sprite themselves are connected in some unseen way, but because they
both share the same material. This may seem strange and counterintuitive
initially. After all, you were previously able to change the position of one
Sprite without it affecting the position of the other when you moved them
side by side. The reason this doesn’t apply to the material is because
materials are resources, and a resource is a separate object or file. You used
the Inspector in Section 3.1.3 to create a new material resource. This
resource is an independent entity, separate from the Sprite. The resource is

not a node and doesn’t exist spatially within the scene as an object does, but
it is a free-floating entity that exists nowhere except in the computer’s
memory. When you duplicated the Sprite, you created two different objects
(two different Sprites) that link to the same underlying material resource.
The resource itself is merely referenced by each Sprite, and neither Sprite
contains nor owns the resource or its settings. Hence, changing the resource
will impact all objects that use it either directly or indirectly. This applies to
all resources in Godot, not only materials. We’ll see other examples later.
OK. So, how can you vary the material across objects? How can I change
it for one Sprite, but not for the other? The answer is that, for two Sprites,
you’ll need two materials. One for each Sprite. You can easily make a
separate material resource from the first. To do this, select one of the
Sprites, and from the material drop-down, choose Make Unique from the
context menu. This will duplicate the resource, just as we previously
duplicated the Sprites, and assign the new duplicate to the currently selected
Sprite, leaving the other Sprite to use the original resource. Now, you can
change them separately (see Figure 3.19).

FIGURE 3.19 Duplicating a resource. ⏎
At this point, you may reasonably wonder about our manually created
material resource in comparison to the imported texture resource imported
earlier. Specifically, our texture resource exists outside of any scene, within
the FileSystem Dock, and it can easily be selected separately from any Node
within any scene. But the material resource is different, it seems. Unlike the
texture, the material doesn’t appear in FileSystem as a selectable thing at all.
It can only be edited by first selecting an object in a specific scene (such as
a Sprite object) and using the designated Inspector fields. And it’s hard to
see how such a resource, made in this way, could be used or accessed in
other scenes or even transferred to other Godot projects. It’s therefore a lot
more inconvenient for sharing and reusing. Thankfully, we can easily ‘fix’
this. In so doing, it marks the conceptual distinction that Godot makes
between built-in resources and external resources.

The imported texture is an external resource because it exists explicitly
as a unique file in FileSystem and can be used in any scene or project. The
recently created material, by contrast, is an example of a built-in resource
because we created it in a very specific, local way through an object and
through the Inspector inside a specific scene. Although it still exists as a
resource for the active scene and can be shared by multiple objects in that
scene, it nonetheless doesn’t feature as a file alongside other resources in
the FileSystem. The advantage of this kind of ‘local’ resource is that your
game may contain many of them, and they don’t clutter your FileSystem
view. But, if you want to share the resource across scenes and across
projects, then you’ll want to make the resource an external one. To do that,
select one of the Sprite objects, and from the Material section in the
Inspector, expand the Resource section within (see Figure 3.20).

FIGURE 3.20 Viewing resource information. ⏎
By checking the Path field within the Resource Group, you’ll notice that
it appears empty. This means the resource is a built-in resource. To convert
the resource into an external resource, click the drop-down arrow from the
Material section and choose Save from the context menu (see Figure 3.21).
Then name your file and save.

FIGURE 3.21 Saving to an external resource. ⏎
After saving, you’ll notice the material is saved to the FileSystem in the
TRES format, which is a text file that can be read, edited, and versioncontrolled easily. You can also double-click this file from the FileSystem to
view its properties independently in the Inspector, outside of any scene or
object. If you change the properties here, in this global space, any
dependent objects using this resource will also change. For example,
changing the Blend mode from Add to Mix will affect any Sprites using this
material (see Figure 3.22).

FIGURE 3.22 Applying changes to an external resource. ⏎
Finally, if we wanted to configure our second Sprite object or any
additional Sprite object to use our external resource as a material, we do
that by first selecting the object and moving to the material roll-out in the
Inspector. Click the material drop-down, as seen before, and choose Quick
Load from the context menu. From here, you can choose your external
resource. Easy, though not immediately obvious! Refer to Figure 3.23.

FIGURE 3.23 Sharing a single external material across multiple
Sprites. ⏎

3.2 TEXTURES FOR 3D OBJECTS,
HANDS-ON
We’ll now move into the vibrant world of textures for 3D scenes and
objects, such as primitives and meshes. These textures in 3D work much
like they do for 2D, but with additional options, details, and complexities.
Before moving forward, please ensure that you’ve read the previous section
in full about textures and 2D, even if you do not intend to make 2D games.
This section relies on important knowledge covered there. As with the
previous section, I’ll assume that you’ve already imported a single texture

of any size or format that you want to apply to a single 3D object in a 3D
scene. For this example, we’ll use a cube object. More complex meshes are
covered later in this chapter. In practice, meshes and scenes normally rely
on multiple textures rather than only one, but the process for importing and
using one texture or multiple is the same. So, we’ll work with one texture
for simplicity and clarity (see Figure 3.24). For this texture, ensure the
Generate Mipmap setting is enabled, as it should be for most 3D objects
that will be seen from different angles and distances.

FIGURE 3.24 Importing a texture for 3D use. ⏎

3.2.1 Creating Materials for 3D Objects
Materials for 3D objects in 3D scenes can be both external and built-in, as
with 2D scenes and workflows. Let’s start by creating an external material,
which will be used shortly to apply our imported texture across the surface
of a 3D model, such as a cube. The advantage of an external material is that
it can be easily shared across multiple objects, scenes, and even projects. To
create an external material resource, move to the FileSystem Dock and
right-click on the root node ‘res://’. This root represents the topmost folder
of your Godot project’s internal file system for assets. After right-clicking,
choose Create New > Resource from the context menu (see Figure 3.25).
This displays the resource creation menu.

FIGURE 3.25 Creating a new material resource. ⏎
Next, create a StandardMaterial3D resource. Select it from the Matches
list and then press the Create button. There are many different material
types in Godot for different purposes and use cases. The
StandardMaterial3D is the most common type for 3D scenes. You’ll be
asked to assign the material a unique filename. I chose ‘standard_3d’, but
you can use any suitable name for your games (see Figure 3.26). As with all
standard resources, this is saved inside a text-based TRES file.

FIGURE 3.26 Creating a standard 3D material resource. ⏎

NOTE. The TRES file is similar to, but different from, the IMPORT
file. Both are text-based, human-readable, and editable. TRES,
however, represents the native properties of a Godot-created resource.
IMPORT, by contrast, saves the import settings used to convert an
imported file into a resource.
To configure and edit the newly created material, double-click on it from
the FileSystem. This displays the material properties in the Inspector. From
here, expand the Albedo field. This field controls a surface’s color under
normal lighting conditions. It’s what we call, in common sense terms, the
color of an object (see Figure 3.27).

FIGURE 3.27 Defining the color of an object’s material. ⏎
From the Albedo rollout, click the drop-down arrow in the Texture field,
and choose Quick Load from the context menu. Then select the texture that
you imported into the FileSystem earlier. When you do this, a connection is
immediately made between the material and the selected texture. The
texture is not copied or duplicated. It still retains its independence from the

material, which means that future changes to the texture, if any, will
automatically be reflected in the material. The Inspector features a preview
pane, where you can see a live version of your material on a sample 3D
object (see Figure 3.28).

FIGURE 3.28 Updating a material’s Albedo texture. ⏎

3.2.2 Assigning Materials to 3D Objects
The previous section focused on material creation as an external resource.
The created material is currently a stand-alone resource that is not attached
to any in-game instance, such as a mesh or a Sprite. That is, the material
currently exists in theory but not in reality. As a potentiality rather than an
actuality. Let’s now assign the material to a 3D object. To do that, create a
new 3D Scene. Refer to the previous chapter, Section 2.2.3, on creating a
3D scene with a cube object. We’ll begin with a plain, blank cube, as shown
in Figure 3.29.

FIGURE 3.29 A 3D scene with a newly created cube mesh. ⏎
There are different ways to assign a material to a 3D object in Godot. The
quickest and most straightforward way is to expand the Surface Material
Override field from the Inspector, with the MeshInstance3D selected, and
then from the 0 slot, click the drop-down arrow and choose Quick Load
from the context menu, selecting the newly created material (see Figure
3.30).

FIGURE 3.30 Assigning a material to a 3D object. ⏎
NOTE. Each Surface Material Override may have more slots than
simply 0, as we have here. There may be an additional 1, 2, 3, or even
more slots. Each slot represents a connection to a single material.
Normally, if a single mesh uses only one material, there will be only a
0 slot. But some more complex meshes may have different materials
for different parts (such as a material for the character’s skin, another
for hair, and another for clothes).
As the material is assigned to the 3D object, its surface will immediately
change, which updates the viewport. You should see your selected texture
wrapped around the object’s surface. It may not appear at the scale,
orientation, or location that you expect. The scale, orientation, and location
of a texture on a surface are defined by an object’s UV Mapping. This
mapping is a specialized coordinate system and is part of the mesh and not
part of the material. You cannot normally change the mapping through the
material. Typically, if you don’t like how a texture is being wrapped around
a model, you’ll need to jump back into the 3D modeling software – such as
Blender – to tweak the mapping for the model and then reimport it back to
Godot. However, the Godot material offers some very basic controls that
can change how a texture is wrapped in a limited way. You’ll find these
controls inside the properties for your material resource, under the UV1
rollout. A mesh may have up to two UV channels: UV1 and UV2. Again,
these are defined inside a 3D modeling program, as we’ll see in later
sections. Each channel defines how the surface of an object unwraps flat
onto a 2D image. Most objects, however, use only one channel and
therefore can unwrap in only one way. From the UV1 rollout, you have two
controls: Scale and Offset. We’ll explore these further (see Figure 3.31).

FIGURE 3.31 Accessing the scale and offset properties for a
material. ⏎
The Scale Property behaves as follows: values less than 1, such as 0.5,
will seem to stretch parts of the texture across the whole surface of the
model. Values higher than 1 will tile and repeat the texture across the
surface (see Figure 3.32).

FIGURE 3.32 Using scale to stretch and tile a texture. ⏎
NOTE. The Scale field features a lock icon at the far right-hand side of
the field. By default, this locks the uniformity of scale. In other words,
if you enter a value of 6 for the X field, then Godot will automatically
enter 6 for Y and Z. If you click the lock icon to break the connection,
then you can enter different values for each field and change the tiling
in different directions.
The Offset property is fun and behaves as follows: By changing X, for
example, you will slide the texture along a local X axis, changing its
starting point on the mesh surface. A great use of animating this value is for
sliding a water texture along a flat plane to create the illusion of running
water, a popular technique in retro-style games (Figure 3.33).

FIGURE 3.33 Sliding a texture along a cube surface using the
offset field. ⏎

3.3 MESH RESOURCES: THE EXPORT
AND IMPORT PROCESS
Mesh resources are a truly complex subject because there are many parts to
them, such as geometry, mapping, textures and materials, and rigging and
animation. A mesh can be a simple static prop, such as a crate or a weapon.
It can be an architectural element, such as a wall or a door. It can be an
animated character, such as the player or an NPC. Meshes can be created in
different visual styles too, from cartoon to photoreal, and they can be
assembled in different programs with different features, such as Maya or
Blender. At their most basic, however, all meshes are structurally made
from three basic ingredients. These are vertices, edges, and faces. Now,
there are other programs and disciplines out there that conceive of meshes

in different terms from these three elements (such as hypersurfaces and
splines), but these do not normally apply to Godot or game development.
For our purposes, we have the vertex (plural: vertices), which defines a
corner point; the edge, which is a straight line connecting any two vertices;
and the face (or polygon), which is a surface created whenever a series of
edges forms an enclosed loop – such as when the three edges of a triangle
loop back around to their starting point. Of these, the face is special because
it’s the only element that a player can see during gameplay. The player
cannot see vertices or edges unless the developer is using a special kind of
material.
This section explores the 3D modelling software, Blender. It examines
how to export a static prop mesh from that software to be import-ready for
Godot. Each 3D modeling application will have a different process for
exporting a mesh – Blender has one approach, and Maya another. In this
section, we will not consider animated characters but rather meshes that do
not move by deformations. This includes walls, floors, windows, statues,
pillars, weapons, and many others, for example. Although Blender is a
different program from Godot (and this book is about Godot), Blender is
nonetheless an excellent starting point for our exploration of meshes. This is
because, through Blender, we can see meshes in action prior to their being
imported. Specifically, we’ll create a quick mesh together inside Blender
(don’t worry, you don’t need art skills!), and then we’ll go through the
process of exporting that mesh from Blender and into Godot, step by step.
Along the way, we’ll consider many interesting subjects that can enhance
our workflow exponentially. Blender is a free and open-source application
that can run on Windows, Linux, and Mac, and can be downloaded from
https://www.blender.org/. If you don’t use Blender, or use a different
program, then you don’t need to follow along with this section step by step,

but I still recommend reading it, especially if you’re new to working with
meshes in game development. It will feature some useful concepts and
ideas that transfer valuably across many different programs, including
Godot.

3.3.1 Creating a Mesh in Blender
Let’s create a mesh together inside Blender. If you don’t want to follow this
process, you can still learn a lot about meshes by reading this section, and
our final exported mesh is also included in the book companion files (in the
Chapter 3 folder) for your convenience. To start, load up the Blender
software (I am using Version 4.3.2). You’ll end up with an almost empty
scene, which includes only a cube at the world’s origin (see Figure 3.34).

FIGURE 3.34 Blender startup file. ⏎
We don’t need the auto-created cube made by Blender. After all, we can
easily make one of those ourselves in Godot using the MeshInstance3D

node. So, select the cube by clicking on it, and then hit the Delete button on
the keyboard to remove it from the scene. This returns us to an almost
empty scene. Although we have no rendered, visible items remaining in the
scene, there are still non-visible items there. Specifically, a camera and a
light. You can see this from the Blender Hierarchy Panel, which works a lot
like the Godot Scene Tree, listing all items in the scene. This is important to
know because, as we export content later, we don’t want to accidentally
export non-visible items like cameras and lights (see Figure 3.35).

FIGURE 3.35 Viewing scene contents from the hierarchy. ⏎
Now let’s create a more complex mesh to export from Blender. To create
this, choose Add > Mesh > Monkey from the creation menu at the top of the
viewport. Suzanne is Blender’s test model, equivalent to the Utah Teapot
found in many other modeling applications. It’s a quickly generated 3D
model. When you select this option, a 3D head mesh is created at the world
origin (0, 0, 0) immediately. The location of the model is important when
exporting, as we’ll see soon (see Figure 3.36).

FIGURE 3.36 Creating a mesh in Blender. ⏎

3.3.2 Exporting a Mesh from Blender Using GLTF
After completing our mesh in Blender, let’s export it now to Godot. For
more complex meshes, you don’t need to wait until the mesh is fully
completed to export it. You can export multiple times during development
and jump back and forth between Blender and Godot to visualize your mesh
as it gets refined. The export process can sometimes be involved and
complicated because, ideally, we don’t want anything to be lost in
translation, so we need to take care of how we export. The goal is for our
mesh in Godot to appear identical to its Blender counterpart. That sounds
simple, but sometimes it’s not always possible. To start, select the mesh in
the viewport by clicking on it. Selected meshes in Blender have a bold,
solid-color border surrounding them (see Figure 3.37).

FIGURE 3.37 Preparing to export. ⏎
Next, provided the selected mesh looks good to you, let’s see the toplevel properties for it: namely, its position, rotation, and scale. We normally
want these to be at their identities, that is, a position of (0,0,0), a rotation of
(0,0,0), and a scale of (1,1,1). Otherwise, the meshes will display at
unintended offsets and locations when imported into Godot. To do this,
click the Object Properties tab from the Inspector and view its properties
(see Figure 3.38).

FIGURE 3.38 Checking a mesh’s position, rotation and scale. ⏎
If these values are set differently from the identities, then you have two
options. One: you could type in (0,0,0) for the location, (0,0,0) for rotation,
and (1,1,1) for scale, but doing so may change the model in ways you do
not want. For example, it may orient the model away from how it should
look. The alternative, which leaves the model unchanged, is to Apply All
Transforms. This keeps the current position, rotation, and scale of the model
and accepts its current state as the identity state. This is the more common
method. To achieve this, select Object > Apply > All Transforms from the
object menu (see Figure 3.39).

FIGURE 3.39 Applying all transforms for a selected mesh. ⏎
Now we’re ready to export our selected mesh. Godot accepts meshes in
either the FBX format, which is commonly used by Maya, and the GLTF
format. We’ll use the latter since it is well-supported in all modern Godot
versions. To do this, select File > Export > glTF 2.0 from the file menu.
This displays the export menu where you can customize export options (see
Figure 3.40).

FIGURE 3.40 Accessing the glTF export tool in Blender. ⏎
The GLTF Exporter has many options. First, ensure the Format field is
appropriate. The two options are either GLB (binary) or GLTF. The default
GLB is the faster-performing and simpler option and should be preferred.
There is an additional and optional Copyright field where you can enter
authorship details for the asset you are exporting (see Figure 3.41).

FIGURE 3.41 Setting the GLTF format. ⏎
Next, expand the include field. This lets you refine what objects are
exported. By default, everything in the scene will be exported – both visible
and non-visible objects – regardless of what meshes you may have selected
in the viewport. However, let’s enable the Selected Objects option to ensure
that only selected objects will be exported (see Figure 3.42).

FIGURE 3.42 Limiting the export to selected objects. ⏎

The include section allows you to filter the export by object, such as
selected objects or visible objects. The data section allows you to narrow
your export further by selecting which properties of the exported objects
should be retained, such as materials and rigging. It’s tempting perhaps to
enable everything here, reasoning that this would be the best approach for
importing your mesh as faithfully as possible. However, you should export
the minimal amount needed for your mesh to work and behave as needed in
Godot. This keeps your file size to a minimum and reduces the amount of
data that Godot needs to process. For our Suzanne mesh, I have left
everything at their defaults for this section, except I have disabled both
skinning and animation. The mesh is not animated (see Figure 3.43).

FIGURE 3.43 Filtering exported data. ⏎
Finally, name your mesh appropriately, select a destination folder on your
computer, and then choose Export. This will create a new GLB file on your
hard drive (see Figure 3.44).

FIGURE 3.44 Exporting to a GLB file. ⏎

3.3.3 Importing a Mesh to Godot from GLTF
Meshes for game development are commonly found in the FBX and GLTF
formats. FBX is the most common for Unity and Unreal. The GLTF format
is more common in the Godot world, and it comes in two forms, namely
GLTF and GLB. The mesh exported in the previous section, which is
included in the book companion files in the Chapter 3 folder, is in the GLB
format. This is the most common form. It is a mesh of the Suzanne Monkey,
exported from Blender 4.3.2. Importing a mesh like this into Godot is much
like importing an image texture in the initial stages. You simply drag and
drop your mesh file from your file browser and into the FileSystem dock in
the Godot editor. When you do this, the mesh is added to your project
automatically as a resource (see Figure 3.45).

FIGURE 3.45 Importing a GLB file into Godot. ⏎
NOTE. More technical information on importing meshes in Godot can
be found in the official Godot documentation here:
https://docs.godotengine.org/en/4.1/tutorials/assets_pipeline/importing
_scenes.html
Great! So, Godot has now imported your mesh. Or has it? Let’s see. Start by
creating a new 3D scene and then drag and drop the GLB resource into the
3D viewport. You’ll notice that a new object is created, and it looks just like
your mesh (see Figure 3.46).

FIGURE 3.46 A new mesh is created based on the imported
resource ⏎
Things look good, at least at first sight. But there are some interesting
points to note, which are likely to cause confusion, especially if you’re
approaching Godot coming from either Unity or Unreal. First, notice that
there is an unusual clapboard icon next to the object name in the Scene
Dock. This doesn’t appear on any of the objects we created previously. And
second, even when the object is selected in the scene, there seems to be no
way to change its material override from the Inspector, as we did with the
cube mesh created earlier. We cannot seem to change any mesh properties,
like texture, material, and shaders (see Figure 3.47).

FIGURE 3.47 Exploring the imported GLB mesh inside a scene.
⏎
So, what’s going on here exactly? Seems strange, right? Here’s the
answer: Godot understands GLTF and FBX files to represent 3D scenes
rather than meshes. A single GLTF file doesn’t represent a single mesh but
rather a scene that could contain one or more meshes. You may be working
in the tradition of a single file representing a single mesh. It makes sense
and feels nice and neat. But that tradition is a convention rather than a
requirement of the file format itself. So, by importing GLTF files, you are
technically importing a 3D scene (such as a Scene from Blender) which is a
three-dimensional space containing one or more meshes as child nodes. For
this reason, when you drag and drop our Suzanne file from the FileSystem
Dock into the 3D viewport, you are not actually instantiating a single mesh.
Rather, you’re instantiating a complete scene that contains a mesh. That is
why, when selecting our object in the Scene Dock, you don’t see a bunch of
properties for a single mesh inside the Inspector; because you are really
selecting a higher-order root object that represents a scene, inside which the
mesh lives as a separate child object. You can confirm that this is indeed the

case by clicking once on the clapboard icon beside the Suzanne object from
the Scene Dock. When you click this, it asks a technical question about
scenes. For now, choose Open Anyway (see Figure 3.48). Choosing this
option will open a new Scene tab beside the original scene and display the
full contents of the imported scene – the Suzanne scene. Doing so, our
imported object (Suzanne) finally reveals itself to be a scene and not simply
a mesh. And because we previously dragged and dropped an instance of
Suzanne into our original, empty 3D scene, that instance is actually a scene
embedded in a scene. This concept of scenes within scenes (embedded
scenes) is an incredibly powerful idea that forms a core part of the Godot
workflow, and we will revisit it later in this chapter and throughout this
book. It’s analogous to Prefabs in Unity and Unreal.

FIGURE 3.48 Opening up the GLTF scene. ⏎
OK. So, let’s keep exploring. If we now examine the Suzanne mesh scene
in its own scene resource, you’ll see that it features two nodes in the
hierarchy, namely a root node and a Suzanne node. If you select the
Suzanne node, you’ll see all the expected mesh properties in the Inspector,
such as material and surface overrides. Therefore, this is the mesh node.

Now, our scene here features two nodes, but naturally different scenes will
have different nodes and configurations, and this complexity varies
depending on your exported data (see Figure 3.49).

FIGURE 3.49 Selecting the mesh node inside a GLTF resource.
⏎
Good. Now, what about changing the mesh properties? For example, we
might want to create two versions of the same imported mesh, one with a
red material and one with a blue material. This is certainly common in the
retro platform games where multiple enemies in a level are often repeated
but with different materials and colors to indicate their strength. Surely, we
don’t need to create the variations in Blender or Maya and then export each
variation separately as different meshes? Thankfully, Godot offers us a
range of features for varying our imported meshes and assets. However, the
originally imported GLTF file that we are now viewing in the scene editor
is read-only. Back when we clicked on the clapboard icon to view the scene
and chose ‘Open Anyway’, we were effectively being warned there by

Godot that by opening the original scene, we could only view its contents
and not modify them. So, let’s close the Suzanne mesh scene since we
cannot change it and find another way. To do that, we click the Close
button. It may, absurdly, ask us if we want to save any changes made (see
Figure 3.50).

FIGURE 3.50 Closing the imported GLTF scene. ⏎

3.3.4 Modifying an Imported Mesh with Inherited
Scenes
We’ve seen now how we can import any number of meshes from Blender,
using GLTF, and display them effectively inside a regular Godot 3D scene.
You simply drag and drop the scene (which contains a mesh) resource from
the FileSystem dock into the scene viewport, and this method will work
well. That is, provided you don’t need to modify the mesh, or meshes, in
any way. If you want to change a mesh’s material, re-scale the mesh, or add
additional data such as colliders or weapons, then you’ll certainly need a
method for modifying the imported meshes. By default, the imported scene

resources are read-only and cannot be changed, as we’ve seen. There are
different approaches to get around this problem. This section considers one
of them, which works well for any type of mesh, whether it’s a prop,
architectural element, or character. To get started, drag and drop your
imported mesh into an open scene, as we already did in an earlier section
(see Figure 3.51).

FIGURE 3.51 Closing the imported GLTF scene. ⏎
The newly added mesh has a clapboard icon next to its name in the Scene
Dock, which means it’s an embedded scene. That is, although it appears as
one node in the hierarchy, it could represent many more child nodes. Click
on the clapboard icon and choose New Inherited from the context menu (see
Figure 3.52). This focuses on the scene in a new tab.

FIGURE 3.52 Creating an inherited scene for making mesh
changes. ⏎
Let’s make one version of the mesh red and the other blue. Let’s make
blue first. Select the mesh node (the child node) in the newly opened scene.
From the Inspector, expand the Surface Material Override and create a new
StandardMaterial3D. Then expand the Albedo slot and assign a blue color
to it. The mesh will immediately change to blue in the viewport (see Figure
3.53).

FIGURE 3.53 Updating the mesh material to blue. ⏎
Now Save this scene with Ctrl + S and use a different filename (such as
Mesh_Blue). The saved variation will now appear in the FileSystem Dock as
a separate scene (see Figure 3.54).

FIGURE 3.54 Saving a blue mesh variation. ⏎
Now go back to our previous scene and again select the clapboard icon
for the original Suzanne mesh. Then repeat the process of creating a new,
inherited scene for the red variation. Be sure to save the scene meaningfully,
for example, mesh_red. You’ll now end up with a FileSystem dock
containing a total of three scenes: the original Suzanne scene and two other
scenes, which are variations that derive from the original (see Figure 3.55).

FIGURE 3.55 Creating blue and red variants of an imported
scene. ⏎
Excellent! You can now drag and drop the variations into the active
scene, placing them side by side in a lineup. You have now imported a mesh
and varied its properties in an efficient and accessible way (see Figure
3.56). Unlike the original Suzanne mesh, which will always be read-only,
you can always open up and edit the variations. And, if your variations are
instantiated in multiple places and multiple scenes, then all instances will
instantly update to reflect any changes you make upon saving.

FIGURE 3.56 Adding mesh variations to a scene. ⏎

3.4 BLENDER AND GODOT LIVE LINK
EDITING
Godot integrates well with Blender. This integration has now reached an
impressive stage such that, in addition to importing meshes into Godot from
GLTF files, as we’ve seen, we can also connect to Blender through its
native file type, .blend files. That is, Godot can open .Blend files. This
seamless ‘live link’ approach practically means that we can save a file in
Blender, import that directly into Godot, and then return to Blender, where
any saved changes to that file are automatically updated live in Godot. In
this way, there is a continuous, one-to-one correspondence between the two
applications when they share the same blend file. This workflow is
especially appealing because, in theory, it removes the need to tediously

‘export’ any meshes via an exporter tool – like FBX or GLTF. Plus, it
retains a live connection between the two applications, making it
frictionless to change your work whenever needed. This section explores
how to set up the live link connection between Blender and Godot, and we
also examine the limitations and technical risks of this solution if you rely
on it entirely.

3.4.1 Creating a Connection between Godot and
Blender
The first step to seamless integration between Godot and Blender is to make
Godot aware of the location of Blender on your computer. That sounds
straightforward, but it can actually be trickier than it first appears. To
achieve this, start by choosing Editor > Editor Settings from the Godot
application menu (see Figure 3.57).

FIGURE 3.57 Accessing the Godot Editor Settings. ⏎

From the Editor Settings dialog, choose FileSystem > Import, and from
there enter a valid and fully qualified path to the Blender executable on
your computer, using the Blender Path field (see Figure 3.58). On Windows
operating systems, this will likely be straightforward, as you can easily
choose the install location of Blender. On Mac and Linux, this is potentially
more complicated. For Linux users especially – such as the popular Linux
Mint Distro – you may even need to download and extract Blender
manually from the official Blender website, as opposed to using a prepackaged version from the system package manager, like Flatpak. After
changing this, you’ll need to restart the Godot Editor.

FIGURE 3.58 Specifying the install location of Blender. ⏎
After restarting Godot, or at some later point in the process, you’ll see an
error message if you got the Blender location wrong or if there was an issue
accessing Blender at the specified location. If and when this happens, Godot

may disable Blender connectivity entirely to prevent any future error
messages from showing while using Godot. However, if you later return to
the Editor Settings and enter a new and correct path to Blender, Godot will
still have deactivated Blender connectivity. To re-enable this option, start by
choosing Project > Project Settings from the application menu (see Figure
3.59).

FIGURE 3.59 Accessing Project Settings in Godot. ⏎
From the Project Settings menu, enable Advanced Settings in the topright-hand corner. This reveals a selection of more advanced and less
commonly used options (see Figure 3.60).

FIGURE 3.60 Enabling advanced options from the Project
Settings dialog. ⏎
Next, view FileSystem > Import options, and be sure to enable the
Blender field (see Figure 3.61). That’s it. Blender import will be re-enabled
again. Note that Godot may disable this field again if an error occurs
connecting to Blender at the new path.

FIGURE 3.61 Re-enabling Blender importing. ⏎

3.4.2 Creating a Shared Blend Scene
Next, let’s switch over to Blender and create a new scene featuring Suzanne
Mesh, as we created earlier. We’ll eventually connect this to Godot (see
Figure 3.62).

FIGURE 3.62 Create an empty Blender scene with a Suzanne
mesh. ⏎
Now, return to your Godot project and select the topmost node in the
FileSystem hierarchy, which is the ‘res://’ node, the topmost folder in the
file system. Right-click on this node and choose Copy Absolute Path from
the context menu. This copies the FileSystem path of your Godot project to
the clipboard, which will be pasted later inside Blender (see Figure 3.63).

FIGURE 3.63 Copying the Absolute Path of a folder location. ⏎
Now, return to Blender and choose File > Save from the application
menu to access the file-saving features. Then paste the Absolute Path of the
Godot project, copied previously, to save the Blender file into your Godot
file system directly. Give your Blend file a suitable, unique, and meaningful
name, as this name will display in Godot too (see Figure 3.64).

FIGURE 3.64 Saving a Blend File into a Godot project. ⏎
Return to Godot, and you’ll automatically see your Blend file appear in
the FileSystem. Next, create a new 3D Scene and drag and drop the Blender
file into the 3D viewport. You’ll immediately see the contents of your
Blender scene. However, the scene may not appear as you expected because
all objects in the Blender scene, including any lights, were also imported
into Godot (see Figure 3.65).

FIGURE 3.65 Establishing a connection to a Blender Scene. ⏎
If you see your Blender scene in the Godot viewport, then that’s great
news. You can now easily jump back to Blender, make any changes, and
then re-save. Godot will automatically detect the saved changes and update
the scene with your latest changes. Amazing! No need for an export, and no
need for any dragging and dropping files.

3.4.3 Mesh Name Suffixes
Previously, we successfully established a live connection to a Blender scene
between Godot and Blender. This offers us many technical and logistical
advantages. However, you’ll notice from Figure 3.65 that everything in the
Blender scene, including lights and cameras, is imported directly into
Godot, regardless of whether we want them or whether they are useful. If
we wanted to exclude some items – such as the cameras and lights – one
solution would be simply to delete them manually inside Godot. However,
those unwanted items would, of course, return every time we re-saved the

Blender file, and Godot updated the scene in response. Another solution
would be to delete the items from the Blender scene itself, using Blender.
But this is problematic too because we might want to keep those items in
Blender, usually because they are useful there. So, an alternative solution
that Godot offers us is mesh name suffixes. These are special letters that we
attach to the end of object names in Blender. These change how Godot
behaves during the import process. When Godot encounters a reserved
combination of letters at the end of an object name, it responds in a specific
way to that object on an object-by-object basis. Let’s consider the case of
excluding specific objects from being imported from a Blender scene. For
this, the suffix of –noimp (meaning: No Import) can be appended to the
name of any object that Godot should ignore at import time, acting as
though it didn’t exist. For our example Blender scene, created in the
previous section, there is a camera and a light object that I’d like Godot to
ignore specifically. Consider Figure 3.66.

FIGURE 3.66 Godot ignores objects with the naming suffix noimp. ⏎

After applying naming suffixes to the lights and cameras and then resaving the scene in Blender, Godot will automatically reimport the file and
exclude the specified objects. This allows us to keep the objects in Blender
and remove them in Godot. Nice feature. It should be noted that this feature
also works for the GLTF Export workflow and not only the live link.
NOTE. For more details on other supported Godot suffixes, check out
the official documentation here:
https://docs.godotengine.org/en/stable/tutorials/assets_pipeline/importi
ng_3d_scenes/node_type_customization.html.

3.4.4 Advantages and Disadvantages of Live
Linking
It’s worth closing this section with a brief discussion on the pros and cons
of Blender to Godot live-link editing. I’ll divide these into ‘reasons for’ and
then ‘reasons against’, and you can make a judgment for your own needs. In
short, there is no right or wrong approach. If you choose to avoid Live
Linking, then your alternative for importing meshes from Blender is the
GLTF export workflow above. If you instead use Maya, you can export as
GLTF or FBX.
Reasons for:
1. No need for Exporting
Perhaps the strongest reason to choose Live Linking is that it avoids
the tedium of exporting meshes separately and of having to choose the
right settings and configure everything in the correct way. It takes
some of the intricate and annoying work away from you, and that’s
tempting!
2. Fast and Interactive

Another great reason is simplicity and speed. With Live Linking, you
can jump almost seamlessly back and forth between Godot and
Blender and make changes that update as soon as you push save in
Blender. This interactivity is impressive.
Reasons against:
1. Software Lock-In
Blender to Godot Live Linking only works between those two
applications. Although many applications export to GLTF and import
from it, only Godot supports Live Linking with Blender in this way.
This means your team is tied into using Blender for 3D modeling if
they are to take proper advantage of Live Linking.
2. Easy to break
Each machine in your team needs both Godot and Blender installed
and to be configured correctly in order to live link. This depends on
users understanding how to set things up, having the correct
permissions, and knowing their way around the file system properly.
3. Version Invalidation
If you upgrade your software often, such as always using the latest
Godot or Blender, then please remember that code changes and feature
additions can impact how these applications work with each other.
There is the potential for breaks to happen.

3.5 THE MESH ADVANCED IMPORTER
Whether you’re importing FBX, GLTF, or Blend files, Godot features a
general-purpose Advanced Import tool for meshes. This is useful in many
situations, as we’ll see. You access this tool simply by double-clicking the

mesh file from the FileSystem dock or by right-clicking the file and,
strangely, choosing Open Scene from the context menu (see Figure 3.67).

FIGURE 3.67 Accessing the Advanced Mesh Import tool. ⏎
The tool contains a combination of preview features, optimization
settings for meshes, and even a series of batch process features. The tool
will open in the Scene tab (see Figure 3.68).

FIGURE 3.68 Viewing the advanced mesh import tool. ⏎

3.5.1 Setting the Mesh Scale
Rather than scan through every feature of this tool, let’s explore at least two
key reasons during development why you would use it and how it can
achieve those core purposes. First, your imported mesh may appear too
large or too small in the scene compared to everything else. This is
especially important when the player characters, or enemy characters, need
to be a specific size to fit through doorways, tunnels, and other spaces. You
commonly find this problem when working with different assets by
different artists, made for different games or purposes. In any case, one way
to solve this is by returning to Blender and fixing the size there at the
source, or you could simply change the individual scale of every instance of
the mesh in every scene. The latter is tedious if you’re using many instances
of the imported mesh, such as many enemies repeated throughout the scene.
To solve this more effectively in Godot, you can use the Root Scale setting.
When set, the mesh is uniformly scaled by the specified scale factor (1

means default size, 2 means double-size, and 0.5 means half-size, etc.), and
this becomes its default size whenever the mesh is added to a scene. If you
change this value, or any value in the Advanced Mesh Importer, it will also
affect all existing instances of the mesh that already exist in any scenes you
have, if any (see Figure 3.69).

FIGURE 3.69 Setting the root or Mesh scale. ⏎

3.5.2 Separating Meshes
Another important feature of the Advanced Importer is mesh separation.
Your imported file is technically a scene, which contains many meshes and
other objects in a single 3D space. If there are many objects, they will be
treated as a single scene unit by Godot because they are contained within
the same scene. The meshes within can be moved and transformed
separately when edited using the scene editor, but they all still constitute
part of a larger scene, which is taken in its entirety when embedded into
another scene. For this reason, it’s often convenient to separate the meshes
from the imported scene file, saving them separately not as smaller scenes,

but as mesh resources that can be added to scenes on their own. This has
advantages and disadvantages, as we’ll see. To start separating a mesh, click
on the Mesh tab from the Importer tool and select the mesh to separate (see
Figure 3.70).

FIGURE 3.70 Choosing a Mesh for separation. ⏎
Next, enable Save to File from the tool Inspector, and then select a valid
path in the project. Then finally choose Reimport. This reimports the mesh
into Godot and applies all saved meshes, creating separate mesh resources
for them (see Figure 3.71).

FIGURE 3.71 Choosing a Save Destination. ⏎
If you’re extracting many meshes from a file, and not simply one or two,
then you can use the Batch tool to set a save path for multiple meshes at
once. This tool is available from the Actions Menu. Choose Actions > Set
Mesh Save Paths. And then choose Reimport (see Figure 3.72).

FIGURE 3.72 Setting multiple save paths. ⏎
NOTE. When a mesh is saved from an imported scene file as a mesh
asset and a separate resource, it becomes separated from its attendant
material and collision information. The former defines how the mesh
surface should appear under lighting, and the latter defines whether the
mesh is a solid object. You can easily but manually configure these
again for each instance of the mesh.

3.5.3 Separating Materials
Finally, you may want to externalize mesh materials to separate material
resources that you can edit separately from the FileSystem, or even through
code, as we saw earlier in Section 3.2. This gives you easier control over an
object’s surface. You will probably want to do this if you’ll be assigning
different materials to the same mesh, if you’re changing a material, or if
you want to access the material from code. You probably won’t do this if
you’re happy with the mesh material as it is and have no need to make any

changes. To start, select the Materials tab from the tool and then choose a
material to save (see Figure 3.73).

FIGURE 3.73 Extracting materials. ⏎
From the Inspector, choose Enabled under the Use External category,
then select a valid path (see Figure 3.74).

FIGURE 3.74 Enabling external materials. ⏎

As with meshes in the previous section, you can export many materials at
once using a batch process tool. This is especially convenient with
materials, as even one mesh can contain many materials. To export
multiple, choose Actions > Extract Materials. This exports and externalizes
all materials in the imported file (see Figure 3.75).

FIGURE 3.75 Extracting all materials. ⏎

3.6 CONCLUSION
This chapter explored how to work with the most common and fundamental
resources in Godot, namely textures, materials, and meshes. Together, these
represent the building blocks of nearly every game and interactive media.
We’ll see later that there are many other resource types, and we’ll explore
some of them in greater depth as we encounter them in our work, such as
TileMaps and GridMaps. Overall, this chapter is critically important to
anybody working in Godot for any purpose. Having now covered these
essentials, we can move on to code, functionality, and the general structure
of a Godot program.

OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER 4
GDScript Introduction
Programming Games
DOI: 10.1201/9781003484523-4

This chapter explores the fundamentals of game programming in Godot
using the GDScript language. Programming for games is essentially about
creating the DNA of a game world – the constituent ingredients that bring
otherwise lifeless assets, such as meshes and textures, to life. Code, or
programming, is what essentially makes ‘stuff’ happen inside a game. You
push a button on the gamepad, and the player character jumps in response;
you shoot an enemy, and they die in response; and you reach the end of a
level, and the game responds by progressing to the next one. These are
examples, perhaps crude examples, of code in action and they exemplify
why code is so critically important. This chapter assumes you have a basic
familiarity with programming in any standard language – such as C++ or
C# or Python or JavaScript – as well as the core concepts common to all
languages – such as variables, functions, loops, and conditionals. But I
assume you are new to GDScript and its application in Godot. As such, this
chapter is more of a quick-start guide for a literate programmer seeking an
accessible orientation point for coding in Godot in the fastest and most
effective way. We’ll consider how to get started at coding in Godot and how
to create basic functionality, and we’ll make some comparisons to other,
relevant engines – such as Unity – which will be especially helpful if you’re

approaching Godot from that engine. This chapter is not, however, intended
for readers who have never explored programming in any language. If that’s
your case, then you can still read through this chapter and learn a lot, but I
recommend complementing the materials here with a more comprehensive
and dedicated introduction to coding to help you consolidate all the
essential principles.

4.1 FIRST STEPS – WHICH
LANGUAGE?
Before coding in Godot, you’ll need to decide on which language to use,
and this is not an unimportant decision. Godot natively supports two
languages for gameplay scripting, namely C# and GDScript, and sound
arguments can certainly be made for choosing either language. For
example, C# offers industry-wide acceptance and plenty of tutorial
resources for learning the language, and it has applications outside of
Godot. GDScript, which is similar to Python, is a domain-specific language
(you’ll only encounter it inside Godot), but it’s arguably simpler to learn
and use, and it definitely gives you access to the greatest range of Godot
features across every supported platform, from desktop to mobile. So, this
book will focus on GDScript.
NOTE. Whichever language you choose, stick to that one for the
entirety of your project. I strongly discourage mixing languages. This
results in additional confusion and will be most unhelpful to your
projects.
NOTE. If you choose C# as a language, you’ll need to download a
special build of Godot. The .NET version. This is available from the

Godot homepage here: https://godotengine.org/download/.

4.2 MAKING A HELLO WORLD
PROGRAM WITH GDSCRIPT
The first program that any coder should learn to create is ‘Hello World’.
Indeed, this is a useful program to make, so that’s what we’ll do here. This
program essentially prints the message ‘Hello World’ to the debug panel
(Output) of Godot when the program first runs; that is, every time that Play
Mode is activated. This section assumes you already have a new and empty
Godot project created. So, to create a new hello world program from an
empty project, you should right-click the ‘Res://’ root inside the FileSystem
dock, and then from the context menu choose Create New > Script. This
will display the New Script dialog for creating a new Script file resource
(see Figure 4.1).

FIGURE 4.1 Create your first script file. ⏎
The Create a Script dialog allows you to create a new script file, which is
a plain text document containing coded instructions. From this dialog,
ensure the chosen language is GDScript (it may be your only option), and
set the Inherits field to Node. The value of this field should vary, depending
on your needs, as we’ll see throughout the book. Node is used for the
simplest of cases. Finally, name your file. I’ve set this to hello_world.gd
(see Figure 4.2). When you’re completed, click the Create button to
confirm and apply the settings.

FIGURE 4.2 Configuring the created script file. ⏎
Once created, the GDScript script file lives as a file resource with the
FileSystem Dock. For the program to run, the script must be instantiated by
being attached to a Node (or object) inside the scene. That is, a script
normally only runs when ‘living on’ a Node within the time and space of the
scene. To instantiate the script, let’s make a new 3D scene (although a 2D
scene can also work). The newly created scene will feature a Node3D or
Node2D object at the root. To attach the script, select the object from the
Scene Dock, and then in the Inspector, click the empty drop-down box from
the script field. Choose Quick Load and select the hello_world script (see
Figure 4.3).

FIGURE 4.3 Attaching a Script file to an object. ⏎
NOTE. It doesn’t matter whether you write your script first and then
attach it to an object, or vice versa. You can attach the same script to
multiple objects. A very important concept for efficient reuse of scripts.
This causes the script to run separately for each object.
Now let’s write the script itself. For GDScript, Godot has a built-in Code
Editor directly as part of the Editor interface. You can access it either by
double-clicking the script file from the FileSystem Dock or by clicking the
Script button from the top of the Editor. Then choose the Script file to view
from the filter (see Figure 4.4).

FIGURE 4.4 Accessing the Godot Code Editor. ⏎
The script file will already be populated with some Code, which can
remain as is. See Code Sample 4.1. This code simply defines the type of
object whose behavior we will be customizing; in this case, a Node.

CODE SAMPLE 4.1
extends Node

⏎

Let’s create a Hello World program. The full code is given below in Code
Sample 4.2. You can simply copy and paste this code into the script editor
and Save it. An explanation for the code is given below too.

CODE SAMPLE 4.2
extends Node
func _ready():
print("hello world")

⏎

The code above consists only of three lines. The keyword func is similar to
the Python def. It marks the start of a function definition. That is, it’s a
function (hence the word func). A function names a block of code, which is
clearly indented on the lines beneath, that can be referred to in shorthand
form by the function name, and it can run as many times as needed simply
by use of the name. The name of the function here is _ready. Function
names are normally user-defined (by you) and can be whatever you want
them to be, within naming rules. You should generally name functions that
are meaningful to the context (close for exiting a program, fire for shooting
a weapon, etc.). In Godot, however, there are some special names, which
are reserved. This is because, when a function by any of those reserved
names is included in a script, Godot will automatically run those functions
at specific times, as an event. This is an application-specific convention
rather than a language requirement. Godot uses the function name _ready as
an event, which is run (executed) only once when an object is added to the
scene for the first time during gameplay. ‘The object’ always refers to the
node to which our script (hello_world) is attached. This means that any
code inside the _ready function (code indented below its name) will be run
at the level start in sequential order, line by line from top to bottom. In our
case, we have only one line within the function, and so only one thing will
happen. This line calls the print function (another function!) and includes
the argument ‘hello world’. An argument is an input parameter. In this case,
it tells the print function which text should be output. An argument almost
always adds additional details, controlling how a function should behave. A
function can have multiple arguments.
So now let’s run our code and see what happens. To do that, run the
current scene by pressing F6 on the keyboard, or hit the Run Current Scene
button from the toolbar (see Figure 4.5). If F6 doesn’t work, or the button

appears disabled, then make sure you have a 2D or 3D scene open in the
viewport.

FIGURE 4.5 Running the active scene. ⏎
When you run your scene using the Play button, an empty window will
pop up. This is your game in action, running a separate process. But you
probably won’t see anything inside the window because a default scene is
created empty. It doesn’t include any cameras, and it doesn’t include any
objects to see. If you’ve added these things yourself, then your scene may
show some content. In any case, by attaching your Hello World script to a
node in the scene, it will have run already, if attached and written correctly.
If you close your game by closing the pop-up window, you can view the
Output panel to see the results of your script file (see Figure 4.6).

FIGURE 4.6 Viewing the Output panel. ⏎
The Output panel should display the message ‘Hello World’ because this
is where all statements end up when run through the print function. This
message is printed to the Output panel at the same moment the print
command is executed, and the message remains in the Output panel for you
to read later. If you don’t see the message in the Output window, then
ensure your script is attached to an object, and further that your call to print
is included within the _ready function of that script. Printing messages this
way is practically useful for debugging in game development because by
seeing your messages appear in the Output panel, you can confirm that a
specific line of code (the code featuring print) was reached and executed
successfully. If your script were attached to multiple objects, then you
would see the message printed once per object. Consider the revised code in
Code Sample 4.3.

CODE SAMPLE 4.3
extends Node
func _ready():
print(name)

⏎

This code replaces the literal message ‘Hello World’ with a variable name.
This variable (called name) is included on all objects and refers to the userdefined name of the object (to which the script is attached) as it appears in
the Scene tab. If you now add more nodes to the scene (such as empty
nodes or meshes), rename each one, and then finally attach the script to
each of those objects, you’ll see the different names printed in the Output
window when you hit Play again, as the script is run on each object (see
Figure 4.7).

FIGURE 4.7 Printing to the Output panel from multiple objects.
⏎

4.3 GAME CRITICAL EVENTS IN
GDSCRIPT
The previous section explored the reserved, and Godot-specific, _ready
function in the context of Hello World. The _ready function, as we saw, is a
special event. It is called automatically by Godot for an object on the first
occasion that it’s added to a Scene. If the object is in the Scene from its
beginning, then it will be called when the Scene begins too. But the
function could be called later if the object (to which it is attached) is added
to the scene later, such as when a bullet or ammo object is instantiated later
when the trigger is pulled on a gun. In this sense, _ready is analogous to the
Start function, featured in the Unity engine. The _ready event is critically
important to gameplay programmers because it’s often necessary to run
initialization and configuration code when an object is first created. The
_ready function is not the only important event that Godot offers us for
running code. There are many others. This section explores the most
common and widely used events in Godot.

4.3.1 The _process Event
Every object in the scene has its own heartbeat. This ‘heartbeat’ is referred
to as frames or processes, and these processes typically occur many times
per second. This ratio (processes per second) is literally the game’s frame
rate. Godot offers us the _process event to signify a single process (a single
frame or heartbeat), which is run automatically for any script on an object.
The _process event is therefore called many times per second – at least,
when your game is working normally! Obviously, if the _process event

were to happen less frequently than once per second (such as once for every
two seconds), then it means the frame rate for your game has dropped so
low that there is clearly a serious performance issue occurring. In fact, even
once or twice per second is a terribly low frame rate. You don’t want that. A
more sensible range would be 50 or 60 frames per second. The _process
event is the single most important opportunity to perform repeated or
prolonged behaviors for an object. This includes making an object move,
rotate, or change size; checking whether the object (if it’s an NPC) has
sustained damage; and checking whether the object (if it’s the player
character) should respond to input, such as a button press. Consider Code
Sample 4.4.

CODE SAMPLE 4.4 ROTATE.GD – MAKING
A 3D OBJECT SPIN AROUND ITS CENTRAL
AXIS
extends Node3D
func _process(delta: float) -> void:
var _rot_speed:float = 45
rotate(Vector3.UP, deg_to_rad(_rot_speed * delta))

⏎

NOTE. Go ahead and put this code (in Sample 4.4) onto a cube object
in a 3D scene and then try it. Use a MeshInstance3D node to create a
quick cube.
The above code, in Sample 4.4, should be attached to any 3D object, such
as a Cube mesh (see Chapter 2). When attached to a 3D object in a 3D
scene, combined with a camera and a light, the object will rotate
continuously around its center at a user-defined rotational speed. This code

uses the _process function to update an object’s rotation forever. There are
some important points to note about this code, as below.
1. This script file (rotate.gd) uses the extends command and extends from
a Node3D, as opposed to a Node. A Node extension will cause your
script to inherit all variables and functions that are essential to all
nodes. A Node3D includes everything in a Node, plus additional
functions and variables that are specific to 3D objects. This includes
the rotate function, which is used later in the _process event.
2. The _process function accepts an input argument of delta, which is a
floating-point value (a decimal number). This number is the amount of
time in seconds since the previous _process was called for this object.
A value of 1, for example, would mean that 1 second had elapsed since
the previous _process occurred. It would also mean that the frame rate
was 1 frame per second. A value of 0.5 seconds would mean 2 frames
per second and half a second since _process was previously called.
This value will therefore be of the form 1/frame_rate. As a result, it
will usually be a small, fractional value. The higher the frame rate, the
smaller this number will be. This value is incredibly useful for
ensuring that objects animate at predictable speeds over time, as we’ll
see.
3. This _process function uses a locally defined variable of _rot_speed
(which is defined as float) for specifying the rotational speed of an
object in degrees per second. The default value of 45 means the object
will turn a total of 45 degrees in one second. This line does not
actually rotate the object. Rather, it only defines the speed to rotate.
4. Next, the rotate function, which is inherited from Node3D, is used to
rotate the object on each frame. It rotates the object relatively, in
increments, turning the object by small fractions in each frame. The

rotate function accepts two arguments. The first is the axis around
which rotation should occur, and the second is the amount of rotation
to apply around that axis. The first argument is specified as a threecomponent number (a Vector). Specifically, the Up Vector is (0,1,0),
creating a straight vertical pole along the Y axis through the center of
the object, around which rotation will happen. The second argument
converts the _rot_speed (in degrees per second) to radians per second.
In Godot, angles are specified in the metric angular measure of
Radians, as opposed to the commonly used and intuitive degrees.
5. Notice that the _rot_speed is multiplied with the delta variable. This is
to keep the rotation speed constant over time since speed * delta will
scale to the frame rate measure. If _rot_speed were not so multiplied,
then the object would rotate at different rates on each frame, as the
frame rate fluctuates.
NOTE. Find out more about Node3D from the Godot online
documentation here:
https://docs.godotengine.org/en/stable/classes/class_node3d.html.

4.3.2 The _physics_process Event
The _process event has an important counterpart event, called
_physics_process. It can be confusing to newcomers as to which one to use
for prolonged multi-frame behaviors. _process is called once per frame and
therefore reflects the game’s true frame rate. The frame rate can vary,
depending on what a computer is doing. Resource-intensive processes, for
example, can cause frame rate drops. So, you can never be sure exactly how
often _process will be called in any second. This isn’t necessarily a problem
because you can use variables, like delta, as a multiplier to speeds to ensure
consistent behavior that is fixed to time. Nonetheless, Godot also features a

dedicated physics system for handling object interactions (such as gravity
and collision detection). This system typically updates at a lesser frequency
than the frame rate. By default, the frequency of the physics system is 60
ticks per second. For this reason, if you’re working with the physics system
(such as checking for collisions), then you should use _physics_process to
contain your code rather than _process when performing repeated and
prolonged behaviors. For a broad discussion on _process vs.
_physics_process, please see the online documentation here:
https://docs.godotengine.org/en/stable/tutorials/scripting/idle_and_physics_
processing.html.
To change the physics frequency, you can use the Project Settings. Select
Project > Project Settings from the application menu, and then choose
Physics > Common Category. From here, you can specify the Ticks per
second to control the frequency of the _physics_process function. You
should try to keep this value as low as possible while still achieving the
physical accuracy you need. I recommend leaving this setting at the default
of 60 unless you have a compelling reason to change it (see Figure 4.8).

FIGURE 4.8 Controlling a project’s ticks per second. ⏎

4.3.3 The _unhandled_input Event
If you need relatively low-level and direct access to input devices, such as
the keyboard and mouse, then the _unhandled_input event is very useful.
This event is run automatically by Godot whenever it detects that the mouse
cursor moved, a mouse button was clicked, or a keyboard key was pressed
or released, among other events. Using this function, in combination with
checks and conditional statements, you can effectively determine what input
the player most recently provided. For example, the following code in
Sample 4.5 determines whether the space bar was pressed on the keyboard
and then prints a confirmation message to the Output panel in response.

CODE SAMPLE 4.5 CHECKING FOR SPACE
BAR INPUT
func _unhandled_input(event):
if event is InputEventKey:
if event.pressed and event.keycode == KEY_SPACE:
print("space bar pressed")

⏎

The main problem with this event, when used to read input data, is that it
provides raw input data, unabstracted and totally dependent on the input
device. For example, if the player changes from a keyboard to a gamepad,
or the player changes keyboard mapping, or the player inverts the mouse
controls, then your code remains fixed and inflexible to such player-defined
customizations. This event may be useful at the prototyping or debugging
stages of development, but you would not normally read player input this
way in the final code. In this next section, we’ll see a better approach to
reading player input.

4.4 READING PLAYER INPUT
Input refers collectively to all the instructions that players provide a gameto-action command during gameplay: run, shoot, jump, turn, collect, stop,
and others are examples of the commands. The list of commands in a game
depends on the genre, style, gameplay, and design of the game. These
instructions, nonetheless, are provided to a game through Input Devices,
also known as Input Peripherals. This includes keyboards, mice, gamepads,
joysticks, steering wheels, touch screens, hand controllers, and many more.
The list of device types is almost endless. Ideally, we’d like to support all
device types in all configurations to make our games as accessible as
possible. That would be great, but this isn’t normally practicable or

economically possible for a developer, given the sheer variety and
specificity of devices. So, the next best thing is to support the most common
device types and their most common configurations. The way to approach
this in a game engine, like Godot, is through abstraction; that is, by creating
an Input Map. This map is a higher-order many-to-one database that sits
above the physical hardware and connects our physical input devices, on
the one hand, to in-game commands on the other. For example, it may
connect both a space-bar press and a left-mouse-click to the in-game
command Jump. Likewise, we may connect a keyboard-left-arrow-press
and a gamepad-left-arrow-press to the in-game command Turn Left. The
Input Map makes it possible to seamlessly reconnect the input hardware
differently to the in-game commands, without the coder needing to rewrite
any code. This allows the player easy customization of controls because our
code won’t directly read input from the devices. We won’t assume that the
controls themselves are predefined. Rather, our code will instead consult the
intermediary Input Map to understand player input. Let’s now see how this
Input system is handled in Godot. To start, select Project > Project Settings
from the application menu (see Figure 4.9).

FIGURE 4.9 Accessing project settings from the application
menu. ⏎

4.4.1 Configuring an Input Map for Buttons
From the Project Settings menu, choose the Input Map tab. This displays an
Input Map Editor. This is a complete database of Inputs connected to
Actions. By default, the map is empty, and so it contains no entries (see
Figure 4.10).

FIGURE 4.10 Getting started with Input Maps. ⏎
Let’s configure an example fire or shoot button to get started using the
Input Map. Crucially, this type of input (a button press) is a single one-shot
button press that initiates an immediate in-game action when pressed, like
shooting, jumping, or interacting. It doesn’t have an analog component of
input, such as a joystick, which can be partially left or fully left. A button
press is either on or off. To start, type in a new name of the Input Map
connection to build. Typically, you’ll name this connection after the ingame action the input will trigger. I will name this connection Fire. Once
named, click Add to add a new entry to the Input Map (see Figure 4.11).

FIGURE 4.11 Creating a Fire Entry in the Input Map. ⏎
Next, let’s connect physical inputs to this Action. Fire will be triggered
by a Ctrl button press on the keyboard and by a left-mouse-click. To start,
click the + icon in the new Fire entry (see Figure 4.12).

FIGURE 4.12 Building a physical button connection. ⏎
From the popup Event Configuration dialog, choose Mouse Buttons, then
select Left Mouse Button, and finally click the OK button to confirm the
change (see Figure 4.13).

FIGURE 4.13 Confirming the Left Button Click. ⏎
Now let’s add the keyboard button press. To do this, click the + icon
again. From here, you could scan the entire list for the Ctrl button, but there
are many keys to search through! Instead, click the Listen button, and then
press Ctrl on the keyboard (see Figure 4.14).

FIGURE 4.14 Listening for keyboard input. ⏎
You’ve now created two physical input connections to the Fire action in
the Input Map. Check over your settings to ensure they’re correct (see
Figure 4.15).

FIGURE 4.15 Reviewing the Fire button settings. ⏎

4.4.2 Reading Button Presses
Finally, let’s see some code to read the Input Map and determine if Fire is
being activated. To do this, consider the following Code Sample 4.6.

CODE SAMPLE 4.6 READ_INPUT.GD FOR
READING USER INPUT
extends Node
func _process(delta: float) -> void:
if Input.is_action_pressed("Fire"):
print('Fire is being pressed now')

⏎

Here, in Code Sample 4.6 as above, the function Input.is_action_pressed is
being used to determine if any input combination for Fire is currently being
activated. This function will return true if either the left mouse button is

being pressed or the Ctrl key is being pressed. It will repeatedly return true
if these buttons are held down, and it will return true for as long as they are
held down. Once released, or if never pressed at all, this function will return
false. So, this method of reading the button press is perhaps not useful for a
single-Fire mechanic (such as a shot from a gun) in which only the first
instance of a press is usually needed to simulate the trigger press. Instead,
consider Code Sample 4.7.

CODE SAMPLE 4.7 READING INPUT FOR A
ONE-SHOT MECHANIC
extends Node
func _process(delta: float) -> void:
if Input.is_action_just_pressed("Fire"):
print('Fire was pressed')

⏎

Code Sample 4.7 will return true on the first occasion that Fire is pressed,
and then false thereafter. It will return true again only if Fire is pressed
again. This function has a companion function of
Input.is_action_just_released. This alternative returns true for releases
rather than presses.

4.4.3 Creating Axis Controls with an Input Map
Determining whether a button is pressed or released, up or down, is
ultimately a question about Booleans. The binary states of true and false are
together sufficient for representing this kind of data meaningfully. But what
about analog joystick motion for left and right or up and down? In this case,
the joystick could be fully held left, partially held left, fully held right,
partially held right, or not held at all. In essence, we have a number of lines
of inputs. This has 0 at the center for ‘not held’, -1 for fully held left, and 1

for fully held right. Fractional values are also possible in the -1 to 1 range,
such as 0.5 and -0.3, to express degrees of being held in either the left or
right direction. The same applies up and down too. Let’s configure the
horizontal and vertical input axes for keyboard input using the Godot Input
Map. To do this, open the Input Map window and create a new Action
called Left (see Figure 4.16).

FIGURE 4.16 Creating a Left Axis. ⏎
Next, click the + icon to add a new mapping, choose Joypad Axis Left,
and assign the keyboard left arrow and the keyboard A key (for WASD
controls) (see Figure 4.17).

FIGURE 4.17 Completing the Left Axis. ⏎
Now let’s do the same for the right axis and also for up and down,
assigning the relevant keys and joystick states (see Figure 4.18).

FIGURE 4.18 Completing all Input Axes. ⏎

4.4.4 Creating Axis Controls with an Input Map
In this section, we’ll read input data from the directional axes, which
include left and right and up and down. To do this, we’ll add code to the
_process event. See Code Sample 4.8.

CODE SAMPLE 4.8 READING
DIRECTIONAL INPUT
func _process(delta: float) -> void:
var _left:float = Input.
get_action_strength("Left")
var _right:float = Input.
get_action_strength("Right")
var _up:float = Input.
get_action_strength("Up")
var _down:float = Input.
get_action_strength("Down")
print("Left: " + var_to_str(_left))
print("Right: " + var_to_str(_right))
print("Up: " + var_to_str(_up))
print("Down: " + var_to_str(_down))

⏎

Each variable reads between 0 and 1, indicating whether the input is pressed
and to what extent. Only the value of 0 signals that nothing is being
pressed. We can go further with this idea and Vectorize the directional input
for ease of reading and processing. Consider the following code in Sample
4.9.

CODE SAMPLE 4.9 VECTORIZING INPUT
func _process(delta: float) -> void:
var _direction_input:Vector2 = Vector2.ZERO
_direction_input.x = -Input.
get_action_strength("Left") + Input.
get_action_strength("Right")
_direction_input.y = -Input.get_action_strength("Down") +
Input.get_action_strength("Up")
print(var_to_str(_direction_input))

⏎

The above code in Sample 4.9 converts the input data into Vector form such
that left is (-1, 0), right is (1, 0), up is (0, 1), and down is (0, - 1).
Combinations are possible too, such as (1,1) for up-and-right and (-1, 1) for

down-and-left. If the player presses left and right simultaneously, or up and
down, then –1 + 1 = 0.

4.5 EXPORTING VARIABLES
If a vehicle in a video game travels along a road, we need to specify how
fast. If an NPC punches as a form of attack, we need to define how hard. If
the player character jumps as a mechanic, then we need to express how
high. In all these cases, and in many more, we use variables to define this
kind of data. By default, variables are created and set in code, and they are
hidden from the Inspector interface to avoid the Inspector becoming littered
with unnecessary information. However, there are times – perhaps many
times – when it is convenient and important to expose a variable to the
Inspector interface, allowing its values to be read and set visually, saving us
from editing the code directly. Godot supports this behavior using a special
keyboard at the variable declaration. Consider Code Sample 4.10.

CODE SAMPLE 4.10 EXPORTING
VARIABLES
extends Node3D
@export var __rot_speed:float = 180
func _process(delta: float) -> void:
rotate(Vector3.UP, deg_to_rad(__rot_speed * delta))

⏎

Code Sample 4.10, which rotates a mesh object, demonstrates the @export
keyword. This keyword exposes a variable to the Inspector. This allows the
variable to be read and set directly via a type-in field in the Inspector, and
the Inspector takes precedence. That is, if __rot_speed is initialized to 180

in code but this differs in the Inspector, where it is set to 90, then the
Inspector value is used (see Figure 4.19).

FIGURE 4.19 Exporting a variable. ⏎
NOTE. There’s a lot more to learn about Exported Properties in Godot.
See the online documentation here:
https://docs.godotengine.org/en/stable/tutorials/scripting/gdscript/gdscr
ipt_exports.html.

4.6 SIGNALS AND THE OBSERVER
PATTERN
Video games commonly feature many types of events that happen during
gameplay; for example, the player jumps, an enemy shoots, the level
begins, health is restored, a timer expires, a cutscene begins, an NPC starts
patrolling, another NPC starts patrolling again, and the list goes on. The

range of possible events, and their actual frequency in-game, is entirely
determined by the game design. Each event itself can be the beginning of a
knotty chain reaction of other events that flow as a consequence across the
entire scene. For example, as the player collides with a dangerous enemy
bullet, their health reduces in response, and if it reduces to below zero, the
player then dies, and on their death, the level must reset, and so on. Now,
this event complexity would get messy in code, especially for large games
if the events are left unmanaged and unsystematized. We could end up with
a nightmarish spaghetti code of ad hoc conditionals and fragile events that
are wholly contingent and difficult to follow. Especially so for an outsider
reading our code for the first time, and eventually for ourselves too after a
short time has passed and the code is no longer fresh in our own minds. So,
Godot offers a robust solution for working with events, specifically for
connecting events to each other in predictable and clear ways. It’s therefore
important to know about this system before coding your first large game in
Godot. This system is called Signals, and it implements the famous
Observer Design Pattern, as we’ll see. To start, we’ll use the Signals
system in code that is ready-made, and then we’ll make our own Signals for
our own objects.

4.6.1 Creating a Game Timer
Let’s begin with a brand new and empty Godot project as a starting point
for this section. From here, we’ll build an empty 3D scene, featuring a timer
set to a specific period (measured in seconds), which counts down as soon
as the level starts, until eventually it expires. On expiry, the game responds
by printing the words ‘Game Over’ to the debug console. That is, we’ll
create some code in a script file that runs automatically when an event in
another object (the timer) happens, namely, the timer expiry. Now, printing

to the console is not an especially exciting response, but that’s not important
here. This section demonstrates the power of signals generally, allowing
you to connect any number of events to a single in-game event. The key
takeaway here is in understanding practically how any event can be wired
to any number of responses purely by way of the signal system. To start,
let’s add a Timer object to a 3D scene. To do this, add a timer. Choose
Create Node and then search for a Timer object. Click Create (see Figure
4.20).

FIGURE 4.20 Creating a Timer node. ⏎
Select the Timer object in the scene and use the Wait Time field to specify
how long the timer should wait before ‘expiring’. That is, how long (in
seconds) before sending a signal that other objects in the scene can listen
for. In this case, let’s choose a Wait Time of 3 seconds (see Figure 4.21).

FIGURE 4.21 Setting the Wait Time for a Timer. ⏎
Now we’ll create a new, empty object that will exist in the scene only to
host a script file, which we will create shortly to respond to the timer
expiry. Create a new Marker3D node (see Figure 4.22).

FIGURE 4.22 Create a Marker3D node for holding a Script File.
⏎

Next, let’s create a new script named TimedOut.gd. This should be
attached to the recently created Marker3D node and inherited from
Marker3D (since it will be attached to a Marker3D node). See Figure 4.23,
and then see Code Sample 4.11.

FIGURE 4.23 Creating a new script derived from the Marker3D
class. ⏎

CODE SAMPLE 4.11 CREATING CODE TO
RUN ON A TIMER EXPIRY
extends Node3D
extends Marker3D
func on_timer_expiry():
print("Timer has expired!")

⏎

The above code in Sample 4.11 contains only one function to print a
message. As it stands, when this code is attached to a Marker3D node and
when the scene is run, the code inside the function will not automatically
execute because it is not yet attached to the Timer through Signals. To do
this, select the Timer object, and from the Inspector, change to the Node tab.
Within the Node tab, ensure the Signals tab is active to view all available
Signals for the selected object (see Figure 4.24).

FIGURE 4.24 Finding relevant Signals for an Object. ⏎
The timeout signal is invoked (executed) when the timer expires. That
means any and all connected code to that signal will run on that event. You
can connect multiple functions to a single Signal. It supports a one-to-many
relationship. To connect code to this Signal, double-click the Arrow icon
next to the timeout name, and this will display the Signal Connection
Window (see Figure 4.25).

FIGURE 4.25 Opening the Signal Connection Window. ⏎
The Signal Connection Window lets you select objects and code to
attach. In this case, we attached the timeout script (with a function inside) to
a separate Marker3D object. From the Nodes list, select the Marker3D
object. Then select the Pick button for the Receiver field (see Figure 4.26).

FIGURE 4.26 Find and select a Connecting Object. ⏎
The Pick Dialog will show a list of all functions inside the script, which
is attached to the object, that are compatible destinations for the Signal.
That is all functions whose argument list matches the Signal expectations. If
the Signal invokes functions with only three arguments, for example, then it
will not show functions with fewer or more arguments. The timeout event
for the Timer expects functions with no arguments, so all empty-argument
functions will be shown for selection, including the one we created in Code
Sample 4.11. Select our function on_timer_expiry, and then choose OK.
Then choose Connect from the Signal Connection Window (see Figure
4.27).

FIGURE 4.27 Connecting the signal to a named Function. ⏎
You can confirm that a successful connection has been made, as a green
entry now appears in the Signal list for the timer when viewed in the
Inspector (see Figure 4.28).

FIGURE 4.28 Confirming the Signal Connection. ⏎
Finally, return to the timer by selecting it and enabling the Autostart
property from the Inspector. This ensures the timer starts as the scene
begins (see Figure 4.29).

FIGURE 4.29 Enabling AutoStart ⏎

Now run the scene, and the timer expiry will cause our scripted function
to run automatically every three seconds.
NOTE. To disconnect a Signal after it has been connected, right-click
on the connection from the Signals tab in the Inspector, and then
choose Disconnect from the context menu (see Figure 4.30).

FIGURE 4.30 Disconnecting a Signal. ⏎

4.6.2 Connecting a Signal in Code
The previous section demonstrated how to connect a signal from a timer to
a function in a Script, manually and through the Godot UI via the Inspector.
This is a convenient mouse-driven method for connecting one signal to one
function with objects that already exist in the scene at design time, such as
the Marker3D object and the Timer Object. But how would we connect a
dynamically created object using Signals? That is, an object spawned at
runtime. Or how would we connect thousands of objects via Signals and
objects such as power-ups, collectibles, and NPCs? In these cases, it’s much

more convenient to connect them via code and automate the process, rather
than connecting them one by one through the UI as we have done. So, let’s
disconnect the Signal from the Timer, which we configured previously, and
see how to create the same connection through code rather than via the
Inspector. To start, let’s think more carefully about the relationship of our
two objects. The Marker3D object, which contains our code for running,
depends upon the Timer object. So, let’s drag and drop the Timer object as a
child of the Marker3D, using the Scene Hierarchy view. The Timer
becomes indented (see Figure 4.31). This step is important later when
writing the code, as we’ll see.

FIGURE 4.31 Moving the Timer to be a Child Object of the
Marker3D. ⏎
Now let’s redefine the code we created earlier in Code Sample 4.11.
There, we defined only one function, which runs when invoked by a signal.

Now, we’ll write the code to include the same function as before but also
include additional code to establish the signal connection beforehand. See
Code Sample 4.12.

CODE SAMPLE 4.12 CREATING CODE TO
CREATE A SIGNAL CONNECTION
extends Marker3D
@onready var __Timer:Timer = $Timer
func _ready() -> void:
__Timer.connect("timeout", on_timer_expiry)
func on_timer_expiry():
print("Timer has expired!")

⏎

In Code Sample 4.12, there are two notable lines. First, the @onready
command is used to auto-assign the variable __Timer a valid reference to
the Timer object in the scene. This ensures that the __Timer object will be
valid by the time the _ready event occurs, pointing to the timer object
through which a Signal connection can be made. The constant $Timer value
is a shorthand way to identify named objects in the scene if they are
children of the current object (the object to which the script is attached).
Thus, the Timer object is named Timer in the scene, and it is a child of the
Marker3D. For this reason, $Timer refers to the Timer child. If the value
were instead $Node3D/Timer then it would refer to a Timer object that was
a grandchild of the current object.
The second line of interest uses the __Timer.connect function to build the
connection. This function accepts two arguments at a minimum, namely the
signal name (timeout) and the function to call when the signal occurs
(on_timer_expiry). Now, when you run this code, it’ll connect the signal

from the timer, and our on_time_expiry function will run automatically for
every timeout signal.
NOTE. If this is the first time that you’ve seen the Observer Pattern, a
common question is, why are we connecting two functions together
(timeout and on_timer_expiry) in a complicated and indirect way
through Signals, making our work harder? For our example, why don’t
we just amend the original Timer code internally to directly call
on_timer_expiry when needed, without going through a Signals system
at all? Surely, a direct function call between two objects is simpler than
rerouting our entire function traffic through a separate events system?
The reason is that the Observer Pattern tries to build Object
Decoupling. Every direct function call between any two objects, X and
Y creates a coupling, which is easy to break through code changes and
needs continued maintenance to ensure the application runs smoothly.
This is troublesome in the long term. We cannot be sure, for example,
that in the future, new objects won’t need to respond to our earlier
events in new and different ways. So, by using a Signals system, we
can easily connect multiple objects together in a managed way without
having to revisit and recode any objects.

4.6.3 Creating Custom Signals
We saw previously that the Timer node supports a dedicated timeout signal,
which runs any code attached to it whenever the timer expires. The Timer
node is not alone in supporting Signals, however. The
VisibleOnScreenNotifier3D node, for example, supports a signal that tells us
when a specified 3D object becomes seen by a camera. Likewise, all Nodes
support a tree_entered signal, which is invoked when the object enters the
hierarchy of a scene, such as at the scene start or when an object is spawned

dynamically into the scene. Almost every node type supports a range of
public-facing signals like these, which we can connect code to as and when
needed for our games. We also can define our own signals for our own
scripts, making it easier to connect our code to other scripts and making it
easier for third parties (including other team members and freelancers) to
work with our code and connect it to their own. In this section, we’ll create
our own custom Timer object, which prints ‘Hello World’ at specified
intervals and invokes a custom signal for each print. This allows other code
to intercept those moments and add new behavior. Consider the following
Code Sample 4.14, which is a new script with signal functionality.

CODE SAMPLE 4.14 CODE FOR
REPEATING A HELLO WORLD MESSAGE,
WITH SIGNALS
extends Node
signal on_print_message(message_printed)
var __time_elapsed:float = 0
@export var __time_interval:float = 1
func _process(delta: float) -> void:
__time_elapsed += delta
if __time_elapsed >= __time_interval:
__time_elapsed = 0
var _message_to_print:String = "hello world"
print (_message_to_print)
on_print_message.emit(_message_to_print)

⏎

When this code (in Sample 4.14) is attached to a node in the scene, you will
see that the newly defined signal on_print_message is added to the Signals
tab of the inspector. The emit function, which allows you to pass
arguments, will call any functionality attached to the signal (see Figure
4.32).

FIGURE 4.32 Adding custom signals to Objects. ⏎

4.7 NODES AND GROUPS
A Scene is a hierarchy of Nodes, and normally each node will be a derived
class of the ancestor class Node, which contains all properties and behaviors
common to all nodes. You can find more detailed information about this
ancestor at the Godot online documentation here:
https://docs.godotengine.org/en/stable/classes/class_node.html. An
important skill in coding in GDScript is being able to reach outside of
oneself and grab other surrounding nodes to interact with them. For
example, NPC characters may need to connect with the Player object,
wherever it is, to read the player’s location in the scene. Likewise, if the
player character is holding a weapon object in their hand, the player code
will need to ‘reach out’ to the weapon code to check how much ammo is
left. These examples, alongside many others, demonstrate that scripts and

objects don’t live in a vacuum but must reach out and connect with other
scripts to fulfill their purpose effectively. This section explores some
common ways to reference objects in the scene. Later chapters explore
scenes in more depth.

4.7.1 Get Node
One of the most common ways to find a named object in the scene is to use
the get_node function. This function accepts a string argument, which can
be a relative path to the node you need. For example, get_node(‘gun’)
would search all direct children for a node of that name, and the function
returns an error if the named node is not found. You can also specify paths
to child nodes, for example, get_node(hip/leg_01/foot), to access a foot
object for a character that is nested further in the hierarchy. The following
code accesses a child object and prints its name to the Output Window. See
Code Sample 4.15.

CODE SAMPLE 4.15 PRINT CHILD NAME
OBJECTS
print(get_node("child_gun").name)

⏎

4.7.2 Grouping Nodes
Godot scenes support Groups. A Group is a user-defined collection of
related nodes, such as the NPCs or Collectibles in a scene. Any single node
can be a member of more than one group, such as both the Collectibles and
the NPCs groups. Groups have no limit to the number of nodes they can
contain at any one time, and they are very useful for organizing objects in
your scene. When managing large scenes, you’ll make frequent use of

Groups. They are also useful for searching a scene in code for multiple
nodes of a common type. Let’s explore Groups further. We’ll start by
assigning some objects to a group. Consider the following example scene in
Figure 4.33, which features a collection of mesh objects that could represent
Collectible coins in a side-scrolling platform game.

FIGURE 4.33 A collection of objects in a scene. ⏎
It’s convenient to group together all similar objects into a single Group,
or collection, to make it easier to refer to them in the scene and to process
them in code if necessary. Let’s add all these Collectibles together into a
single group, called Collectibles. First, let’s make a Global Group. That is a
Group that has relevance and applicability throughout the project, as
opposed to a single scene. To do that, select Project > Project Settings from
the application menu, and then Globals and Groups (see Figure 4.34).

FIGURE 4.34 Accessing Global Groups. ⏎
From the Group Creation Dialog, assign the Group a name (Collectibles)
and then choose the Add button. This adds the new Group to the Groups list
(Figure 4.35).

FIGURE 4.35 Creating a Global Group. ⏎
Close the Group Creation dialog, and then select each object in the scene.
From the Inspector, switch to the Nodes > Groups tab, and enable the
Collectibles check box. This ensures the selected node is assigned to the
Group. Unfortunately, as of Godot 4.3, there is no way to assign multiple
objects to the same group in a single operation using the Editor. You’d need
to select each object separately and then assign it to the group (see Figure
4.36).

FIGURE 4.36 Assigning a Node to a Group using the Godot
Editor. ⏎
You can also assign objects to groups using code too. See Code Sample
4.16 for an example script that could be attached to Collectibles.

CODE SAMPLE 4.16 AUTO ADD NODES TO
GROUP
extends Node
func _ready() -> void:
add_to_group("Collectibles")

⏎

4.7.3 Searching Groups
After you’ve assigned one or more nodes to a named Group, you can easily
search a group in code for all members. This is useful if you need to know
how many NPCs or Collectibles remain in the scene, or if you need to
process all those objects (such as scaling or hiding them). Consider Code
Sample 4.17, which iterates through all nodes in a Group.

CODE SAMPLE 4.17 ITERATE THROUGH
GROUP MEMBERS
extends Node
func _ready() -> void:
var _nodes = get_tree().get_nodes_in_group("Collectibles")
for n in _nodes:
print(n.name)

⏎

4.8 CONCLUSION
This chapter explored the foundations of coding inside GDScript for Godot.
It explored everything a Godot developer should know to get started with
gameplay scripting. This includes printing output to the debug console,
understanding key events like _ready and _process, reading Input from
different devices, and learning to use Signals to support communication
between different nodes in a scene. The next chapters explore worldbuilding in both 2D and 3D scenes.
OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER 5
Building 2D Worlds
Sprites, Cameras, and Physics
DOI: 10.1201/9781003484523-5

Godot features three main scene types, namely UI, 2D, and 3D. This
technical and nominal distinction, made by the Editor UI, may initially
make it seem that each scene type is mutually incompatible, as though
every scene type is separate and cannot work together with any other type.
But this really isn’t true. As we’ll see, scenes can be mixed in different and
important ways, if needed. 2D scenes can be ‘put into’ 3D scenes, for
example, and vice versa. This chapter explores the fundamentals of 2D
scenes: worlds that exist within the flat Cartesian plane of X and Y. In this
world, most objects are flat and camera-facing, and the camera can slide left
and right and up and down, but it cannot rotate around its own axes to view
other dimensions. Godot offers an incredibly powerful feature set for
building 2D games, and the comprehensive editor tools make 2D
development an enjoyable experience for developers. This chapter explores
2D scenes and many of their related subjects in a specific order from the
perspective of a developer creating a movable player character in a scrolling
2D environment. We’ll begin with sprites and Animated Sprites, and then
continue with cameras, collisions, and more general world building. So,
let’s get started.

5.1 SPRITES AND ANIMATED SPRITES
Chapter 3 explored how to import many common asset types into Godot,
including textures, which are flat 2D images – such as TGAs and PNGs.
Consider the cartoon axolotl image (Lottie the Lotl by Evy Benita) in Figure
5.1. This image, alongside others, is included in the book companion files,
which allows you to follow along with the project work in this chapter. You
can also use your own images or textures from Asset Libraries.

FIGURE 5.1 Cartoon Axolotl Texture image, imported into
Godot. ⏎
Textures are imported easily into Godot by dragging and dropping the
texture files from the Operating System into the FileSystem Dock of the

Godot Editor. You then add the imported textures to the 2D Scene as a
Sprite, simply by dragging and dropping from the FileSystem Dock into a
2D scene. Try it now for yourself with the included image in Figure 5.1.
Godot automatically instantiates images into a 2D scene as a Sprite Node. A
Sprite is the spatial instantiation of a texture into the 2D space of a scene.
Unlike a texture, a Sprite has an additional position, rotation, and scale,
among other properties (see Figure 5.2).

FIGURE 5.2 Adding a Sprite to a 2D scene. ⏎
Every Sprite has an Offset field, which is important. The Offset is
ultimately a 2D Vector quantity of (X, Y), which defines the pixel position
within the Sprite that represents its center of gravity – its pivot point. The
location of a Sprite in the scene is measured from its Offset. By default, the
offset is measured from the sprite center (width/2, height/2), but this can be
disabled to change the offset to anywhere in the image. This is important
because, typically, you’ll want the offset to represent the center of motion
for a movable character. For a humanoid player character, for example, the
offset will usually be at the feet, where the feet contact the ground plane.
For the character in Figure 5.1, the offset might be placed at the tip of the
nose, where the sprite first contacts a surrounding surface. To change the

offset, disable the Centered Boolean field in the Inspector, and then enter
pixel values for the X and Y Offsets (see Figure 5.3).

FIGURE 5.3 Setting the Sprite Offset. ⏎
NOTE. Offsets are measured absolutely in pixels and not in any
normalized form (such as a fractional value between 0 and 1). This
means that if the texture for a sprite is changed to a texture of different
dimensions, then any extant offset may be invalidated from the change.

5.1.1 Making Sprites Move
Typically, a 2D scene features many moving sprites, from scrolling
backgrounds to walking characters. There are different ways to move a
sprite, each method with unique advantages and disadvantages. Let’s first
consider the simplest method of motion, using a Sprite2D Node Script that
adjusts the X and Y values of a position property over time. Consider the
Code Sample 5.1 below, which can be attached to any Sprite2D node.

CODE SAMPLE 5.1 MAKING A SPRITE
MOVE
extends Sprite2D
@export var __speed:float = 100
@export var __direction:Vector2 = Vector2.RIGHT
func _process(delta: float) -> void:
position += __direction * delta * __speed
if __direction.x != 0:
scale.x = clampf(__direction.x, -1, 1)

⏎

The above Code Sample 5.1 moves a Sprite at a speed of __speed in the
direction of __direction. __speed is expressed in pixels per second, and
__direction is a 2D Vector expressing direction, where (1,0) is rightward
and (-1,0) is leftward. (0,1) is up and (0, -1) is down. Combinations move in
both directions simultaneously. This code also sets the X scale of the Sprite
to conform to the direction of travel, making the characters look in the
direction they are moving (see Figure 5.4).

FIGURE 5.4 Moving a Sprite using Node2D. ⏎

NOTE. The Position, Rotation, and Scale properties are part of
Node2D and are inherited by Sprite2D. More information on Node2D
can be found at the Godot online documentation here:
https://docs.godotengine.org/en/stable/classes/class_node2d.html.

5.1.2 Sprites and Pixel Art
Many 2D games made in Godot are rendered in the beautiful and classic
pixel art style. This is a retro, old-style art form that is immensely popular
and forms the basis for many excellent aesthetics. The examples in this
book do not use the pixel art style, but if you’re making a pixel art game,
then you’ll want to adjust some texture settings for your Sprites. If you’re
using pixel art for all textures, or most textures, then access your project
settings by choosing Project > Project Settings from the application menu,
and then choose Rendering > Textures Group, as shown in Figure 5.5.

FIGURE 5.5 Setting Texture Filters for pixel art. ⏎

You should choose Nearest for Pixel Art games and leave it as Linear for
most other cases. This affects how pixels are rendered on screen. You
should also select each Sprite and check its Texture Filtering mode. By
default, it will use the default settings specified in the Project Settings, as
we did above. Select the Sprite, and from the Inspector, expand the Texture
rollout. The Filter field should be Inherit to match the Project Settings. But
you can click the drop-down to override this setting for a specific Sprite if
you need its filtering method to be different from the default (see Figure
5.6).

FIGURE 5.6 Setting Texture Filters for a Sprite. ⏎

5.1.3 Making the Camera Follow a Sprite
2D Scenes are created without camera nodes. However, they do contain a
static ‘pseudo-camera’ by default, making Sprites visible during gameplay
even when no camera is technically in the scene. However, if any moving
Sprites leave the default camera view by moving off the edge of the screen,
the camera will not follow the sprite automatically. To follow the motion of
an object, a Camera2D node needs to be added to the scene. Camera2Ds
are essential whenever a 2D level is larger than the screen and you need to
move the view. So, let’s add a Camera2D node to the scene (see Figure
5.7).

FIGURE 5.7 Adding a Camera2D Node to a 2D scene. ⏎

To make a Camera2D follow an object in the scene, such as the player
character, you’ll need to attach a Script to the camera. Consider Code
Sample 5.2.

CODE SAMPLE 5.2 CAMERA SCRIPT TO
FOLLOW A 2D OBJECT
extends Camera2D
@export var __target:Node2D = null
func _process(delta: float) -> void:
global_position = __target.global_position

⏎

Once attached to a Camera 2D, you can then tweak the camera properties to
create smoother motion, as it follows an object when it moves (see Figure
5.8).

FIGURE 5.8 Smooth camera motion following an Object. ⏎

5.1.4 Animated Sprites
The Animated Sprite is a specialization of the standard Sprite node. It offers
additional features for ‘flip book animation’; that is, animated frames, and
this behavior is now quite comprehensive in the latest Godot. In this
section, we’ll explore how to configure two sets of animations for a single,
for example, Animated Sprite (Idle and Yawn), which could be used for a
player character in a 2D side-scroller game. The Idle plays by default, and
the Yawn plays on demand, such as by a button press. An Animated Sprite
can support many different animations (walk, run, jump, etc.), which can be
dynamically switched during gameplay using code. Let’s start by creating
the AnimatedSprite node (see Figure 5.9).

FIGURE 5.9 Creating an AnimatedSprite object. ⏎
The Animated Sprite node begins empty. It exists in the scene as a true
object but has no renderability by default. To create the frames of
animation, select the AnimatedSprite object, and then from the Inspector
expand the animation rollout. For the SpriteFrames field, choose New
SpriteFrames from the dropdown context menu. This option creates a new
Resource. However, the resource is local to the scene by default and so does
not appear in the FileSystem dock alongside project-wide resources, like
meshes and textures. This isn’t a problem but is worth noting (see Figure
5.10).

FIGURE 5.10 Creating an AnimatedSprite object. ⏎
Next, after clicking the newly generated SpriteFrames menu entry from
the Inspector, you’ll be presented with the AnimationFrames Editor
window, which is docked unmovably at the bottom of the editor interface,
aligned horizontally. This window allows you to define all possible
animations for the sprite, including the default animation, which plays
automatically when the scene begins. See Figure 5.11 for the default, empty
FramesEditor.

FIGURE 5.11 Preparing to use the FramesEditor. ⏎
Let’s create our first animation for the sprite, the Idle animation. Idle
animations for both player and NPC sprites are typically the default ones,
and they play whenever no other activity is happening, such as shooting,
running, or jumping. To create this animation, select all the Idle frames
from the FileSystem Dock, and then drop them into the Frames Editor. For
example, in Figure 5.12, there are only two frames, but Idle animations can
contain many more. There is no official limit on the total number of frames
in any animation besides what the computer can sustain.

FIGURE 5.12 Adding our frames of animation. ⏎
Most Idle animations are intended to play on a loop and should play
automatically when the level begins. To ensure this happens, enable the
Loop and AutoPlay Commands from the FrameEditor Toolbar. Then
additionally, double-click the default animation name, and rename it to Idle.
Finally, hit the Play button from the FrameEditor window to preview the
animation in the viewport. If the speed seems incorrect to the eye, you can
adjust the frames per second (FPS) to control how many frames cycle in a
single second. But a total of 5 frames works well for my example (see
Figure 5.13).

FIGURE 5.13 Completing a default, looping animation for Idle.
⏎
Let’s make a second animation for our ‘Yawn’ state. Unlike the previous,
default animation, this animation doesn’t play automatically. It would
typically be played during gameplay when an event happens. Thus, the
animation is triggered by code. To build this animation, press the New
Button from the Frames Editor, and then simply repeat the process above to
name the animation and define the frames. Once created, make sure the Idle
animation is set as the default for the AnimatedSprite by checking the
Animation field from the Inspector (see Figure 5.14). If you now press Play
on the Scene toolbar, the Sprite will animate as expected.

FIGURE 5.14 Completing a default, looping animation for Idle.
⏎
We can also control our Animated Sprite from code, which is critically
important for creating believable 2D worlds. Consider Code Sample 5.3,
which can be attached to any Sprite object that has an animation called
‘Idle’ and ‘Yawn’, as our sprite does.

CODE SAMPLE 5.3 CONTROLLING
SPRITE ANIMATION.
extends AnimatedSprite2D
func _ready() -> void:
#connect animation signals to sprite
connect("animation_looped", _on_animation_completed)
connect("animation_finished", _on_animation_completed)
#if a non-idle animation loops or ends, then return to idle
func _on_animation_completed():
if animation != "Idle":
play("Idle")
#check input, and should we play a different animation?
func _process(delta: float) -> void:
if(!Input.is_action_pressed("Shoot")):
return
#Play yawn animation if Shoot is pressed
play("Yawn")

⏎

NOTE. More information on coding with AnimatedSprites can be
found online at the official Godot reference documentation here:
https://docs.godotengine.org/en/stable/classes/class_animatedsprite2d.
html.

5.2 PHYSICS AND COLLISIONS IN 2D
Previously, we saw how the Sprite2D and AnimatedSprite2D nodes are
specialist node types, ultimately derived from Node2D. A Node2D is the
main parent of all nodes existing inside a 2D scene. The Node2D object
features a range of important properties, such as Position, for controlling
the location and movement of objects within a unified Cartesian space. The
problem with this setup for a developer seeking to create believable levels
is that these positional properties of a Node2D are not fully validated at the
time of being set. For example, Godot will happily allow you to set the
position of a Node2D object to any specified (X, Y) location in the scene,

regardless of whether another solid object, such as a wall, occupies that
same location. As a result, you can easily make two or more objects overlap
and intersect when they clearly shouldn’t, assuming you want believable
collisions and physics. This section explores how we can solve this problem
by creating a moveable player character that won’t pass through other
solids. Godot makes it simple, but we need to configure our objects
appropriately. Let’s start doing that from an empty 2D scene.

5.2.1 Configuring a Movable Character with
Physics
In this section, we’ll build a movable player character. Now, we already did
this already in Section 5.1.1. But in that case, we used a Sprite object, and
our movement was neither constrained nor validated. Our movable Sprite
could literally pass through solids. Here, however, we’ll use a different
object type that will respect other physical objects. To start, let’s add a
CharacterBody2D node to the scene. This node is used for any controlled
object under the remit of physics. So, it should be used for player-controlled
characters and NPCs. It should not be used for immovable physical objects,
such as walls, trees, and buildings. And it should not be used for lifeless
physical objects which can move, like falling branches, bales of hay, and
marbles in a maze. A CharacterBody2D is an agent, and it acts upon things,
as opposed to falling branches, which are acted upon by others (see Figure
5.15).

FIGURE 5.15 Creating a CharacterBody2D. ⏎
The CharacterBody2D is added to the scene, and a suspicious-looking
exclamation triangle appears beside it in the Scene Dock of the Editor. That
means the CharacterBody2D node cannot operate properly until further
steps are taken by us. In this case, the CharacterBody2D requires a Collider
as a child node; that is, a special kind of node that defines the surface area
and shape of the character. This data is separate from any pixels or from the
sprites which define the character. This allows us to dress our characters in
complex-looking sprites while maintaining a simpler underlying shape for
faster collision calculations. So, let’s add two child objects to the
CharacterBody2D. First, an AnimatedSprite Object was created as above.
And second, a CollisionShape2D node (see Figure 5.16).

FIGURE 5.16 Creating a Sprite and CollisionShape Child Node.
⏎
As with CharacterBody2D objects, CollisionShape2D objects are created
with a suspicious-looking exclamation next to them (see Figure 5.16). For
the Collision Shape, we need to create the shape itself, as the object is
created empty. To do this, click the Shape drop-down field in the Inspector,
and select the most appropriate shape for your character. This choice can be
more complex than it first appears. It’s tempting to conclude that you
should create a rectangle enclosing the entire sprite. And while this safely
ensures that all sprite collisions are detected, it doesn’t necessarily lead to
the most believable or compelling gameplay. This is because technically
correct collisions can include ones that don’t look or feel right. For the
character shown in Figure 5.16, I’ll choose a Circle. Once selected, you can
click and drag the red handle to scale the circle and enclose the character,
and you can also click and drag from the circle center to reposition it to
match the Sprite (see Figure 5.17).

FIGURE 5.17 Create a Circle Shape around the Sprite. ⏎
NOTE. There are some really interesting additional properties for
Collision Shapes. One is Disabled, which can be toggled on to
deactivate the shape from the physics system (allowing objects to pass
through). The other is One Way Collision. This is useful for platform
games, where characters that are standing on the ground can literally
‘jump up’ and through the bottom of the platform and then finally fall
and land on the same platform as a solid object.
Finally, as our player character is a floating, or swimming, entity, we’ll
change the Motion Mode of CharacterBody2D from Grounded to Floating
(see Figure 5.18).

FIGURE 5.18 Configuring the CharacterBody2D. ⏎

5.2.2 Coding a Movable Character with Physics
We’ve now fully configured three related nodes that will work together as a
single-player character, namely the CharacterBody2D node and its two
children, AnimatedSprite2D and CollisionShape2D. At this stage, we can
now attach a script to the CharacterBody2D and create a physics-compliant
player-controlled character in GDScript. First, create a new script. As
shown in Figure 5.19, called player_controller.gd.

FIGURE 5.19 Creating a new Script. ⏎
Great. Now consider the following script in Code Sample 5.4. This code
assumes Input Axes have been configured for up, down, left, and right on
the keyboard or gamepad. Chapter 4 explores how to configure this in more
detail.

CODE SAMPLE 5.4 CONTROLLING A
CHARACTER WITH PHYSICS
extends CharacterBody2D
var __input_direction:Vector2 = Vector2.ZERO
@export var __speed:float = 200
func _process(_delta: float) -> void:
__input_direction.x = -Input.get_action_strength("Left") +
Input.get_action_strength("Right")
__input_direction.y = Input.get_action_strength("Down") Input.get_action_strength("Up")
func _physics_process(_delta: float) -> void:
velocity = __input_direction * __speed
move_and_slide()

⏎

Code Sample 5.4 features some key statements that make physics possible.
First, the __input_direction variable vectorizes our input from the
horizontal and vertical axes, as we saw previously in Chapter 4. This is later
used in the _physics_process function, which is called once per physics
step. That is, once per internal cycle of the physics system. This is likely to
be multiple times per second, but less than the frame rate. The built-in
variable velocity is a 2D Vector whose X and Y components describe the
object’s movement speed in pixels per second. The move_and_slide
function is called to apply the velocity, and it will update the physics system
with the object’s motion. If you run this code now, along with a Camera2D
in the scene, you’ll be able to control the player character.

5.2.3 Creating a Static Obstacle
In this section, we’ll create a static obstacle for the player to bump into.
This object will prevent the player from passing through it. To build this,
we don’t even need any extra code. Let’s get started. First, create a new
StaticBody2D node. This should be a child of the root node and not a child
of the player character (see Figure 5.20).

FIGURE 5.20 Creating a new StaticBody2D. ⏎

As with the CharacterBody2D node, the StaticBody2D node expects two
children. A Sprite2D defines how the object looks, and a ColllisionShape2D
defines how the object behaves physically. For the Sprite, I’ll use a cute
Frog Character (included in the book companion files), and for the
collision, I’ll use a Circle (see Figure 5.21).

FIGURE 5.21 Configuring a Static Obstacle. ⏎
And that’s it! The player can now move around the level and will bump
into static frogs! The physics system ensures that all collisions are
respected.

5.2.4 Querying Collisions with GDScript
Our physics configuration so far has explored how to create a playercontrolled character that can bump into static, solid objects elsewhere in the
scene. Static obstacles could be used for walls, trees, streetlamps, statues,
and more. The collisions and responses themselves are both detected and
handled automatically by Godot through the move_and_slide function of
CharacterBody2D. However, there will be occasions when you’ll want to

dig deeper into what is happening beneath the surface. Specifically, when a
collision happens during gameplay, you may need to determine which
objects collide. In the case of our player character, you may need to know
which other object it contacted. This is important to know because not all
objects are created equal. Bumping into a friendly cat is different from
bumping into a wall of spinning saws. In the latter case, the player’s health
is likely to reduce from the collision. Consider Code Sample 5.5 for
collision querying.

CODE SAMPLE 5.5 QUERYING
COLLISIONS
func _physics_process(_delta: float) -> void:
velocity = __input_direction * __speed
if move_and_slide():
var _col_data:KinematicCollision2D = get_last_slide_collision()
var _col:Node2D = _col_data.get_collider() as Node2D
print(_col.name)

⏎

Code Sample 5.5 uses the get_last_slide_collision function to return
information about the most recent single collision for the current
CharacterBody2D. The get_collider function, cast as a Node2D, returns a
reference to the colliding object during that collision.
NOTE. It’s possible for a CharacterBody2D to collide with multiple
objects in a single frame, such as hitting multiple enemies at once. In
this case, you may need to query for all collisions, as opposed to the
last collision. For this, you’d need the get_slide_collision function.
More information can be found at the Godot online documentation
here:

https://docs.godotengine.org/en/stable/classes/class_characterbody2d.h
tml.

5.3 REPEATING BACKGROUNDS
WITH SPRITES
One important, creative decision when creating powerful 2D worlds is to
choose a suitable background. Often, backgrounds are layered with multiple
elements, one atop the other. One of the first decisions is to decide on a
background color to fill the background as the furthest background layer,
and then usually different elements will be layered on top, such as
embellishments and details. To start, click on Project > Project Settings,
and then choose Rendering > Environment. From there, select a background
color that is consistent with your art style using the color picker dialog.
Interestingly, this choice is project-wide, for every scene, as opposed to the
active scene only (see Figure 5.22).

FIGURE 5.22 Choosing a Background Color. ⏎
NOTE. To set a different background color for each scene, you should
use a ColorRect node, which is considered later with UIs.
Next, we’ll create a repeating background using a Sprite2D node. To make
this work for a left-to-right aligned world, you’ll need a texture that repeats
horizontally. I have included an example world background in the book
companion files (BG_05.png), and I’ll use that texture in this chapter, but
you can use any repeating texture. Import the texture into the project and
then drag and drop it into the scene as a standard Sprite2D (see Figure
5.23).

FIGURE 5.23 Using a Sprite for the background. ⏎
Next, select the background Sprite, expand the Texture rollout from the
Inspector, and for the Repeat field, choose Enabled from the drop-down list
(see Figure 5.24).

FIGURE 5.24 Enabling the Repeat Property for the Background
Sprite. ⏎
Now move to the Region rollout and choose Enabled. Region allows you
to specify a smaller rectangle within the texture space to use for the Sprite.
However, it also allows you to choose a larger Region into which the
texture will be repeated when the Repeat field is enabled. As you enable the
Region field, the Sprite vanishes. But it’ll return when you enter the image
dimensions into the Rect field. The default dimensions for my texture are
1920 x 1080 (HD resolution). If you’re using a different texture, then be
sure to check out its pixel dimensions (see Figure 5.25).

FIGURE 5.25 Setting the dimensions for a region-restricted
Sprite. ⏎
Finally, type the final pixel width of the level into the W field (Width).
When you do this, the Sprite expands to meet that width, and the texture is
repeated continually (rather than stretched) to fill that space (see Figure
5.26).

FIGURE 5.26 Repeating a Sprite to fill the width of a level. ⏎
When you’re happy with the scene width and appearance, click the
padlock icon to lock the Sprite in place and prevent it from being selected
accidentally. Given its size and location, a background sprite can easily be
selected, so using the padlock is useful (see Figure 5.27).

FIGURE 5.27 Securing the background in place. ⏎

5.4 TILEMAPS AND WORLD DESIGN
Large, expansive 2D worlds are frequently formed from TileMaps. Sidescrolling platformers, top-down RPGs and shooters, and even quirky little
puzzle games feature worlds made from smaller, tileable images that are
tightly packed together, like building blocks, into a large and meaningful
grid. The grid forms the basis of all levels and scenes. Consider Figure 5.28
for a tileset, featuring tiles that can be rearranged to compose an underwater
maze environment. Each tile in the map represents a unique building block,
such as a straight section or a corner piece, which works in different
orientations to build a larger world. In this section, we’ll build an example
level from a tileset (see Figure 5.28).

FIGURE 5.28 Exploring a Tileset. ⏎

5.4.1 Creating a Texture Atlas for a TileMap
TileMaps typically begin from one of two places: either each and every tile
is saved into a separate image file, one tile per file, or every tile is included

together in a larger image, called an Atlas, where every tile is packed in grid
formation. Godot expects the latter (one image), but it can work with the
former case too. The former (individual tiles) require some additional steps
in Godot, so we’ll consider that case here to cover both scenarios. This
book features a collection of tiles in separate images, which can be
imported into Godot, but you can use any similar tileset to follow along (see
Figure 5.29).

FIGURE 5.29 Importing multiple tiles. ⏎

After having imported tileset images, let’s create a new TileMap Layer
object, adding it to the scene. Be careful in choosing here; Godot 4.3 offers
both a TileMap node and a TileMap Layer node. The TileMap node is a
deprecated, legacy feature, which has now been replaced by TileMapLayer
(see Figure 5.30).

FIGURE 5.30 Creating a TileMapLayer Node. ⏎
From the newly created TileMapLayer, you can configure an entire
TileMap. To start, select the TileMapLayer object, and from the Inspector
set the TileMap field to a new TileSet. This creates a new TileMapLayer
resource. Again, as with AnimatedSprites, the created resource is not added
to the FileSystem Dock by default. Rather, it is stored locally in the scene
(see Figure 5.31).

FIGURE 5.31 Creating a new TileSet Resource. ⏎
NOTE. You can save the TileSet Resource as a global, project-wide
resource by choosing Save As from the Resource Menu in the
Inspector. This is useful if you need to reuse the same tileset across
multiple scenes (see Figure 5.32).

FIGURE 5.32 Saving a resource to the FileSystem Dock. ⏎
Next, click on the TileSet resource from the TileSet Inspector field, and set
the TileSet size in pixels. This defines the pixel width and height of each tile
in the set, assuming all tiles are of equal size. Often, tiles will be square too,
but Godot does not require this. For my example images, the dimensions
are 64x64 pixels (see Figure 5.33).

FIGURE 5.33 Setting the Tile dimensions. ⏎
After setting the tile unit size, jump over to the TileSet editor, which is
docked at the bottom center of the Godot interface. Select all of the newly
imported tiles and drop them into the Tiles list. This causes all imported
tiles to be listed in a stack (see Figure 5.34). An obscure, and initially

unhelpful, prompt may ask if you want to ‘create all tiles in the atlas’ and
suggest the ‘atlas has been modified’. You can answer ‘No’ to that question.

FIGURE 5.34 Adding tiles to the list. ⏎
Godot lets you generate a single, unified texture atlas from multiple
textures. That is, a single texture that features all smaller tiles arranged in
rows and columns. You’ll need to generate this before creating a TileSet. To
start, click the … icon and then choose Open Atlas Merging Tool from the
context menu (see Figure 5.35).

FIGURE 5.35 Generating an Atlas with the Atlas Merging Tool.
⏎
Select all textures in the list to include them in the Atlas and then choose
the Merge button. From here, choose a Save Destination for the generated
image file. This can be anywhere on the local file system. The file will be
created as a single, collated PNG file. Once created, you can import the file
back into Godot as a texture (see Figure 5.36).

FIGURE 5.36 Creating an Atlas Texture. ⏎
The newly imported file is a texture atlas, and this can now be added to
the Tileset list. This time, when the dialog prompts you to ‘create tiles’,
choose Yes. In choosing this, all tiles in the atlas will be added from the
TileSet, which is an image containing tiles, to the TileMap, which is a
resource where all selected and extracted tiles appear in a palette, ready to
use (see Figure 5.37).

FIGURE 5.37 Creating a TileMap from a TileSet. ⏎

5.4.2 Building Tile Collisions
Previously, we imported and configured a complete tileset for a 2D world
from an atlas texture. At this point, we could use the TileMapLayer node in
the scene to paint tiles and build an expansive world that characters can
explore. However, beforehand, we should apply further configuration to our
tiles, ensuring they behave as expected. Specifically, many tiles in the set
may represent solid objects, such as rocks, corals, walls, doors, and other
types of solids that should not allow physical objects, like the player and
NPCs, to pass through. In these cases, we should attach collision data to our
tiles. In this section, we’ll create that. To start, enable Physics for the
TileMapLayer node. Select the node in the scene, and from the inspector
expand Physics Layers, and then click the Add Element button (see Figure
5.38).

FIGURE 5.38 Add a physics layer to a Tileset. ⏎
Now that Physics is enabled, a new Physics Option will be made
available in the TileSet Editor. Switch to the TileSet Editor, activate the
Select tool, and pick a tile in the set. When you do this, expand the Physics
Layer to see collision options (see Figure 5.39).

FIGURE 5.39 Accessing the physics for a Tile. ⏎
Next, let’s create physics data for our selected tiles, one by one. Choose a
tile from the set, and from the Physics Editor, you can activate the Add
Polygon Tool to click and plot points to build a polygon. By clicking, point
by point, you define new vertices for a polygon. If you click back on the
first point, you’ll create an enclosed space, and Godot will shade the shape.
This means the polygon is completed and the collision data is now defined
(see Figure 5.40).

FIGURE 5.40 Building a collision polygon for a tile. ⏎
Now complete defining collisions for all remaining tiles by repeating the
process. You only need to do this once for each TileSet you create (see
Figure 5.41).

FIGURE 5.41 Completing the collisions for a tileset. ⏎

5.4.3 Painting TileSet Worlds
Now it’s time for the fun of world-building using the TileMap painter. The
TileMapLayer node allows you to paint selected tiles directly into the Scene
viewport, building a world tile by tile according to your brush settings. To
get started, activate Paint Mode from the TileMap tab. You can confirm that
the Paint tool is active because a ghosted version of the selected tile will
appear on your mouse cursor (see Figure 5.42).

FIGURE 5.42 Painting tiles into the viewport ⏎
You can now click and hold down the button to continually paint the
selected tile into the viewport grid. You can then select a different tile from
the palette and proceed to paint. Using this technique, you can build an
expansive level (see Figure 5.43).

FIGURE 5.43 Painting a world from a TileMap. ⏎
You can rotate and reflect tiles. To rotate a tile 90 degrees
counterclockwise, press Z. To rotate 90 degrees clockwise, press X. To flip
the tile horizontally, press C, and vertically press V. You can also use the
tile toolbar from the TileMap Window (see Figure 5.44).

FIGURE 5.44 Transforming tiles. ⏎
Finally, you can now move your player character around the level using
the controller created earlier, and collisions will apply with the tiles.

5.5 2D PATHS AND PATH FOLLOWING
Many 2D space shooters and platformers feature NPCs and other objects
that travel along predetermined and curved paths, such as flight paths.
These kinds of paths can be hard coded and defined, but for long and
complex paths, things can get complicated. So, Godot offers a handy tool
for building and following paths. This section explores how to create and
follow a predefined path. To start, add a new Path2D to an empty scene (see
Figure 5.45).

FIGURE 5.45 Transforming tiles. ⏎
Every newly created path is generated empty in the scene, and you need
to add points manually to build a path. This is easy to do. First, select the
Path2D in the scene and then click the Add Points button from the toolbar.
By selecting this, you can click inside the viewport to add points. By
default, the newly added points are connected by a straight edge (see Figure
5.46).

FIGURE 5.46 Creating a new Path by adding points. ⏎
By default, the path is created by straight edges between points. You can
add curvature to the path, however, which changes how the curve is
generated between the same points. To do this, switch to the Select Control
Points option by clicking its icon from the toolbar. When you click this, you
can click on each control point and adjust its ‘handle’. This is a straight,
tangential reference line that extends on either side of the control points,
and it can be clicked and dragged to adjust the curve of the path (see Figure
5.47).

FIGURE 5.47 Adjusting point handles. ⏎
You can add as many points as needed to the curve. When you’re happy
with its structure, you can add a new PathFollow2D object to the scene.
This should be added as a child of the Path2D that it should follow. Follow,
in this case, doesn’t mean that the object will move and rotate with the path,
as its parent, as all children do. It means that the follower can procedurally
travel along the curve, from start to end (see Figure 5.48).

FIGURE 5.48 A follower should be the child of a curve. ⏎
The PathFollow2D node features two separate properties in the Inspector
for measuring how the curve is navigated or followed. These are Progress
and Progress Ratio. Progress controls the distance travelled along the curve
in pixels, which can vary depending on the length of the curve. Progress
Ratio normalizes the length of the curve, regardless of its actual length. The
number 0 always means the start of the curve, and 1 always means the end.
Fractional values between, such as 0.5, represent degrees between these two
endpoints (see Figure 5.49).

FIGURE 5.49 Two properties for controlling Curve Progress. ⏎
As you traverse those numbers in the Inspector, scrolling the progress bar
– either Progress or Progress Ratio – you’ll notice that a red point scrolls
along the curve, indicating the location of the follower object. The follower
is not a visible object like a Sprite. Its purpose is to act as a parent and
controller for one or more children who should follow the curve. So, as an
example, let’s attach a Sprite object as a child of the PathFollow2D (see
Figure 5.50).

FIGURE 5.50 Attaching a Sprite as a child of PathFollow2D. ⏎
With the Sprite attached as a child of the PathFollow2D, you can scroll
through the Progress Ratio and move the Sprite along the path. The rotate
property of PathFollow2D ensures the object rotates to conform to the curve
(see Figure 5.51).

FIGURE 5.51 A Sprite Travels along a curve. ⏎

5.6 2D MODULATION
Let’s now consider two useful features of renderable 2D objects generally
in Godot, such as the Sprite2D and the AnimatedSprite2D. First are the
Modulate and Self-Modulate fields, which are defined from the Inspector
using Color Picker fields. Each defines a solid color that can be multiplied
by the Sprite to ‘tint’ it a specific color. This is useful for flashing a sprite
red whenever it takes damage or for turning the sprite blue when it gets
frozen. Consider Figure 5.52.

FIGURE 5.52 A Sprite’s color controlled by modulation. ⏎
The main difference between Modulate and Self-Modulate is how the
color affects child objects. If Modulate is set, the color will affect both the
selected object and all the renderable children, making this a great choice
for tinting multi-part objects, such as complex player characters holding

weapons. By contrast, the Self-Modulate does not cascade down to child
objects (see Figure 5.53).

FIGURE 5.53 Modulate cascades down to child objects. ⏎

5.7 CLIPPING
A truly excellent and convenient feature of 2D objects in Godot is the
ability to use them as a clipping mask. That is, to use one object as a
container for a child, preventing the child from being drawn outside the
boundaries of its parent. In this case, each and every non-transparent pixel
of the parent will reveal any overlapping child object and will otherwise
hide it. Let’s see how to configure that behavior. To start, add two Sprite
objects to the scene, and make one the parent of the other. The parent acts
as a mask, and the child will be hidden or revealed (see Figure 5.54).

FIGURE 5.54 Parents can act as masks for children. ⏎
Next, expand the Visibility section of the selected parent Sprite2D, and
for the Clip Children field, choose Clip Only. When you do this, both the
parent and child will seem to vanish, even though they are clearly present in
the scene, via the Scene Dock (see Figure 5.55).

FIGURE 5.55 Choosing Clip Only for Clip Children will hide
both parent and child… ⏎
Finally, if you move the child object to any location that intersects the
parent, you’ll see the child to that extent and no further (see Figure 5.56).

FIGURE 5.56 Parent objects can be used as a clipping mask for
children. ⏎
This is a really powerful and easy-to-use feature that can create all kinds
of interesting and fun transition effects between levels and scenes.

5.8 CONCLUSION
This chapter considered the most critical Godot features in 2D for building
2D games and 2D worlds. Of these, the Sprite and its associated objects are
at the forefront. The Sprite, and the related AnimatedSprite, are the raw
materials for building 2D elements that move and are dynamic, such as the
player character and NPCs. For static elements, however, such as
environments and architecture, 2D TileMaps are usually the tool of choice.
These objects are configured to draw lots of pixels to the screen in one
operation. Together, Sprites and TileMaps are crucial. But these must
usually be completed by physical objects, such as CharacterBody2D and

StaticBody2D, as well as collision data embedded into tiles. In the next
chapter, we’ll move from the world of 2D into the world of 3D, which has
very similar parallel concerns, as we’ll see.
OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER 6
3D Worlds
Meshes, Lights, and Cameras
DOI: 10.1201/9781003484523-6

This chapter explores the exciting world of three dimensions in Godot. 3D
opens a new world of possibilities and creativity for game developers. In
some ways, 3D scenes and worlds are simpler for newcomers to learn and
build than 2D, because far more asset packs, tutorials, and examples are
available for 3D than for 2D. For example, you can easily find 3D tutorials
for most subjects in game development, from first-person shooters to thirdperson platformers. And yet, creating 3D worlds and making them truly
believable poses a significant challenge both creatively and technically.
Although there is so much about 3D that this chapter must necessarily leave
unsaid due to space constraints, we’ll nonetheless cover the foundations of
working with 3D in Godot. This includes everything needed to start making
3D scenes and learn with confidence independently. This chapter assumes
you’ve read the previous one on 2D scenes. You should complete that
chapter before reading this one.

6.1 PROTOTYPING 3D SCENES WITH
CSG
Nearly every 3D world in a production-ready game, from stylized dungeons
to hyper-realistic towns, is formed from many custom-made 3D meshes
arranged in a map, lovingly created over long periods of time by
experienced artists and third parties. These meshes will normally be made
in content creation software, such as Blender, and then finally imported into
Godot for use inside scenes. Chapter 3 of this book explored common
resource types, including meshes, and their usual import process from thirdparty applications into Godot. In Chapter 3, we saw an especially excellent
workflow between Blender and Godot, allowing you to edit and change
meshes directly inside Blender with a live and updated connection in
Godot. This intuitive pipeline creates an almost seamless bridge between
the two applications. However, before such content is even made inside
Blender, many game developers will initially be creating prototypes inengine. Prototypes are early, experimental iterations of a game used to test
ideas, try out experiments, see what works, and pre-visualize how a level
looks and feels and works ahead of final assembly. Prototypes are a game
developer’s equivalent to an artist’s sketch or to an architect’s blueprints in
progress. Almost everything about a prototype is subject to change, perhaps
even massive change, and indeed, changes at the prototyping stage are
considerably cheaper than those further along the line after much time and
effort has been invested by the team. So, many 3D scenes begin not as part
of a final project that must get everything right, but as part of a prototype
where a developer is iteratively finalizing an idea before greenlighting the
creation of final assets.

6.1.1 Creating a Room with a CSG Box
Godot features an excellent collection of prototyping tools to quickly build
3D levels from geometry directly inside the editor. These nodes are
collectively referred to as Constructive Solid Geometry (CSG). They are not
intended for use in final versions of a game but are great for ‘blocking out’
worlds to ‘stand in’ for elements that will, eventually, be replaced by final
custom-made geometry. From the Add New Dialog of a 3D scene, you can
view all related CSG nodes by typing CSG in the Search field (see Figure
6.1).

FIGURE 6.1 Searching for CSG nodes. ⏎
Now let’s try working with some CSG to create a basic third-person 3D
level. Let’s start by making a room with a floor and four walls. To start, let’s
create a CSGBox3D node. As the name suggests, this action creates a cube

mesh. However, unlike regular meshes, which are normally non-editable in
the viewport, CSG can be changed, as we shall see (see Figure 6.2).

FIGURE 6.2 Creating a CSG box to build a room. ⏎
The newly generated room looks good initially: it’s a box, and
immediately, we have four walls, a floor, and a ceiling. But the box is
facing outward and is always one-sided. If you move the viewport camera
inside the box, its faces will turn transparent. This is due to a famous and
pervasive technique known as Backface Culling. That is, the ‘other side’ of
a polygon is never rendered by the engine. By default, all polygons are onesided. This is a render optimization to prevent the computer from having to
calculate surfaces that probably won’t or can’t be seen by the player. So,
what choices do we have here? One is to turn the cube ‘inside out’. That is,
to Flip all the faces so they face inside rather than outside. You can achieve
this by enabling the option Flip Faces from the Inspector (see Figure 6.3).

FIGURE 6.3 Flipping Faces to turn a Primitive inside out. ⏎
Flipping Faces can be a good option for first-person games where all
walls and surfaces are normally seen from ground level and through the
eyes of the player character, who can never see the other side of any wall.
However, for other camera view types, such as aerial, it can be problematic
because it means your walls are paper-thin (without any thickness at all)
and cannot be seen from the reverse side. So, for now, we’ll disable Flip
Faces in this case, and we’ll build an actual room with thicker walls that are
seen on both sides. After disabling Flip Faces, select the CSGBox3D in the
Godot viewport and duplicate it (Ctrl+D or Cmd+D). You’ll end up with
two boxes overlapping each other exactly. Next, select the newly duplicated
box, raise it from the ground slightly, and scale it smaller so that it’s
contained by the original on all walls and it peeks out above the top of the
original box (see Figure 6.4).

FIGURE 6.4 Positioning and scaling a second CSGBox, inside the
original. ⏎
Next, let’s add a new CSGCombiner node. This node will soon control
how other CSG meshes should interact and relate. Once created, make both
of our CSG boxes a child of this node (see Figure 6.5). The order of nodes
as children matters here, so be careful. The original CSG box should be the
first (topmost) child, followed by the smaller box beneath (see Figure 6.5).

FIGURE 6.5 Creating a CSGCombiner node, and adding children
to it. ⏎
Now select the smaller box in the scene and choose Subtraction for the
Operation field, using the Object Inspector. When you do this, the smaller
box gets ‘subtracted’ from the bigger, overlapping box. Indeed, whenever
two or more CSG objects are children of the CSGCombiner node, then they
will each get combined with every overlapping mesh as defined by the
Operation fields. The Combiner is therefore a form of Boolean modeling. It
allows you to combine two or more meshes based on an Operation. The
great feature of this technique is that you can still move the meshes around
separately, and the Operations will still apply, allowing you to quickly make
changes to any meshes. In reaching this far, then, we have now created our
first room, with floors and walls (see Figure 6.6).

FIGURE 6.6 Combining meshes using a CSGCombiner node to
create a room. ⏎

6.1.2 Creating a Connecting Hallway and Room
The previous section created a room with solid walls and floors using the
CSGCombiner node. Here, we’ll continue that work by expanding our
environment further with CSG to include a hallway connecting to another
room. If you were making this type of environment in Blender, Maya, or
3DS Max, you’d probably use extrusion and poly-modeling tools. But with
CSG, you need to think in terms of addition and subtraction between
multiple objects. To start, let’s drag and drop the smaller room as a child of
the larger to treat them as one unit hierarchically. Select the larger room (as
a parent) and duplicate it (along with the child) to make a second room
further away (see Figure 6.7).

FIGURE 6.7 Creating a second room through duplication. ⏎
Next, let’s make the hallway piece by duplicating one of the cube
meshes, used for the rooms and deleting any interior space. And then use
the scale tool, or the control handles, to resize the hallway as a connecting
region. Ensure the two hallway ends pierce through each of the cube walls
on either side. It’s important for the hallway section to be a child of the
same CSGCombiner node as the two rooms (see Figure 6.8).

FIGURE 6.8 Creating the Hallway Outer Shell. ⏎
Now duplicate the hallway section, and shrink the duplicate to create the
interior space, but do not make it a child of the hallway because it must also
affect the rooms as well as the hallway. Make sure the Operation is set to
Subtraction (see Figure 6.9).

FIGURE 6.9 Creating a complete hallway section. ⏎
The final step in working with CSG is to make the meshes solid objects.
By default, the CSG meshes are created without any collision data, which
means any solid objects will pass through the CSG meshes as though they
were substance-less apparitions. To enable collisions, you’ll need to select
the CSGCombiner node and then enable Use Collision from the Object
Inspector (see Figure 6.10).

FIGURE 6.10 Adding Collision Data to CSG. ⏎
NOTE. More information on CSG can be found here:
https://docs.godotengine.org/en/stable/tutorials/3d/csg_tools.html.

6.2 LIGHTING
The previous section explored how prototypical, and potentially complex,
worlds may be constructed quickly from CSG. In this section, we’ll move
on to lighting in 3D, which is a huge subject that could occupy a book on its
own. Here, we’ll explore the basics. To start, let’s create an empty 3D scene
with a sphere and a plane. Chapters 2 and 3 explored how to create this kind
of setup using MeshInstance3D nodes, along with materials (see Figure
6.11).

FIGURE 6.11 Creating a Scene with a Plane and Sphere. ⏎
Now let’s add a Camera3D to the scene, which will allow us to see the
scene at runtime from a specified perspective. To do this, add a new
Camera3D node, and then align the camera to the viewport by choosing
Align Transform with View from the Perspective viewport menu. This
action moves and rotates the selected object to match the viewport location
and orientation. Note that it doesn’t adjust the camera field of view or lens
properties, so the camera view may still differ slightly from the viewport
(see Figure 6.12).

FIGURE 6.12 Aligning the camera to the viewport. ⏎
If you now run the scene by pressing the Play button from the toolbar,
you’ll notice a striking difference between the scene view and the game
view, even though both views present the scene from the same camera. The
difference is in the lighting. This is because, by default, a different kind of
lighting is applied to the scene in the editor to make editing and building
easier. However, it doesn’t represent how the player will see the lighting
(Figure 6.13).

FIGURE 6.13 Comparing the game view with the scene view. ⏎
To make the editor viewport reflect the final lighting, be sure to disable
the scene background and enable lighting using the Scene Toolbar (see
Figure 6.14).

FIGURE 6.14 Creating parity between the scene and game views.
⏎

6.2.1 Ambient Lighting
To start lighting a scene, you’ll first need to consider whether any extant
lighting exists in the scene. After all, a world without any light sources
should appear completely dark, and yet our scene is not as black as one
might expect. Everything seems illuminated by a dull and pervasive light,
casting illumination in all directions with an equal intensity for an infinite
distance (see Figure 6.14). Indeed, this is known as the Ambient Light, or
the Default Clear. It is, essentially, an artificial boost of illumination to
render the contents of the scene visible. Although artificial, that doesn’t
mean it shouldn’t be used and isn’t useful. Indeed, the Ambient Light can
help us in many ways. But it can prove a source of confusion if you’re
trying to create lighting from scratch and are wondering why your almost
empty scene, without any lights, isn’t rendering as black. The simplest way
to control the ambient light is by using the Project Settings. From the
Rendering > Environment menu, you can set the Default Clear Color. This
is set to a midtone by default. By setting this to black, you’ll remove all
lighting from the scene (see Figure 6.15).

FIGURE 6.15 Setting the Ambient Light for 3D and 2D scenes. ⏎
The problem with the Default Clear Color setting is that it’s global and
not scene-specific. Changing this value affects the default starting color for
all scenes. This may not be a problem if you set this value at the start of
your project and always keep it in mind. But there are likely to be times
when you don’t want all scenes to behave in the same way. So, a more
flexible way to control scene lighting is to use a WorldEnviroment Node,
which can override the defaults. Let’s create one of these now, as shown in
Figure 6.16. Once created, create a new Environment asset via the
Environment field in the Object Inspector.

FIGURE 6.16 Creating a new Environment asset for an
Environment node. ⏎
Next, we’ll override the Default Clear Color locally from the Project
Settings by using the Background section and the Mode drop-down from the
Inspector on the WorldEnvironment node. Specifically, set Mode to Custom
Color, and choose Black as the color. This removes the ambient light from
the scene, giving us a blank canvas to work from (see Figure 6.17).

FIGURE 6.17 Setting the background for the Environment Node.
⏎
Now, if you run the scene, it’ll appear completely black. We have
successfully removed all light from the scene. Of course, this is only an
achievement if we want it, and we often will when designing our lighting.
We have reason to come back later and restore some ambient light (see
Figure 6.18).

FIGURE 6.18 Light removed from a 3D scene. ⏎

6.2.2 Directional Lights
Ambient Light is a pervasive light that isn’t created by nodes or by objects
but by global settings and controls from option menus. The Directional
Light, however, is the first highly customizable and controllable light object
that is a node type in scene space. You can add a Directional Light to the

scene, as with any node. The node type is a DirectionalLight3D. This light
type is the simplest kind of light and is also unusual in some notable ways.
It’s unusual because, even though you can position it at different locations
in the scene, its position actually has no effect on its ability to cast light.
Only its orientation matters. It will cast light for an equal intensity over an
infinite distance in any single direction you specify by its orientation. This
light type is useful for simulating large, astronomical, and natural light
sources, such as sunlight and moonlight, as well as light from other large
bodies, such as energy fields, a laser beam, and a spaceship explosion (see
Figure 6.19).

FIGURE 6.19 Creating a Directional Light. ⏎
The Energy field (which is a float) controls the light brightness from the
Object Inspector, and the Color field lets you choose the light color. More
complex, however, is the Shadow rollout, which enables shadow casting for
the light. Shadows, when calculated in real-time in Godot, are both complex
and computationally expensive. You’ll want to have as few shadow-casting
lights as possible. Or rather, the smallest number needed to achieve the look
you want. I do not recommend enabling shadows for every single light you

add, especially if you’re creating a large scene with many lights (see Figure
6.20).

FIGURE 6.20 Enabling shadows for directional lights. ⏎
There are many settings to control shadows in Godot. The most important
are Bias, Opacity, and Blur. Bias is ultimately an error adjustment field to
correct rounding errors during shadow casting calculations. Practically,
lower values slide the shadow closer to the casting object, and higher values
slide the shadow away from it. If you go too low, the shadow creates a
strange, self-repeating artifact appearance that looks erroneous. If you go
too high, however, the shadow slides too far from its casting object that it
creates a sense of disconnectedness. Choosing the right value is an
important balance that varies from object to object. Opacity ranges from 0
to 1 and controls shadow intensity. At 1, the shadow is a solid color (usually
black), and at 0, the shadow is fully transparent. You would normally
choose a value to achieve the most believable shadows. Finally, Blur
softens the edges of shadows; again, values that are too low make shadows
look hard and artificial, while values that are too high can erase or nullify
the shadow altogether (see Figure 6.21).

FIGURE 6.21 Adjusting shadow settings. ⏎

6.2.3 Omni Lights
The Omni Light is next on our list to consider. This is a moderately
expensive light and is so named because it casts light in all directions from
its location at a specified intensity and for a specified distance. Unlike the
Directional Light, location matters here, and, as a result, the light
diminishes in intensity the further it moves from its source location. The
Omni Light (OmniLight3D) is the preferred method for simulating artificial
light, such as light bulbs, fiery torches, and glowing portals or computers
(see Figure 6.22).

FIGURE 6.22 Adding an Omni Light to the Scene. ⏎
Each Omni Light has a Range and Attenuation. The Range specifies the
maximum radius, in meters, for the Omni Light’s influence. Anything
outside of the radius will be unaffected by light. Anything within the radius
could be affected by the light, depending on its Attenuation settings.
Attenuation controls how light dissipates within the Radius. That is, how
the intensity of the light reduces from its center to its circumference. The
best way to adjust these settings is normally by eye rather than by value. So,
you would normally adjust these values while checking in the viewport to
see the effects of your changes, settling on the values that look right
aesthetically (see Figure 6.23).

FIGURE 6.23 Controlling the Attenuation and Range for a Godot
Omni Light. ⏎

6.2.4 Spot Lights
The final light primitive in Godot is the Spotlight (SpotLight3D) node,
which is directed (like a Directional Light) but is also positional and limited
like an Omni Light. The Spot Light is useful for creating artificial lights,
such as ceiling lights, flashlights, and car headlights. The Spot Light has a
range determined by two cones. The Outer Cone (controlled by Angle and
Range) specifies the maximum range of the spotlight, both the
circumference and the distance of the cone, respectively. The Attenuation
and Angle Attenuation fields control the falloff of the light within the cone
as it moves from the light source (see Figure 6.24).

FIGURE 6.24 Creating a Spot Light Object. ⏎

6.3 TRANSFORM OBJECTS IN 3D
The previous two sections focus on prototyping and lighting 3D scenes,
allowing you to create worlds to explore in 3D in a way where both Edit
mode and Play mode can match each other faithfully in appearance. Now
let’s make 3D objects move dynamically through the scene from code, such
as a camera fly-through or a sample player character. We’ll start without
any regard for physics and solidity. And then we’ll explore how to achieve
similar behavior but with physics included in the following section. Let’s
start with a new 3D scene and add an example character mesh. We’ll create
a Capsule Mesh for the player and a Plane Mesh for the floor. Both of these
are created using a MeshInstance3D, as we have seen (see Figure 6.25).

FIGURE 6.25 Creating a player from a capsule and a floor from a
plane. ⏎
Next, make sure you’ve setup the controls via the Project Settings Input
Map. This is important for reading keyboard input to control object
movement in the script (see Figure 6.26).

FIGURE 6.26 Configuring player controls. ⏎
Next, let’s add some code to create a player-controlled moving object. Be
sure to attach the script to your object and then try it out on the capsule.
Consider Code Sample 6.1 below.

CODE SAMPLE 6.1 PLAYERCONTROLLED 3D OBJECT
extends Node3D
@export var __move_speed:float = 2
@export var __rot_speed:float = 90
func _process(_delta: float) -> void:
var _player_input:Vector2 = Vector2.ZERO
_player_input.x = Input.get_action_strength("Left") Input.get_action_strength("Right")
_player_input.y = -Input.get_action_strength("Down") +
Input.get_action_strength("Up")
position += basis.z * _delta * _player_input.y * __move_speed;
rotate_y(deg_to_rad(__rot_speed * _delta * _player_input.x))

⏎

Let’s review some important details about this code:
First, two variables are defined – Speed and RotSpeed. Speed defines
the translation speed of the object (in meters per second) as we move
through space by pressing the up or down arrow. RotSpeed is the
angular speed at which the object will rotate as we press either left or
right in degrees per second.
The _process function is called automatically by Godot once per
frame.
The get_action_strength function returns input values between -1 and
1 to reflect keyboard input on either the left-right axis or the up-down
axis.
The position variable is part of Node3D and specifies the 3D location
of the 3D object for this frame.
The basis.z property is a 3D Vector. Basis contains three such vectors:
X, Y, and Z. Each refers to (X, Y, Z) values. The Z property refers to the
local Z axis in world space for that object. That is, it always points in

the direction that the player is facing. It’s the blue arrow (Z axis) in the
viewport, which appears when the object is selected. For this reason,
when Z is multiplied by other scalars, such as speed, time, and input, it
offsets the player’s position along the direction they are looking
(creating forward or backward movement).
The rotate_y function turns the player object around its local Y axis
(that is, the axis pointing upward through its center). The angle in
degrees is converted into the metric Radian angle measure as a
function of the argument.
Great! In reaching this far, we have now created a player-controlled object
using GDScript and the Node3D class. As shown in Chapter 2, this freeform movement can be useful, and it’s good to know. But what about if we
need collisions? Right now, our 3D object will move around and pass
through solids and be unaffected by gravity. In the next section, we’ll add
physics to our workflow.

6.4 PHYSICS AND COLLISIONS IN 3D
This section continues from the previous in creating a movable, playercontrolled object that respects physical interactions with other solids. Here,
we’ll expand on the previous scene, which features a capsule for the player
and a plane for the floor. Additionally, we’ll add some boxes which can be
‘bumped into’ as obstacles. Let’s get started.

6.4.1 Configuring Solid Objects with Colliders
Let’s first build a solid cube mesh. To do this, create a StaticBody3D node,
which should feature two children, mirroring the 2D workflow. The
children should be a MeshInstance3D, set to a Box mesh, and a

CollisionShape3D, which is configured to a Box Shape. Together, these
represent a solid obstacle (see Figure 6.27).

FIGURE 6.27 Cube mesh. ⏎
We should also apply the same thinking to the floor too because the floor
is a solid object. So, let’s make it a static body, coupled with a box collision
shape (see Figure 6.28).

FIGURE 6.28 Creating a collider for the floor. ⏎
And now it’s time to setup the player. The player should consist of three
objects in a hierarchy. Namely, CharacterBody3D, with a mesh child and a
representative collider (see Figure 6.29).

FIGURE 6.29 Creating a player object with collisions. ⏎

6.4.2 Creating a PlayerController with Physics
The CharacterBody3D is the critical movable physics object for in-game
agents, like the player character or NPCs. This node contains the necessary
functions and behaviors to easily build physically believable systems for
games. Consider Code Sample 6.2, which should be attached to the
CharacterBody3D for the player character.

CODE SAMPLE 6.2 PLAYER CONTROLLER
extends CharacterBody3D
@export var __move_speed:float = 2
@export var __rot_speed:float = 90
var _player_input:Vector2 = Vector2.ZERO
var _gravity:float = 0
func _ready() -> void:
_gravity = ProjectSettings.
get_setting("physics/3d/default_gravity")
func _process(_delta: float) -> void:
_player_input.x = Input.get_action_strength("Left") Input.get_action_strength("Right")
_player_input.y = -Input.get_action_strength("Down") +
Input.get_action_strength("Up")
func _physics_process(_delta: float) -> void:
rotate_y(deg_to_rad(__rot_speed * _delta * _player_input.x))
velocity = basis.z * _player_input.y * __move_speed
if(!is_on_floor()):
velocity.y -= _gravity
move_and_slide()

⏎

Let’s review some important details about this code:
First, two gravity variables are defined in the _ready function as the
scene starts. It reads the gravity setting from the Project Settings. This
value is a float that defines the speed of gravity – the strength of its
pull.

The _process function is used here only to read input on the horizontal
and vertical axes.
The _physics_process function is called once per physics cycle.
The function move_and_slide is used in conjunction with velocity to
drive the player while taking into consideration physical collisions.
The is_on_floor function returns true if the player is touching the
ground. If this returns false, then gravity is subtracted from the
velocity to pull the object down.

6.4.3 RigidBodies and Movables
So far, we’ve coded a player character that can move freely around the
scene and collide with physical objects that are static bodies, such as boxes
and floors. When the collision happens, further movement in that direction
is prevented. In this section, we’ll handle a physical interaction with a
movable object, like a ball. Specifically, let’s create a movable player
character that can push a ball by colliding with it. To do this, let’s create a
movable ball object. We’ll need three nodes for this: a RigidBody3D node
as a parent and then two children: a sphere mesh and a sphere collider. See
Figure 6.30 for the configuration.

FIGURE 6.30 Creating a RigidBody object. ⏎
Next, select the RigidBody3D object (the ball), and let’s apply some
important settings. Let’s disable Sleeping and Can Sleep, as this object must
continually monitor for collisions. Then set the Solver to Continuous.
Again, to ensure the object will always respond to a collision (see Figure
6.31).

FIGURE 6.31 Configuring a RigidBody for collisions. ⏎
Finally, the Player Controller script, attached to the Player Agent, can be
modified. It is given in full in Code Sample 6.3.

CODE SAMPLE 6.3 PLAYER CONTROLLER
WITH COLLISION INTERACTION FOR
RIGIDBODIES
extends CharacterBody3D
@export var __move_speed:float = 2
@export var __rot_speed:float = 90
var _player_input:Vector2 = Vector2.ZERO
var _gravity:float = 0
@export var _push_strength:float = 1
func _ready() -> void:
_gravity = ProjectSettings.get_setting("physics/3d/default_gravity")
func _process(_delta: float) -> void:
_player_input.x = Input.get_action_strength("Left") Input.get_action_strength("Right")
_player_input.y = -Input.get_action_strength("Down") +
Input.get_action_strength("Up")
func _physics_process(_delta: float) -> void:
rotate_y(deg_to_rad(__rot_speed * _delta * _player_input.x))
velocity = basis.z * _player_input.y * __move_speed
if(!is_on_floor()):
velocity.y -= _gravity
if move_and_slide():
for i in get_slide_collision_count():
var collision = get_slide_collision(i)
if collision.get_collider() is RigidBody3D:
(collision.get_collider() as RigidBody3D).apply_central_impulse(collision.get_normal() * _push_strength)

⏎

Let’s review some important details about this code:
First, the _push_strength variable defines how strongly the player will
push a rigidbody on a collision. This value is a multiplier, so a value of
2 means twice as strong as the default, 3 means three times, etc.
The _physics_process function contains an additional statement to
detect the collision. If a collision is detected with a Rigidbody, then an
impulse is applied.

The impulse is a vector, expressing the strength of a push. The
get_normal function returns the ‘direction of the collision’ between the
player and the ball. Thus, an inversion of this, multiplied by the push
strength, will repel the ball away.

6.5 AREAS AND TRIGGERS
Sometimes, you don’t want to block the player from entering an area of
space, such as a box area or a sphere area. Colliders and physics have the
effect of blocking. Instead, you’ll often want to allow the player to enter an
area but be notified when the entry happens so you can respond
appropriately in code. An example would be when the player falls
underwater, or when the player enters a dangerous region, or when the
player enters an enemy’s line of sight. In all these cases, notifications about
the player’s presence inside a specified area are helpful. In Godot, you use
Area Nodes to identify these moments. Let’s see how to use one. To start,
let’s create a new Area3D node, and it should have a child, which is also a
collision shape, such as a box, sphere, or capsule. For this example, and for
most instances, you’ll probably use a box (see Figure 6.32).

FIGURE 6.32 Creating an Area3D. ⏎
Next, if you select Area3D and switch to the Signals tab in the Inspector,
you’ll notice many different types of events that you can listen for. Most of
these events fall across two different types: body events and area events.
Body events occur when a physical body, such as a RigidBody or
CharacterBody, either enters or leaves the Area. Area events occur when
two or more Area objects intersect (see Figure 6.33).

FIGURE 6.33 Areas support many event types. ⏎
Let’s listen for a BodyEntered event. This is called when a physics body
first enters the Area. This event only happens once on the first occurrence.
It will only happen again if the body first leaves and then re-enters the Area.
To configure this, the following code can be added to our Player Controller,
which we created in earlier sections (see Code Sample 6.4).

CODE SAMPLE 6.4 CONFIGURING AN
AREA3D FOR ENTRY DETECTION.
func _ready() -> void:
var _area:Area3D = get_node("/root/MainScene/Area3D") as Area3D
_area.connect("body_entered", _on_body_entered)
func _on_body_entered(_body:Node3D):
print("body entered")

⏎

Let’s review some important details about this code:

This script can be attached to the player’s character. Although it
interacts with the Area3D, it doesn’t need to be attached to that object.
Next, the get_node function is used inside _ready to find the Area3D
node in the scene. This call uses the absolute path syntax. It begins
with ‘/root/’ and then is followed by the Node Name of the topmost
node in the scene. This Path Syntaxis is useful in that you can
absolutely identify any node by name, but it fails if this script is reused
in a different scene with different names or if the current scene
hierarchy changes. So, it’s a very fragile way to refer to nodes. I
include it here to show that it’s possible to do if you want. But a better
approach is to find nodes by groups, as you saw in earlier chapters.
The connect function is used to link the body_entered event to a local
function, which prints a message to the console.

6.6 PHYSICS QUERIES
Previous sections demonstrated both how to block object movement using
Bodies and Colliders and how to be notified about object intersections with
Areas. Together, these two nodes answer questions about events as they
happen now, and so, they satisfy important needs for working effectively in
3D scenes. However, a third need arises, specifically queries. That is, you’ll
often need to ask questions about possibilities and counterfactuals, to take
action, or to prevent action in advance. That is, you’ll need to ask questions
about what might happen if a certain event occurs. For example: if the
player moves forward, will they collide with any dangerous traps? If an
NPC runs forward, will they fall off the edge of a platform? If the player is
teleported to the other side of the world, will they land on the floor?
Answering these questions is important, especially for creating NPC AI, to
make good decisions and to avoid dangers that could radically affect

gameplay. To run these kinds of queries, we can use Raycasts and
Shapecasts.

6.6.1 Ray Casts
A ray in Godot is a finite line segment that is non-rendered and is used only
to test for intersections with surrounding objects. It detects whether the line
intersects either a body, an area, or both. Rays are often attached as children
to movable objects, such as NPCs and the player character, to detect nearby
objects. For example, a ray may be attached to the front of a walking NPC
object to determine when a wall is approached. Let’s attach a RayCast3D to
the player character to express their line of sight (see Figure 6.34).

FIGURE 6.34 Attaching a Raycast to a Player Object. ⏎
Now let’s explore some of the most important settings, which are
available from the Object Inspector. Exclude Parent and Hit From Inside
are two useful settings! Often, the RayCast object will be positioned inside
a mesh looking outward, such as from the eye socket of the character

looking outward to the world. The Raycast will usually be added as a child
of the moving object too (such as the player), to ensure the Raycast moves
with the object. Now, if you disable Exclude Parent and enable Hit From
Inside, then the Raycast will hit the inside faces of the mesh that it’s
contained within. That’s not normally what you want; it’s a self-collision.
Self-collision is usually bad. So be sure to enable Exclude Parent (to
exempt the parent object from collisions) and disable Hit From Inside (to
prevent hitting any interior faces), unless you have a compelling reason not
to do so (see Figure 6.35).

FIGURE 6.35 Configuring a Raycast. ⏎
Finally, be sure to specify the Target Position Vector, which is relative to
the position of the Raycast. A value of (0,0,1) for example, means that the
Raycast will point forward. A value of (0,-1,0) means the Raycast will point
downward. Now let’s create some code to work with the RayCast3D. This
can be added to any existing code, such as the Player Controller. Consider
Code Sample 6.5.

CODE SAMPLE 6.5 WORKING WITH
RAYCASTS.
@onready var —raycast:RayCast3D = $RayCast3D
func _physics_process(delta: float) -> void:
if __raycast.is_colliding():
if __raycast.get_collider() is StaticBody3D:
var _staticbody:StaticBody3D = __raycast.get_collider() as
StaticBody3D
print(_staticbody.name)

⏎

Let’s review some important details about this code:
The is_colliding function can be called on each physics frame, and it
returns a boolean expressing whether the RayCast object intersects
anybody or any area.
The get_collider function retrieves a reference to the first eligible
object that the Raycast intersects, allowing you to determine what was
hit.

6.6.2 Shape Casts
There are some problems inherent with Raycasts, which limit how and
where they can be used. They are generally performant and simple to use,
but they can pose problems for specific cases. For example, consider the
line-of-sight case in the previous section where the Raycast is used as a
handy line of sight, projected from the character’s eyes, looking for solid
walls ahead. This Raycast setup may initially seem to make sense, but what
happens if the wall ahead is shorter than the Raycast level? Consider
another example for a ground check: If the Raycast points downward from
a character and hits the ground below, we can classify the character as
having finally landed on the ground after falling from a jump. But what

happens if there is a small hole in the floor through which the Raycast is
unlucky enough to travel even though the character’s legs have touched the
ground on either side? In both cases, the Raycast will return false, and the
resultant behavior will be undesired: the player will continue through the
wall in the first case and will fall through the floor in the second one. This
is because there are times when the Raycast, by its very nature, isn’t
enough. So, instead, we can use a Shape Cast. This method basically creates
a non-renderable collider, like a box or a sphere, and throws it ahead of the
character along a line to test for intersections. Because the shape has a
width, height, and depth, it’s likely to produce a more accurate result for
collision testing, at the expense of being more expensive than a Raycast.
Let’s start. Create a new ShapeCast3D node and attach that as a child of a
movable character, like an NPC (see Figure 6.36).

FIGURE 6.36 Setting up a Shape Cast Node. ⏎
Next, let’s create some code that detects collisions with a ShapeCast.
Consider the following Code Sample 6.6.

CODE SAMPLE 6.6 WORKING WITH
SHAPECASTS
@onready var —shapecast:ShapeCast3D = $ShapeCast3D
func _physics_process(delta: float) -> void:
if __shapecast.is_colliding():
for i in __shapecast.get_collision_count():
if __shapecast.get_collider(i) is StaticBody3D:
var _staticbody:StaticBody3D =
__shapecast.get_collider(i) as StaticBody3D
print(_staticbody.name)

⏎

6.7 TEXT IN 3D
When creating rapid prototypes of games in 3D, it’s often useful to display
text data besides 3D objects. This is especially useful for live debugging
inside the editor, allowing you to quickly see important data. The text may
be used to display properties of objects in the viewport, such as the name of
an object, the health of a player, the time remaining for a level, or the
location of an object. In these cases, the often-overlooked Label3D object
can be your friend, as it saves you from printing lots of messages to the
debug console. Label3D is a standard Node3D-derived object and can be
attached as a child to an object (see Figure 6.37).

FIGURE 6.37 Adding a Label to an Object. ⏎
Next, you can enter your text directly through the Inspector, using the
Text rollout and the Text field. The Font Size controls text size (see Figure
6.38).

FIGURE 6.38 Setting Text through the Inspector. ⏎
You can also set text through code. Consider Code Sample 6.7, which
sets the Text of a Label3D child object.

CODE SAMPLE 6.7 SETTING THE TEXT OF
A LABEL OBJECT.
extends Node3D
@onready var __text_object:Label3D = $Label3D
func _process(delta: float) -> void:
__text_object.text = name

⏎

Each Label features a Billboard property, which can be enabled. When
enabled, the text will always rotate to face the active camera directly, so it
can be read without any rotation.

6.8 CONCLUSION
This chapter introduced the exciting world of 3D scenes in Godot, and there
are many powerful nodes to use here, from CSGs and Meshes to Physics
and Areas. There is, certainly, a lot more to be said about every one of these
objects. And, indeed, more of them will be explored further in the coming
chapters. Next, we enter the world of user interfaces.
OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER 7
User Interfaces
DOI: 10.1201/9781003484523-7

This chapter is a project-based chapter. Here, we’ll work together, step by
step, to create a working user interface for a main menu screen, used for a
potential 2D space-shooter game called Space Ranger. We’ll create this
project from scratch, from importing assets to hitting play on the final
version. By completing a working project like this, we’ll learn many core
features of user interfaces in Godot and game development more generally.
By ‘user interface’ (UI) I am referring to menu screens, option menus,
HUDs, popups, message boxes, information screens, and many other
relevant elements. UIs are typically 2D but can exist in 3D spaces too, such
as health bars that appear above a 3D character’s head, and Godot offers
features for both 2D and 3D. This chapter is concerned with 2D, but we’ll
explore implications for 3D too (see Figure 7.1). This shows an example of
the interface we’ll create, considering a range of problematic and interesting
issues along the way.

FIGURE 7.1 The Interface to create in this chapter. ⏎
NOTE. Space Ranger is actually a real game made by me and Evy
Benita using the Godot engine! You can access the full game here:
https://thelotls.itch.io/lotl-space-ranger. You can also check a video
play session of the game here: https://www.youtube.com/watch?
v=yO2N2J8nsZM.

7.1 IMPORTING ASSETS
The first step in creating a main menu interface for a game is to import all
our needed texture assets into the project. These will feature as different
elements on the screen. We may not end up using all of them, and that’s
fine. You can easily remove unneeded assets later by simply deleting them
from the project. Remember, if you delete something from the Godot
project, the file is removed from your computer too. So be sure to have a
backup somewhere safe in case you need to restore the file or files at any
time later. To import our textures, as always, drag and drop the contents of

the included UI folder directly into the Godot project, into the FileSystem
panel, and all assets will be imported (see Figure 7.2).

FIGURE 7.2 The Interface to create in this chapter. ⏎

7.2 STARTING THE USER INTERFACE
Now let’s configure our scene and the foundations of our UI. To start, create
a new UI Scene by choosing ‘User Interface’ from the Scene dock, as
opposed to a 2D or a 3D scene. Although a UI is, strictly speaking, a 2D
scene, the UI nodes nonetheless operate differently from standard 2D nodes
(see Figure 7.3).

FIGURE 7.3 Creating a new UI Scene. ⏎
The scene is created with only one node present, that is, a Control node.
Rename this topmost node to Root for clarity, and then from the Inspector
be sure to choose Full Rect for the Anchor Preset from the Layout section
of the node. Choosing this option forces the control to continually stretch its
width and height to fill the screen, whatever its size, and allow for any
changes at run time, such as window resizing. By default, the node is
transparent and doesn’t have any appearance at all. Rather, it simply marks
out a region of the screen (namely, the entire screen), and this will be
relevant for child nodes, which we will add soon. Specifically, the size of
the parent determines the space ‘available’ to children within the interface.
You might be wondering why this process is necessary. Surely, we can just
define the position and sizes of objects in pixels and not need to worry
about any other way of measuring screen size and position? The answer is
‘yes’, technically we can. But this route of specifying position and size in

absolute pixels is far from ideal, because the UI may appear wrongly at
different sizes on different screens and devices where the number of pixels
in height and width may differ from the dimensions you used when making
the interface. Therefore, we usually want the UI to look the same, or at least
equivalent, in all cases, and we only want to make one adaptive UI in the
engine, rather than one static version for every size and screen. The latter
approach would be tedious for one person (see Figure 7.4).

FIGURE 7.4 Setting the Root Control to Fill Rect. ⏎
We’ve created our root control for the UI, but we still need to define how
Godot should behave for scenes generally, both 2D and 3D, if the window
were resized by the player during gameplay, or if the game were presented
on a screen that is smaller or larger than the intended size. One option, in
the case of larger screens with more pixels, is simply to expand the range of
a level that the camera can see, allowing more things to be seen than could
be seen on a smaller screen, such as off-screen enemies and objects. The
alternative, which we will use here, is to keep all graphical elements the
same scale but enlarge or shrink them to fit the new window size, ensuring

the game looks the same on all screens. To do this, access Project Settings
from the application menu. From the Display > Window section, choose
Viewport for the Mode and Expand for the Aspect. This setting ensures the
contents of the viewport (all the in-game graphics) are expanded to fit the
aspect of the window (see Figure 7.5).

FIGURE 7.5 Setting the Window for the Display. ⏎

7.3 CREATING THE BACKGROUND
Let’s create the background layer of the UI – the furthermost layer to the
back. This should be a bold color, and I’ll choose a dark purple/pink style.
To create this, we could set the Default Clear Color of Godot, as we did in
previous chapters. But here, we only need to set the background for this
scene specifically. I’ll use a ColorRect node to do this. As the name
suggests, this node fills a specified rectangle with a selected color. Create
the ColorRect node and, like the root node, set the Layout Mode to Anchors
and set the Anchors Preset to Full Rect. This resizes the rectangle to fill the
screen automatically (see Figure 7.6).

FIGURE 7.6 Resizing the ColorRect to fill the screen. ⏎
Finally, choose the background color via the Color Picker, and then click
the Padlock icon from the toolbar to lock the object in place. As a
background item, it’ll be easy to accidentally select and move in the
viewport, creating unwanted changes, and so, by locking the ColorRect in
place, we keep its settings intact (see Figure 7.7).

FIGURE 7.7 Setting the background color and locking the
position. ⏎

7.4 ADD A UI TITLE
The title of our example game is ‘Space Ranger’, and we’ve already
imported a texture for this in Section 7.1. The title should appear on the
menu, fixed close to the top of the screen. The word ‘fixed’ is used here, and
the word ‘anchored’ is also appropriate. It means that the title should always
appear at the top-center of the screen regardless of how the window may be
resized by the user or regardless of the screen size on which the UI is being
viewed. To start, select the root node, and then create a new TextureRect
node. The TextureRect fills a rectangle with a texture. Once created, choose
the Texture slot from the inspector, and select
Quick Load from the context menu. Pick the ‘Space Ranger’ title, and
this will be displayed in the viewport (see Figure 7.8).

FIGURE 7.8 Adding a UI title to the UI. ⏎
Now let’s size and position the title in place, with precision and
exactitude. First, you’ll notice a small red crosshair at the top-left corner of
the title, which marks the pivot point and default center of the texture, that
is, the location within the texture from which its position is measured. Since
we’re aligning the title to the top-center of the screen, and not the top-left,
let’s move this point as close to that top-center as we can. From the
Inspector, expand the Layout Section and the Transform Section. From
there, set the Pivot Offset on X to 400 pixels; 400 is half the width of my
texture. Then let’s set its scale to 0.6 (see Figure 7.9).

FIGURE 7.9 Setting the Pivot for the TextureRect. ⏎
You’ll also notice a green crosshair that appears by default at the top-left
center of the screen. These are the Anchors. They control which locations of
the screen that the control should absolutely be attached to. This means the
control will always conform, by moving or resizing, to respect those screen
locations, even if the screen or window is resized. When all four Anchors
appear together, it means they all specify the same location. In this case,
let’s attach the title to the top-center of the screen. To do this, select the title
object and, from the toolbar, select the Anchor drop-down. From the dropdown, choose the Center-Top preset (see Figure 7.10).

FIGURE 7.10 Setting the Title to the top-center of the screen. ⏎
The game title is now fixed to the screen top-center, which is excellent.
However, the top edge of the texture touches the edge of the screen, and I’d
like to leave some margin or padding to avoid the UI looking overcrowded.
We can do this by using the Position Y field and adding a pixel offset from
the Anchor location. I’ll enter a value of 30 pixels to push the title down
from the Anchor by 30 pixels (see Figure 7.11).

FIGURE 7.11 Pushing the title away from the top edge of the
screen. ⏎

Finally, lock the title in place. And now take the project for a test run
where you can resize the window, and you’ll see the title fixed in its proper
place. Good work! (see Figure 7.12).

FIGURE 7.12 Running the project and testing the UI. ⏎

7.5 CREATING A CURSOR
This section explores creating a custom mouse cursor for our UI. For
desktop platforms, such as Windows, Linux, and Mac, the cursor expresses
the mouse location on the screen. For mobile devices, such as Android and
iOS, we’ll typically hide the course, as these will be touchscreen devices.
The cursor allows us to click elements on the screen, such as buttons. To get
started, let’s create a new Node2D (see Figure 7.13). Interesting to note here
that this object normally belongs in a 2D scene (it has blue color coding,
rather than green). However, 2D and UI objects (and even 3D) can co-exist
in the same scene!

FIGURE 7.13 Creating a Node2D as the start of a mouse cursor.
⏎
Next, let’s name the node Cursor, and we’ll create a new script and
attach it to the node. This script contains all the needed functionality for the
cursor (see Code Sample 7.1).

CODE SAMPLE 7.1
extends Node2D
#-----------------------------------------------------------@export var _arrow_texture : Texture2D
@export var __cursor_timeout:float = 3
var __OS_name:String = ""
var __is_visible:bool = false
var __is_enabled:bool = false
var __time_elapsed:float = 0
var __manual_override:bool = false
#-----------------------------------------------------------func _enter_tree():
__OS_name = OS.get_name()
if __OS_name != "Android" and __OS_name != "iOS":
__is_enabled = true
show_cursor()
#-----------------------------------------------------------func show_cursor():
if __is_enabled:
Input.set_mouse_mode(Input.MOUSE_MODE_VISIBLE)
Input.set_custom_mouse_cursor(_arrow_texture)
__is_visible = true
__manual_override = false
#-----------------------------------------------------------func hide_cursor(override=false):
Input.set_mouse_mode(Input.MOUSE_MODE_HIDDEN)
__is_visible = false
__manual_override = override
#-----------------------------------------------------------func _input(_event): if !__is_enabled: return
if __manual_override:
return
if _event is InputEventMouseMotion:
__time_elapsed = 0
if !__is_visible:
show_cursor()
#-----------------------------------------------------------func _process(delta):
if !__is_enabled or !__is_visible:
return
__time_elapsed += delta
if __time_elapsed > __cursor_timeout:
hide_cursor()
#------------------------------------------------------------

⏎

Let’s explore this code in more depth, as follows:

1. The enter_tree function is called as the Node2D enters the scene.
Unlike _ready, which is called at object creation only once in the
lifetime of the node, the enter_tree can be called more than once. It’s
called once each time the node enters the scene hierarchy. Normally
this will be once. But if the object were ever removed from the scene
and then later returned, enter_tree would happen a second time.
2. Inside the enter_tree function, we determine which OS is being used.
If the OS is Android or iOS, the cursor is hidden entirely.
3. If the cursor is to be shown, two native Godot functions are called.
Namely, Input.set_mouse_mode, and Input.set_custom_mouse_cursor.
The first enables the mouse cursor inside a Godot Window, allowing
the cursor to move freely and generate events. The latter allows us to
use a texture for the cursor image inside the window.
4. I’ve also added a timer feature, which causes the cursor to disappear
when unmoved for a specified period.
After the script has been attached to the cursor node, let’s configure it inside
the Inspector. For the Arrow Texture field, choose the mouse cursor texture,
which we imported earlier alongside many other textures (see Figure 7.14).

FIGURE 7.14 Configuring the cursor texture. ⏎
Excellent. Now, the cursor should appear during gameplay.

7.6 CREATING A HERO IMAGE AND
SUPPORTING IMAGES
The ‘hero image’, or the ‘hero asset’, is the primary feature and most
striking highlight of a composition. Our menu includes a collection of
Axolotl characters lined up and supporting NPC characters floating around
them. Let’s start with the Axolotl characters. Create a new TextureRect node
and load the characters into it as the texture (see Figure 7.15).

FIGURE 7.15 Adding a Hero image to the menu. ⏎
The newly created image should be fixed to the screen center. Again, we
can use Anchors and Offsets to achieve this. Set the offset to roughly the
center of the image (see Figure 7.16).

FIGURE 7.16 Using offset to set the image center. ⏎
This time use the Anchor Presets from the toolbar to center align the hero
asset and adjust the scale by eye to create a pleasing composition (see
Figure 7.17).

FIGURE 7.17 Center the Hero Asset. ⏎

Now run the game and compare different screen configurations to the
original in the editor, checking different width and height sizes for the
window to see how the hero asset behaves and aligns with the title aligned
at the top-center (Figure 7.18).

FIGURE 7.18 Testing different UI dimensions. ⏎
Next, we’ll add random NPC creatures scattered around the central hero
asset on the main menu. Since the NPCs must complement the hero asset,
orbiting it radially in design, it’s therefore important for them to anchor to
the same location as the hero at the screen center; otherwise, the NPCs can
drift away from the center under different window sizes. Our method will
be to create the first NPC, configure it correctly, and then duplicate it for
other variations. To start, create a TextureRect node. Load any NPC texture
and adjust the offset to the image center (see Figure 7.19).

FIGURE 7.19 Adding an NPC character. ⏎
The newly added NPC looks quite intense compared to the hero asset.
It’ll probably direct attention away from the center, which is shortly where
we’ll be positioning some buttons. These NPCs are designed flourishes to
complement the central elements. So, let’s reduce its opacity. To do that,
select the NPC and expand the Visibility rollout. From there, click the Self
Modulate field, and reduce the Alpha to control its transparency (see Figure
7.20).

FIGURE 7.20 Controlling NPC opacity. ⏎
Now duplicate a few times, assigning a different image to each duplicate,
and then reposition each around the scene, ensuring the anchor is still at the
screen center (see Figure 7.21).

FIGURE 7.21 Adding other NPCs to the scene. ⏎
Excellent. We’re getting there. Next, we’ll start to add buttons and
functional controls to the UI that links to code.

7.7 CREATING UI BUTTONS
Our interface will feature three buttons arranged in a single line or
horizontal row. This will be Play, Settings, and Exit. Now, we could simply
add the buttons to the scene and use all of the positioning techniques
covered already, such as anchoring, to find appropriate locations. This will
work, but there’s a better way. In cases where you’re working with many
elements that appear equally in a regimented, grid-like formation, Godot

offers some powerful tools for auto-arrangement. We’ll explore those here.
To start, let’s create a CenterContainer node. This node represents a
rectangular region of space, which can be anchored, and inside which all
children will automatically be aligned to the center. Once created, draw out
a rectangular strip, by clicking and dragging, spanning the width of the
window and anchoring to the center (see Figure 7.22).

FIGURE 7.22 Adding a CenterContainer Object. ⏎
NOTE. When you click and drag the CenterContainer to align with the
edges of the screen, you can enable Snapping for exact alignment. To
enable Snapping, click the Snapping button from the Editor toolbar
(see Figure 7.23).

FIGURE 7.23 Activate snapping to perfectly align a
container to the screen edges. ⏎
You can easily test the CenterContainer by adding any visible node, such as
a TextureRect, as a child. On making an object a child of the
CenterContainer, it will auto-align to the vertical and horizontal center –
not to the center of the screen, but to the center of the container. Next, we’ll
create a new object, called a GridContainer. The GridContainer aligns its
children neatly in rows and columns, and we’ll use this to make a list of
button nodes. Create a GridContainer now (see Figure 7.24).

FIGURE 7.24 Creating a GridContainer to house all button
objects… ⏎
The GridContainer doesn’t have many options. So, let’s explore how it
works. Start by creating a TextureButton object as a child of the
GridContainer. This node works much like a TextureRect in that it displays
a texture over a rectangular region, but it also acts as a button that is
interactive. Specifically, it can be clicked or tapped (see Figure 7.25).

FIGURE 7.25 Adding a Button as a child of the GridContainer. ⏎
With the new TextureButton Object created in the scene, let’s assign it a
texture appearance. Previously, in Section 7.1, we imported a range of
texture assets to use here. Select the TextureButton, and then Quick Load a
texture into the Textures > Normal rollout from the Inspector (see Figure
7.26).

FIGURE 7.26 Quick loading a texture into a TextureButton. ⏎

The TextureButton features several options under the textures rollout,
such as Normal, Pressed, Hover, Disabled, and Focused. Let’s explore the
definitions of each, as they are important concepts for any interactive UI
element.
1. Normal. This refers to the default appearance of the button. When the
scene begins, or when no interaction is occurring, the Normal texture
will be used and shown.
2. Pressed. This texture will be shown if it exists when the button is
being pressed and held down. This is typically when the user clicks or
taps the button but hasn’t yet released the click or tap to confirm the
interaction.
3. Hover. This normally applies only to mouse-driven interfaces. This
texture will be shown, if it exists, when the cursor moves over the
button, but the button hasn’t been pressed yet.
4. Disabled. This texture will be shown if it exists and if the button is
temporarily deactivated and cannot be used at all. This texture will
often be a faded or grayed-out version of Normal.
5. Focused. This texture will be shown if it exists when the control
receives ‘focus’. This relates to keyboards, gamepads, and other
devices that do not express ‘position’. The focused control is the one
that will respond to the keyboard or gamepad input. Normally, the
leftmost button in a series will receive Focus automatically, allowing
the player to move between the buttons with left and right arrow
presses.
Now let’s duplicate the newly created TextureButton twice, creating two
more buttons. When you do this, you’ll end up with Figure 7.27, and there
are some interesting points to note.

FIGURE 7.27 Adding more buttons to the GridContainer. ⏎
The buttons are auto-aligned into a column by the grid container,
stacking one on top of the other, making sure there is no overlap. This is a
powerful feature, supporting the fast and versatile creation of aligned
elements in a UI. Select the GridContainer, and from the Inspector, change
the Column count to 3. This allows a row to form, which is capped at three
elements, before a new row is created (see Figure 7.28).

FIGURE 7.28 Aligning buttons into a single row. ⏎
Next, change the texture for each button, allowing one for closing the
application, one for starting gameplay, and one for accessing a settings
menu (see Figure 7.29).

FIGURE 7.29 Assigning textures to our button panel ⏎
Finally, we’ll probably want to add some padding, or spacing, between
the buttons to ensure they don’t simply align together at the edges, pixel by

pixel. In my example, the spacing looks acceptable, but this is only because
some transparency is already added to the button edges. To add spacing,
select the GridContainer node, and from the Inspector, open the
ThemeOverrides rollout. From here, enable H Separation (Horizontal) and
enter a value of 30 (30 pixels of separation). The buttons will then be
spaced further apart (see Figure 7.30).

FIGURE 7.30 Adding horizontal separation between the buttons.
⏎

7.8 CREATING BUTTON
FUNCTIONALITY
The interface created here features three unique buttons, each with a
specific purpose commonly found in games. On selecting each button and
moving to the Node tab of the Inspector, you’ll see that each button
supports four signal types, which we can connect to for responding to
different types of events. These are as follows:

1. Button Down. This signal is fired when the button is first pressed. At
this point, it’s likely that the mouse button is still being held down.
2. Button Up. This signal fires when the button is first released from a
click. It may also be called if the button is pressed down elsewhere and
then released separately while the cursor is hovering over the button.
3. Pressed is when a success button press occurs, that is, when the button
is pressed down and then released.
4. Toggled applies to a different kind of button, like a checkbox, which
can be switched on or off.
In this section we’ll handle the different button clicks through a single
overarching class, which will be attached to the root node. Consider the
following Code Sample 7.2, which is attached to the scene root node as a
starting point for connecting the button pushes to functions inside a script
file.

CODE SAMPLE 7.2
extends Node
@onready var __button_close:TextureButton =
$CenterContainer/GridContainer/Button_Close
@onready var __button_play:TextureButton =
$CenterContainer/GridContainer/Button_Play @onready var
__button_settings:TextureButton = $CenterContainer/GridContainer/Button_Settings
func _ready() -> void:
__button_close.connect("pressed", _on_close_press)
__button_play.connect("pressed", _on_play_press)
__button_settings.connect("pressed", _on_settings_press)
func _on_close_press():
print("close pressed")
func _on_play_press():
print("play pressed")
func _on_settings_press():
print("settings pressed")

⏎

7.8.1 Coding the Close Button – Quitting the
Game
The close button should terminate the application and return the gamer back
to the OS. Closing an application in Godot is straightforward. Consider
Code Sample 7.3 for the _on_close_press function.

CODE SAMPLE 7.3
func _on_close_press():
get_tree().quit()

⏎

NOTE. Usually, before running Quit, games will call other functions
and behaviors, such as sound effects and animations, to create a
smooth exit. The Quit function is the final command that is executed
by a game prior to its termination entirely.

7.8.2 Coding the Play and Settings Buttons –
Changing Scenes
The play and setting buttons assume your project consists of more than one
scene; that is, more scenes besides the UI. Normally, a different scene will
be the destination where the player should arrive when Play or Settings are
clicked from the menu. So, essentially, either of these buttons will invoke a
Scene change, moving you from the menu scene to another. Consider the
completed code in Code Sample 7.4.

CODE SAMPLE 7.4
extends Node
@onready var __button_close:TextureButton =
$CenterContainer/GridContainer/Button_Close
@onready var __button_play:TextureButton =
$CenterContainer/GridContainer/Button_Play @onready var
__button_settings:TextureButton = $CenterContainer/GridContainer/Button_Settings
@export var __game_scene : PackedScene
@export var __settings_scene : PackedScene
func _ready() -> void:
__button_close.connect("pressed", _on_close_press)
__button_play.connect("pressed", _on_play_press)
__button_settings.connect("pressed", _on_settings_press)
func _on_close_press():
get_tree().quit()

func _on_play_press():
get_tree().change_scene_to_packed(__game_scene)
func _on_settings_press():
get_tree().change_scene_to_packed(__settings_scene)

⏎

After completing the code, select the root object and set its key properties
(see Figure 7.31).

FIGURE 7.31 Configuring the Main Menu object. ⏎

7.9 ANIMATING UI ELEMENTS – THE
ANIMATIONPLAYER
In this section, we’ll use the Godot animation system to create a predefined,
multi-object animation across the entire UI scene. Specifically, we’ll make
the background NPCs vary their opacity at different rates to create a
tranquil sense of dynamism from the menu. Godot has a powerful and easy-

to-use animation system that is capable of creating complete cutscenes and
cinematics. To create a new Animation object, add a new AnimationPlayer
node to the scene. Despite the name of AnimationPlayer, this node is also
used to create animations. This node should be a child of the root object. It
doesn’t matter where in the hierarchy this node is created, but it can be
problematic and involve lots more work if you relocate the
AnimationPlayer node after creating your animations. So, I recommend you
locate the object in a good, well-reasoned place in the hierarchy before
building animations (see Figure 7.32).

FIGURE 7.32 Creating an AnimationPlayer node ⏎
NOTE. The Animation System can be used to animate any object in
any scene type. It’s not limited to UIs.
To start creating animations for the UI, select the AnimationPlayer node in
the scene hierarchy. With the AnimationPlayer node selected, make sure the
Animation tab is visible in the Output Window area of the Editor (see
Figure 7.33).

FIGURE 7.33 Accessing the Animation Editor. ⏎
Create a new Animation called UI Animation, by choosing the Animation
drop-down from the Animation Editor. Then select New from the context
menu and assign the animation a name (see Figure 7.34).

FIGURE 7.34 Creating a new animation from the Animation
Editor. ⏎

The newly created UI Animation should run as soon as the scene starts
and should play continuously on a loop, over and over again, to create an
animated background. To configure this, enable the Repeat button and the
Auto-play button from the Editor (see Figure 7.35).

FIGURE 7.35 Enabling repeat and auto-play. ⏎
Next, we’ll start building the animation itself. In Godot, each animated
element is defined in the Animation Editor by an Animation Track. A track
defines how a property of a specified object, such as its position or scale,
changes over time. Using this system, an animation is therefore a collection
of relationships of a property to time. In our animation, we’ll be relating
NPC opacity to time. Click the button Add Track and choose Property
Track from the context menu (see Figure 7.36).

FIGURE 7.36 Creating an animation Property Track. ⏎
After choosing the Property Track, it’ll ask you to select an object for
animation. Here, since we’re animating the NPCs, choose one of them and
click OK (see Figure 7.37).

FIGURE 7.37 Next, choose an object to animate ⏎
Now choose the property to animate from the property list. Here, it
should be self_modulate. This is a color field in the form of RGBA (Red,
Green, Blue, and Alpha). The alpha component specifies opacity and ranges
from 0 to 255. This color is multiplied with the material to change its tint

and shade overall. Once selected, choose the strangely named Open button
to confirm your selection (see Figure 7.38).

FIGURE 7.38 Finalizing a property track. ⏎
The animation track is now presented in a horizontal timeline measured
in seconds. The default total time for the animation is 1 second, and I
recommend leaving this setting as-is. An animation can always be
accelerated or slowed down through a global Speed Scale setting on the
AnimationPlayer object, as we’ll see. Click and drag the time slider to the
first frame, at position 0 in the timeline. Once there, right-click your mouse
inside the timeline, along the self_modulate track, and choose Insert Key
from the context menu. A key (Keyframe) locks in the value of a setting at
that time, and the AnimationPlayer calculates (Interpolate) the value for the
property between the known keyframes (see Figure 7.39).

FIGURE 7.39 Inserting a keyframe into the Property Track. ⏎
Now insert a keyframe at the end of the animation, at time 1. This locks
the timeline value at the end of the animation and further creates an
interpolated space between (see Figure 7.40).

FIGURE 7.40 Inserting a keyframe at the end of the Property
Track. ⏎

Now that we’ve created keyframes at the start and end of the track, we
should create some at random points between, at times when the opacity
should change, either up or down. The two keyframes at the start and end
lock the opacity at its default value. So, insert new keyframes between, and
then click each keyframe to set its color in the inspector (see Figure 7.41).

FIGURE 7.41 Select a keyframe to view its properties in the
Inspector. ⏎
For each selected keyframe, click the Value field and set its color with a
different opacity value. Be sure to keep the opacity value for the first and
last keyframes (see Figure 7.42).

FIGURE 7.42 Animating NPC opacity values. ⏎
If you now play the scene, you’ll see the animation take effect
immediately. It’ll probably appear way too fast; that is, the speed will be
inappropriate for the context. We can easily change this. Select the
AnimationPlayer object and then change the Speed Scale from 1 to 0.4 to
reduce the playback speed (see Figure 7.43).

FIGURE 7.43 Changing playback speed. ⏎
Now repeat this process for the other NPCs in the scene to create an
organic and dynamic background.

7.10 AUTOLOADS – THE SINGLETON
DESIGN PATTERN
The main menu screen is rarely, if ever, a destination for the player. Nobody
launches a game to spend all playtime only on its menu screen. Rather, the
menu screen is a location that the player visits on their way to somewhere
else, such as the first level, or to resume gameplay from a later level.
Nonetheless, the player may make important, and even gameplay-defining,
decisions on the menu. Settings or choices applied there, at the menu, must
often be referred to and read in other levels and scenes during gameplay.
This may include checking volume levels, reading the player’s name, and
checking on game difficulty. However, this raises a problem of persistence.

Namely, how can data created in one scene, such as the menu, continue to
survive and be accessible in another, such as a level? This section explores
one method, namely the Singelton Design Pattern, which Godot supports
through Autoload Objects. First, let’s create a basic data object in GDScript.
Right-click the FileSystem menu and choose Create New > Script from the
context menu (see Figure 7.44).

FIGURE 7.44 Creating a New Script from the FileSystem Dock.
⏎
As this script encodes only data and has no position within a scene, the
script should derive from Node, as opposed to Node2D or Node3D or
Control (see Figure 7.45).

FIGURE 7.45 Creating a new Singleton from Node. ⏎
Consider Code Sample 7.5, which contains an example game data class.
This class could contain many different properties for a game.

CODE SAMPLE 7.5
extends Node
@export var game_difficulty:int = 0
@export var player_name:String = ""
@export var volume:float = 15
@export var run_full_screen:bool = true

⏎

Now we need to make this class a Singleton. A Singleton is a class that
always has one and only one instance available at any one time during
gameplay. The Singleton does not permit duplicate instances, and the
single, available instance contains important data that is accessible to every
class everywhere, always. This makes it a useful structure to keep track of

single, global properties, such as Score, Player Name, Volume Levels, and
more. It would not be suitable for keeping track of instance-specific
properties, such as NPC health, as this varies from instance to instance
across potentially many instances. To make our newly created class a
Singleton, select its GD file in the FileSystem and then right-click, choosing
Copy Path from the context menu (see Figure 7.46).

FIGURE 7.46 Copying the path for a selected Script File. ⏎
Next, select Project > Project Settings from the application menu, and
switch to the Globals tab. From there, select the AutoLoad tab (see Figure
7.47).

FIGURE 7.47 Accessing the AutoLoad Tab. ⏎
Now paste your copied path into the Path field, and enter a Global Name
into the Node Name field. This is the name by which your script should be
known – it is Singleton Name. In this case, I have used the name GameData
(see Figure 7.48).

FIGURE 7.48 Adding a GameData Singleton. ⏎
Once added, make sure that Enable is checked for the Global Variable
field. This ensures that your Singleton class is available to access
everywhere, to every node in every scene (see Figure 7.49).

FIGURE 7.49 Enabling Singleton Behavior. ⏎
You can now access your Singleton Object everywhere in the code, as
shown in Code Sample 7.6. You can include this code in any script file. The
Singleton is accessible to every object and is never destroyed. If a scene
changes, the Singleton remains with all its values.

CODE SAMPLE 7.6
GameData. run_full_screen = true

⏎

7.11 ADDING BACKGROUND MUSIC
FOR THE MENU
Let’s add some audio and music to our menu. This book does not include
any music tracks, but there are many resources online where music can be
downloaded both for free and cheaply. In our menu, there should be a
continually playing music track that plays immediately and loops endlessly
to set the mood and context for the menu. To start, import our music into
the project. Music can be either in WAV or OGG format (see Figure 7.50).

FIGURE 7.50 Importing a Music Track. ⏎
Select the music in the FileSystem and switch to the Import tab to view
the default properties for audio import. For a menu screen music track, we
want the track to auto-repeat each time playback ends. To do this, enable

the Forward setting for the Loop Mode. This means the music track should
continue playing the music as normal on each repeat (see Figure 7.51).

FIGURE 7.51 Enabling Looping Playback. ⏎
NOTE. Make sure to click the ReImport button after making changes
to confirm your settings.
Next, create a new AudioStreamPlayer2D to the scene. From the Stream
setting in the Object Inspector, choose Quick Load and select your music
track (see Figure 7.52).

FIGURE 7.52 Using Quick Load. ⏎
Now enable the Autoplay field from the Inspector, and also set the
Playback Type to Stream to prevent Godot from loading the entire sample
into memory, thereby increasing level loading times (see Figure 7.53).

FIGURE 7.53 Configuring streaming audio. ⏎
And that’s it! Your scene is now configured to play a looping audio track
on the menu. Press run from the toolbar and enjoy a completed menu with

music.

7.12 CONCLUSION
This chapter explored a step-by-step workflow for creating a UI menu
screen for an example game named Space Ranger. In creating this menu,
we saw a range of useful and important features, many of which have an
application beyond UIs specifically. We saw how to create a mouse cursor,
how to connect buttons to interactions, and how to use the
AnimationPlayer, as well as how to create persistent data through Singleton
Objects. Singletons especially have an important role to play in storing
settings for games that must live beyond any single scene and must move
through all scenes, being available to all objects. In completing this chapter,
you have seen how to work with scenes of all kinds, namely 2D, 3D, and
UI. As we move forward, we’ll focus less on the scenes themselves and
more on the game mechanics we can create for them, and we’ll see different
functions and libraries that Godot makes available to us for coding many
kinds of behaviors.
OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER 8
Game Mechanics
Creating a First-Person Controller
DOI: 10.1201/9781003484523-8

This chapter is a project-based chapter, just like the previous one. Here,
however, we’ll explore many Godot features and tools and GDScript
functions to support the creation of important gameplay elements. Namely,
we’re going to build a functionally complete first-person controller from
scratch, complete with collisions, mouse and keyboard controls, jumping
and gravity, and more. The first-person controller is a commonplace and
historically important mechanic in 3D games, being the cornerstone of
many 3D shooters and narrative-driven walking simulators. By constructing
a first-person shooter from the ground upward, we’ll learn a lot of
transferable knowledge about Godot, which has applications in many areas
across 2D, 3D, and user interfaces. For this reason, please don’t skip this
chapter by thinking that 3D is not relevant for you if you’re planning to
make 2D games. This is because so much content here – such as
methodology, approach, and problem-solving – all have their relevant 2D
parallels. By the end of this chapter, we’ll have a feature-filled first-person
controller that can easily navigate around a 3D level using traditional WASD
first-person controls, alongside mouse movement for head rotation. So, let’s
get started.

8.1 STARTING A NEW GODOT
PROJECT AND ASSET IMPORTING
Our development journey begins by creating a new Godot project. We’ve
seen this process before in earlier chapters, but let’s recap. From the Godot
Project Creation Window, choose the Create button, and then complete
important project details. I’ve named the project FPS Sandbox, and I’ve
selected a Forward+ Renderer. After this, press Create and Edit to confirm
the details and enter the Editor. See Figure 8.1.

FIGURE 8.1 Creating a new project for a first-person controller.
⏎
For this project, there’s only one very simple mesh asset to import. It’s a
prototype mesh environment with a ground plane and some basic cube

obstacles as walls for testing our first-person controller with collisions as
we build it in-engine. This mesh was created in the 3D modeling software
Blender, which we saw earlier in Chapter 2. The mesh was exported from
Blender as a GLTF file with the naming suffix of –col for all objects inside
the file, meaning that colliders will automatically be generated by Godot for
the mesh at import time. This saves us from having to generate colliders
manually inside Godot using nodes and other objects. We can import the
mesh, and it’s ready to use, and that’s all. The mesh is included in the book
companion files, in the Chapter 8 folder. Drag and drop the file into Godot
in the FileSystem Dock. See Figure 8.2.

FIGURE 8.2 Import a mesh environment asset into Godot. ⏎
For a sanity check, let’s confirm that the colliders were generated for the
imported mesh, as we expect them to be. To do this, double-click the

imported mesh from the FileSystem Dock to open its contents in the
Advanced Import Settings Dialog. In the Scene tab, inside the hierarchy,
you’ll notice that some additional physics objects have been appended to
the hierarchy automatically; namely, a StaticBody3D and a
CollisionShape3D. The CollisionShape3D uses the mesh itself as the
colliding volume. See Figure 8.3.

FIGURE 8.3 Checking a mesh’s collision data. ⏎

8.2 BUILDING THE ENVIRONMENT
SCENE
Although the first-person controller will be part of our game world, it will
also be separate from it. We will be building the first-person controller in
such a way that it can be easily reused across many different 3D scenes and
projects, and it’s not attached to any specific scene or level. To achieve this,
it’s important to see both the environment, inside which the controller will

live, and the controller itself as separate but related entities, just as the fish
is separate from water. We’ll start here by creating the 3D environment first,
ensuring the world is ready to accept a character. To do this, create a new,
empty 3D scene and rename the root node (the topmost node) to the
environment. See Figure 8.4.

FIGURE 8.4 Creating an empty 3D scene. ⏎
Drag and drop the newly imported mesh environment from the
FileSystem panel into the scene, locating it at the world origin and using the
padlock feature to prevent the mesh from being selected and moved
accidentally. See Figure 8.5.

FIGURE 8.5 Importing the mesh environment. ⏎
The scene looks well illuminated in the editor’s viewport. However, as
we’ve seen before in earlier chapters, this is only a sample lighting setup in
editor mode. So, we’ll need to add some in-scene lighting for a game-ready
setup. Let’s add two nodes for this: first, a WorldEnvironmentNode, and
second, a DirectionalLight. See Figure 8.6.

FIGURE 8.6 Creating a lighting setup. ⏎
The newly created WorldEnvironment node requires some attention, as
indicated by the exclamation mark icon beside its name in the hierarchy.
Select this node and choose New Environment under the Environment field
in the Inspector. See Figure 8.7.

FIGURE 8.7 Creating a new Environment node. ⏎

Let’s now configure the lighting itself. Select the Directional Light node,
pull it up into the sky for our convenience, and then rotate it to cast light
downward onto the scene. Find an orientation that works well for your
level, then enable shadow casting. See Figure 8.8.

FIGURE 8.8 Orienting a directional light in the scene. ⏎

8.3 BUILDING THE PLAYER
CHARACTER AS A SCENE
This section explores a truly powerful methodology for working with nodes
in Godot scenes. Here, we’ll create the player’s first-person controller in its
own 3D scene, separate from the 3D world we just made, where the player
will eventually be added as a linked instance. In addition to defining
worlds, scenes in Godot are used as containers for objects, like NPCs and
player characters, and props. Each scene can be reused many times in many
places. The first-person controller will be its own miniature world, inside its
own scene, and this scene will eventually be embedded in our larger scene

of ‘the world’. But, in being added to another scene like this, the player will
still retain its connections to the original scene from where it was made.
Consequently, any changes made to the original scene are updated and
reflected automatically in any other scenes or worlds where it is embedded
as an instance. This is because the embedded scene is not a copy or a
duplication but is an instance that is still connected to the original scene. In
this way, scenes may exist inside other scenes, and there is no limit to the
extent of scene embedding – scenes within scenes and so on, each instance
maintaining its connection to the original scene. Let’s start. To do so, create
a new 3D scene. Add a CharacterBody3D object and right-click on it in the
Hierarchy. Choose Make Scene Root from the context menu to position the
new node at the top of the hierarchy. See Figure 8.9. Afterward, you can
delete the child node, Node3D. We won’t need it.

FIGURE 8.9 Making a CharacterBody3D the root node. ⏎
Next, we’ll give the player a mesh, which will be a capsule. This will
probably be hidden at run time, but it’s useful to have a mesh representation
of the player for debugging purposes, helping us to see where the player is
inside the scene. Otherwise, the player is simply a disembodied camera
floating around. To do this, create a MeshInstance3D node as a child of the
CharacterBody3D, and assign it a Capsule Mesh. See Figure 8.10.

FIGURE 8.10 Creating a Capsule mesh for the character. ⏎
Whenever you work with movable objects, like NPCs and player
characters, you need to be especially careful about pivot points. These mark
the location in the scene from which the position of the object is measured;
it’s the object’s center or origin. By default, the capsule mesh has its origin
at the world origin, and so, the capsule appears centered, half above and
half below the ground level. We want the capsule to stand on the floor, with
the pivot touching the ground for the character’s feet. Select the capsule and
set its Y value to 1. See Figure 8.11. This moves the capsule to ground level.

FIGURE 8.11 Positioning the capsule to the ground. ⏎
Now we’ll add two Colliders for this character. First, let’s add the regular
collider. This is a CollisionShape3D set to a capsule, and again it should be
lifted on the Y axis to 1. This object will be a child of the
CharacterBody3D. See Figure 8.12.

FIGURE 8.12 Adding a collider for the player. ⏎

We’ll be working with two colliders because the player character can
walk and crouch. In the crouch position, the character technically becomes
shorter as their posture changes, and so their collision data also changes. In
crouch mode, the player can fit into smaller spaces. So, let’s create our
second collider, which is also a capsule, but we’ll reduce its height by half.
See Figure 8.13.

FIGURE 8.13 Halving the height of the crouch collider. ⏎
Let’s rename both objects for clarity. One is CollisionShape3D_Standing,
and the other is CollisionShape3D_Crouching. See Figure 8.14. The names
will be important later in the code.

FIGURE 8.14 Naming the colliders. ⏎
NOTE. Only one of the two colliders will be active at any one time,
depending on whether the player is walking or crouching.
Now let’s add a Camera3D node, which will become the player’s eyes, as a
child of CharacterBody3D. Position the camera upward inside the scene,
inside the mesh, at eye level. We can easily adjust later. Also, be sure that
the forward vector of the camera (blue arrow, or Z Axis) matches the blue
arrow of the CharacterBody3D. Rotate the camera if needed to ensure both
objects are facing in the same direction. See Figure 8.15.

FIGURE 8.15 Aligning the camera to the eyes ⏎
Finally, save the player scene, and then drag and drop the saved scene file
from the FileSystem dock into the other environment level, positioning the
player at the suitable location. In the future, if you need to make changes to
the player, you should do so in the original Player scene. Any changes will
be automatically updated at the environment level. See Figure 8.16.

FIGURE 8.16 Adding the Player to the level. ⏎

8.4 CONFIGURING PLAYER
CONTROLS
The first-person controller needs a control scheme. That is, the player must
use input devices to steer the first-person controls, and we’ll need to setup
those controls. We’ll do so by using the Input Manager that we’ve already
seen in earlier chapters. You can access this by choosing Project > Project
Settings from the application menu. See Figure 8.17.

FIGURE 8.17 Defining controls from the Input Manager. ⏎
Let’s review the needed controls, as follows:
Left, Right, Up, and Down (the WASD controls for moving the firstperson controller).
Look_Left, Look_Right, Look_Up, and Look_Down (these are IJKL
keyboard controls for moving the head of the first-person controller,
like mouse movement).
Jump – To make the controller jump on a space bar press.
Crouch – To make the controller crouch, reducing its height.
Run – Finally, when the run is held down, the controller will move
faster.

8.5 CREATING THE PLAYER
CONTROLLER SCRIPT
Now we’ll create our Player Controller script, which will be attached to the
root object of the player scene. It’s very important that our script is attached
here, to the root object inside the player scene. Do not attach it to a child
object anywhere, and do not attach it to the root object as it appears in the
environment scene. Be sure to use the player scene so that the changes will
be reflected wherever else the player is embedded. Select the root object,
and from the Inspector expand the Script field and create a new script file
named PlayerController.gd. See Figure 8.18. This script will be derived
from CharacterBody3D.

FIGURE 8.18 Creating a new script on the Player Controller root
object. ⏎
To start, let’s define a set of exported variables, which will control
important properties for the first-person controller. Consider Code Sample
8.1.

CODE SAMPLE 8.1
#Controls walking speeding of player (meters per second)
@export var _walk_speed:float = 2
#Determines how fast player runs when run is held down (meters per second)
@export var _run_speed:float = 4
#Controls how much head movement responds to mouse movement
@export var _mouse_sensitivity:float = 2
#Controls how fast head movement moves based on keyboard input
@export var _controller_head_rot_speed:float = 90
#Should the cursor be hidden when first person controller is active?
@export var _capture_mouse:bool = true
#How far in any direction can the head turn when player is standing still
(degrees)
@export var _head_rot_limits:Vector2 = Vector2(-80, 80)
#How much should speed reduce when player stops
@export var _movement_damping:float = 4
#How quickly should head turning reduce when stopped
@export var _rotation_Damping:float = 10
#How high or low should the head move when walking
@export var _headbob_amplitude:float = 0.03
#How often should head move when walking
@export var _headbob_frequency:float = 0.002
#What should the height of the player be when crouching
@export var _crouch_amout:Vector3 = Vector3(0, 0.5, 0)
#How fast can we move when crouching (meters per second)
@export var _crouching_speed:float=1000
#Can player controller be controlled by input?
@export var _input_enabled:bool = true
#Should the grey mesh capsule be hidden to avoid shadow casting during gameplay?
@export var _hide_player_mesh_on_start:bool = true

⏎

If you now save this code, when attached to the root object, you’ll see all
the defined properties appear in the Object Inspector. See Figure 8.19.

FIGURE 8.19 Creating player controller variables. ⏎
NOTE. You will also be able to see and change variables on the script
when the object is selected in a different scene.

8.6 CODING HEAD ROTATION
With a first-person controller, the world is seen through the eyes of the
player. This typically means that the camera represents our head. We see the
world through the camera lens from its position, orientation, and
perspective. For this purpose, we can also divide camera behavior into two
types: walking motion, which determines camera position in the world, and
head rotation, which determines camera orientation. We’ll focus on the
latter here. Orientation is controlled by both mouse movement and by the
keyboard keys IJKL. Using this input, we must be able to rotate the head
left, right, up, and down. And indeed, within this rotational space, there are
limits too. We should not normally rotate the head 360 degrees in any
direction, for example. Let’s start. So, first, we’ll need a reference to the
camera object itself to rotate it as needed. See Code Sample 8.2.

CODE SAMPLE 8.2
@onready var _camera_3d = $Camera3D

⏎

Next, we want to keep track of relative mouse movement since the previous
frame. Greater mouse displacement leads to faster header turning, within
preset limits. We can keep track of this with a Vector2 variable. See Code
Sample 8.3.

CODE SAMPLE 8.3
var _relative_mouse:Vector2 = Vector2(0,0)

⏎

Now, before we measure mouse motion itself, we need to understand more
clearly what we’re measuring. Mouse motion will be defined in terms of
pixel displacement. That is, how much the cursor has changed in pixel
position since the previous frame. This sounds straightforward. However,
what happens if the user resizes the window and the game re-scales to a
new size? Or what happens if the first-person controller view is only shown
on part of the screen (such as a pop-up), rather than for the whole of the
screen? In these cases, the ratio between pixel displacement of the cursor
and the viewport scale is not always 1:1. So, we’ll need to define this ratio
first to ensure there is a consistent displacement applied to our rotation
calculations later. If we don’t do this, then the rotational head speed will
vary depending on the viewport scale. Consider Code Sample 8.4.

CODE SAMPLE 8.4
func _input(event):
if !(event is InputEventMouseMotion):
return
_default_viewport_size = get_viewport().size
scaled_view.x = get_window().size.x / _default_viewport_size.x
scaled_view.y = get_window().size.y / _default_viewport_size.y
#measure how much mouse cursor has moved, for controlling head motion
#godot doesn’t scale mouse motion if the window is shrunk or enlarged
#this ensures the mouse movement behaves at the same speed for every resolution
_relative_mouse.x = event.relative.x * scaled_view.x
_relative_mouse.y = event.relative.y * scaled_view.y

⏎

Great! The above code in Sample 8.4 will scale the vector _relative_mouse
by the viewport scale to ensure that there is a 1:1 relationship between pixel
displacement (delta) of the cursor and viewport scale. Now, in addition, we
also need to keep track of the mouse delta from the previous frame,
whatever it was. This value will be needed for a calculation later so that we
can add a ‘smoothing’ effect to our head rotation. If head rotation were
allowed to be driven directly by mouse movement alone, then any ugly
jittering or shaking of the physical mouse by the user’s hand would be
reflected immediately in messy head turning for the first-person controller
in-game. This kind of immediate sensitivity between mouse and head can
enhance a seasickness feel from first-person controls, as well as make the
game feel unnatural. To fix this, then, we create one degree of separation
between physical mouse movement, on the one hand, and the head-turning
in the first-person controller on the other. We do this by having head-turning
always play a game of ‘catch-up’ by rotating smoothly in numbers from
where it was previously to a rotational destination ahead, as determined by
the latest mouse displacement. Let’s examine the _process function, which
happens automatically on each frame, as shown in Code Sample 8.5.

CODE SAMPLE 8.5
func _process(delta):
#update head rotation
if(_input_enabled):
_last_look_input = Vector2(((-Input.get_action_strength("look_left")
+ Input.get_action_strength("look_right")) * _controller_head_rot_speed) +
_relative_mouse.x, ((-Input.get_action_strength("look_up") +
Input.get_action_strength("look_down")) * _controller_head_rot_speed) +
_relative_mouse.y)
else:
_last_look_input = Vector2.ZERO
_target_rotation.y = -_last_look_input.x * _mouse_sensitivity * delta
_yaw = lerp(_yaw, _target_rotation.y, delta * _rotation_Damping)
rotate_y(deg_to_rad(_yaw))
_target_rotation.x += _last_look_input.y * _mouse_sensitivity * delta
_target_rotation.x = clamp(_target_rotation.x, _head_rot_limits.x,
_head_rot_limits.y)
_pitch = lerp(_pitch, _target_rotation.x, delta* _rotation_Damping)
_camera_3d.rotation.x = -deg_to_rad(_pitch)
if(_relative_mouse.x != 0 or _relative_mouse.y !=0):
_relative_mouse = Vector2.ZERO

⏎

Let’s consider some of the key points here in the code:
1. The _process function happens once per frame.
2. If input is allowed, we record the latest head movement as a vector
_last_look_input, combining mouse displacement with keyboard input,
if any.
3. _target_rotation is a vector detailing where the rotation should aim
toward. This is what our head rotation would be if it were linked
directly to mouse movement.
4. The target rotation is clamped by rotational limits. This prevents the
head from rotating 360 degrees, or from turning upside down.

5. The rotate_y function turns the camera around the Y axis by a ‘lerped’
quantity, moving smoothly from a previous value to a new destination.
6. The rotation.x property controls up and down camera rotation; again, it
controlled by a lerped value and within rotation limits.
Before moving forward, let’s take our code for a test run. Click Play, and
your head rotation should now be working. See Figure 8.20.

FIGURE 8.20 Testing head rotation. ⏎

8.7 CODING CAMERA MOVEMENT
In this section, we’ll focus on player controller movement, complete with
physical collisions to ensure the player cannot and does not pass through
solid objects, like the floor and walls. This process involves the
move_and_slide function of CharacterBody3D, which we’ve seen before in
earlier chapters. Movement occurs during the _physics_process event,
called once per physics cycle. Consider Code Sample 8.6.

CODE SAMPLE 8.6
func _physics_process(delta):
#update movement
#check if movement is allowed. Useful to disable motion on game pauses etc
if(_input_enabled): _last_move_input = Vector2(Input.get_action_strength("left") + Input.get_action_strength("right"), Input.get_action_strength("down") + Input.get_action_strength("up"))
_current_speed = _walk_speed
if(Input.is_action_pressed("run") and is_on_floor() and !_is_crouching):
_current_speed = _run_speed
else:
_last_move_input = Vector2.ZERO
_target_velocity = (transform.basis.z * _last_move_input.y *
_current_speed) + (transform.basis.x * -_last_move_input.x * _current_speed)
if(!is_on_floor()):
_target_velocity.y -= _gravity
else:
if(Input.is_action_just_pressed("jump") and _input_enabled and ! _
is_crouching):
_target_velocity.y += 80
velocity = velocity.lerp(_target_velocity, clamp(delta *
_movement_damping, 0, 1))
move_and_slide()

⏎

Let’s discuss this code in more depth, as below.
1. First, we check if input is allowed. This might be disabled during a
cutscene or when the game is paused.
2. Second, we must determine the moving speed of the player to use for
the current frame. This is normally a choice between walking or
running speed, depending on whether the run is being held down by
the player.
3. Third, the Vector _target_velocity is calculated based on the local X
and local Z axis. Local X is projected from the right side of the
CharacterBody3D and it defines movement left and right (side steps).
The local Z axis is projected from the character’s nose and defines

forward and backward movement. This is calculated based on
combining player input with speed.
4. Fourth, we check if either jump or crouch is pressed.
5. Finally, we Lerp the velocity to add inertia and smooth motion, which
we pass on to the move_and_slide function.
You now have motion and rotation coded. Test this out again by pressing
play on the toolbar.

8.8 CODING CROUCHING BEHAVIOR
Crouching is a functional mode of the first-person controller. In this specific
mode, the player moves slower and is shorter in height, able to crawl
through more narrow spaces, like air ducts and ventilation shafts. Engaging
in this mode is caused by pressing and holding the C key. Consider the
following function to enable crouch behavior, which can be called from the
_process function. See Code Sample 8.7.

CODE SAMPLE 8.7
func _update_crouch(delta):
if _input_enabled: _is_crouching = false
_is_crouching = is_on_floor() and Input.is_action_pressed("crouch")
_walk_collision.disabled = _is_crouching
_crouch_collision.disabled = !_is_crouching
_camera_3d.position = _camera_3d.position.lerp(_camera_starting_pos (_crouch_amout * int(_is_crouching)), clamp(delta * _crouching_speed, 0 ,1))
_camera_resting_pos = _camera_3d.position

⏎

8.9 CODING HEAD BOB
Head bob is the sinusoidal tendency of the head to naturally move up and
then down repeatedly because the body is simply going through the
kinematic motions of walking. The movement of the head up and then
down creates a natural feel to the first-person controller, and it should be
enabled whenever you need to stress the humanity and dynamism of the
character. You may choose to accentuate the effect whenever you need to
focus on vulnerability or stressful situations. You may choose to reduce the
effect or remove it entirely when you need an ethereal, powerful, and
surreal character. Head Bob is, essentially, a minor modification to the Y
position of the camera, making sure the camera does not elevate so far as to
move above its own surrounding collider. Consider Code Sample 8.8, which
is another function to be called once per frame from the _process function.

CODE SAMPLE 8.8
func _update_head_bob(delta):
#if we are falling, there should be no head bob var bob_multiplier = 0
#update head bob if we are grounded
if is_on_floor():
if _last_move_input.length_squared() != 0:
bob_multiplier = _current_speed + 8
else:
bob_multiplier = 1
_bob_target = _camera_resting_pos + (_camera_3d.basis.y *
(sin(Time.get_ticks_msec() * _headbob_frequency * bob_multiplier) *
_headbob_amplitude * bob_multiplier))
_camera_3d.position = _camera_3d.position.lerp(_bob_target, delta)

⏎

8.10 COMPLETING THE FIRSTPERSON CONTROLLER
We’ve now arrived at our destination, which is the completion of the firstperson controller. By reaching this point, your controller can move forward,
backward, left, and right. It also has a freely rotating head to look in
different directions. It will collide with physical obstacles, and it can jump
and fall to the ground under gravity. Furthermore, we can run and crouch,
and we can also enable a head-bob for natural motion. See Code Sample 8.9
for the full source code for the first-person controller, and this is also
included in the course companion files.

CODE SAMPLE 8.9
extends CharacterBody3D
class_name PlayerController
@export var _walk_speed:float = 2
@export var _run_speed:float = 4
@export var _mouse_sensitivity:float = 2
@export var _controller_head_rot_speed:float = 90
@export var _capture_mouse:bool = true
@export var _head_rot_limits:Vector2 = Vector2(-80, 80)
@export var _movement_damping:float = 4
@export var _rotation_Damping:float = 10
@export var _headbob_amplitude:float = 0.03
@export var _headbob_frequency:float = 0.002
@export var _crouch_amout:Vector3 = Vector3(0, 0.5, 0)
@export var _crouching_speed:float=1000
@export var _input_enabled:bool = true
@export var _hide_player_mesh_on_start:bool = true
@onready var _mesh = $MeshInstance3D
@onready var _camera_3d = $Camera3D
@onready var _walk_collision = $CollisionShape3D_Standing
@onready var _crouch_collision = $CollisionShape3D_Crouching
var _relative_mouse:Vector2 = Vector2(0,0)
var _pitch:float = 0
var _yaw:float = 0
var _gravity:float = 0
var _last_move_input:Vector2 = Vector2.ZERO
var _last_look_input:Vector2 = Vector2.ZERO
var _target_velocity:Vector3 = Vector3.ZERO
var _target_rotation:Vector3 = Vector3.ZERO
var _camera_starting_pos:Vector3 = Vector3.ZERO
var _camera_resting_pos:Vector3 = Vector3.ZERO
var _bob_target:Vector3 = Vector3.ZERO
var _default_viewport_size:Vector2 = Vector2.ONE
var _is_crouching:bool = false
var _current_speed:float=0
func _ready():
#hides mesh representation of player at scene start
_mesh.visible = !_hide_player_mesh_on_start
_gravity = ProjectSettings.get_setting("physics/3d/default_gravity")
#get gravity strength from project settings
#gets the active viewport for this scene. This could be the game window, or
an embedded view
_default_viewport_size = get_viewport().size
#hide system mouse cursor?
if _capture_mouse:
Input.set_mouse_mode(Input.MOUSE_MODE_CAPTURED)
_camera_starting_pos = _camera_3d.position
_camera_resting_pos = _camera_starting_pos
_current_speed = _walk_speed
func _input(event):
if !(event is InputEventMouseMotion): return
#compare window to viewport size
#this can be different. For example, if a small game world is stretched
to fill the window
var scaled_view:Vector2 = Vector2.ZERO

scaled_view.x = get_window().size.x / _default_viewport_size.x
scaled_view.y = get_window().size.y / _default_viewport_size.y
#measure how much mouse cursor has moved, for controlling head motion
#godot does not scale the mouse motion if the window is shrunk or
enlarged, so let's scale it here
#this ensures the mouse movement behaves at the same speed for every
resolution
_relative_mouse.x = event.relative.x * scaled_view.x
_relative_mouse.y = event.relative.y * scaled_view.y
func _physics_process(delta):
#update movement #check if movement is allowed. Useful to disable motion on
game pauses etc
if(_input_enabled):
_last_move_input = Vector2(-Input.get_action_strength("left") +
Input.get_action_strength("right"), -Input.get_action_strength("down") +
Input.get_action_strength("up"))
_current_speed = _walk_speed
if(Input.is_action_pressed("run") and is_on_floor() and !_is_crouching):
_current_speed = _run_speed
else:
_last_move_input = Vector2.ZERO
_target_velocity = (transform.basis.z * _last_move_input.y * _current_speed)
+ (transform.basis.x * -_last_move_input.x * _current_speed)
if(!is_on_floor()):
_target_velocity.y -= _gravity
else:
if(Input.is_action_just_pressed("jump") and _input_enabled and
!_is_crouching):
_target_velocity.y += 80
velocity = velocity.lerp(_target_velocity, clamp(delta * _movement_damping,
0, 1))
move_and_slide()
func _process(delta):
#update head rotation
if(_input_enabled):
_last_look_input = Vector2(((-Input.get_action_strength("look_left") +
Input.get_action_strength("look_right")) * _controller_head_rot_speed) +
_relative_mouse.x, ((-Input.get_action_strength("look_up") +
Input.get_action_strength("look_down")) * _controller_head_rot_speed) +
_relative_mouse.y)
else:
_last_look_input = Vector2.ZERO
_target_rotation.y = -_last_look_input.x * _mouse_sensitivity * delta
_yaw = lerp(_yaw, _target_rotation.y, delta * _rotation_Damping)
rotate_y(deg_to_rad(_yaw))
_target_rotation.x += _last_look_input.y * _mouse_sensitivity * delta;
_target_rotation.x = clamp(_target_rotation.x, _head_rot_limits.x,
_head_rot_limits.y)
_pitch = lerp(_pitch, _target_rotation.x, delta* _rotation_Damping)
_camera_3d.rotation.x = -deg_to_rad(_pitch)
if(_relative_mouse.x != 0 or _relative_mouse.y !=0):
_relative_mouse = Vector2.ZERO
_update_head_bob(delta)
_update_crouch(delta)
func _update_head_bob(delta):
#if we are falling, there should be no head bob
var bob_multiplier = 0
#update head bob if we are grounded
if is_on_floor():

if _last_move_input.length_squared() != 0:
bob_multiplier = _current_speed + 8
else:
bob_multiplier = 1
_bob_target = _camera_resting_pos + (_camera_3d.basis.y *
(sin(Time.get_ticks_msec() * _headbob_frequency * bob_multiplier) *
_headbob_amplitude * bob_multiplier))
_camera_3d.position = _camera_3d.position.lerp(_bob_target, delta)
func _update_crouch(delta):
if _input_enabled: _
is_crouching = false
_is_crouching = is_on_floor() and Input.is_action_pressed("crouch")
_walk_collision.disabled = _is_crouching
_crouch_collision.disabled = !_is_crouching
_camera_3d.position = _camera_3d.position.lerp(_camera_starting_pos (_crouch_amout * int(_is_crouching)), clamp(delta * _crouching_speed, 0 ,1))
_camera_resting_pos = _camera_3d.position

⏎

Now press play and enjoy your completed first-person controller. See
Figure 8.21.

FIGURE 8.21 The completed first person controller. ⏎

8.11 FEATURES TO ADD A
CHALLENGE
This section focuses on some potential improvements that you could make
independently to the first-person controller to expand its functionality for a
variety of game genres, and even for purposes beyond games. Let’s
consider some of the most important improvements.
Interaction
Interaction is the ability of the player to approach objects in the world
and ‘interact’ with them. This may be as straightforward as
approaching a closed door and then pressing a button on the keyboard
to open it, but it may include more complex interactions too, such as
lassoing a rope around a distant tree branch and swinging to a moving
platform. Interaction involves adding detection points around objects
and the controller, such as through Area Nodes, to determine when the
controller enters the proximity of an interactable. Once detected, you’ll
need to establish the kind of interaction needed. Decisions as to which
objects or nodes are responsible for the interaction behaviors are
engineering decisions. One approach is to use the Command Design
Pattern, which is an approach to coding games.
Inventory
An additional feature of the first-person controller, commonly found in
puzzle and adventure games, is the inventory. It essentially represents
the very deep pockets of the player. If the player collects a key, it goes
into the inventory; if they collect a medi-kit, it goes into the inventory.
For this reason, the inventory is a memory for keeping track of
everything the player has ever collected and which is immediately
accessible to them right now. At first sight, the inventory seems easy to

implement: it’s surely an array of objects. But a closer inspection
reveals that things are not so straightforward. For example, if the
player moves from one level to another, the inventory usually goes
with them. If the player restores the game from an earlier session via a
saved state, the inventory is also restored. Thus, the inventory is
normally a persistent system. That is, inventory data survives the
temporariness of any single play session, and it lives across multiple.
To create this, a developer would normally save data to a file. Godot
offers multiple ways to do this, including JSON.
Embodiment
The first-person controller that we’ve created is ultimately a floating
camera nested inside a collider. There’s nothing wrong with that, per
se. Many games work successfully like that. Historically, the majority
of first-person controllers have worked that way. But it’s not the only
way. You can also create a character mesh to accompany the controller,
allowing the player to see the character’s hands, legs, body, and feet.
Doing this gives the first-person controller a deeper sense of
embodiment, but it comes at the price of both technical complexity and
psychology. If the player can see themselves in first person, it changes
how the player relates to the character. Without a body, the player
could imagine themselves as a protagonist. But with a body, the player
may need to make an additional jump into the shoes of another, seen
through their eyes.
Weapons
Many first-person games involve a hand at the bottom center of the
screen, clutching onto a weapon. This is usually a pistol, rifle, rocket
launcher, or chainsaw. The creation of weapons entails a weapon

system, which is an inventory of weapons, allowing the player to
change from one to another and reload them.
Reactions
The world is full of dangers, hazards, healing potions, and blatant nearmisses. All of these things have an important effect on the player, and
the player must respond appropriately. The response here refers not to
the player’s actions or mechanics, but to the way that a first-person
controller automatically behaves to signal these events to the player.
The screen might shake and flash red when hit, the field of view might
distort and then heal, and the vision might become scrambled when
influenced by a tractor beam from a nearby spaceship. As a result,
many first-person controllers are usually accompanied by postprocessing systems.

8.12 CONCLUSION
In this chapter, we created a first-person controller that could be used for a
walking simulator-type game. There are many further directions this
controller could be taken, but even by creating the controller that we have
already, there are many interesting explorative experiences that we could
make. The next chapter moves forward and considers a range of tips and
tricks for working in Godot.
OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER 9
Godot Tips and Tricks
DOI: 10.1201/9781003484523-9

This chapter is a helpful selection box of tutorials for common and
important tasks when making games and applithe name of the active camera
to the consolecations using Godot. These tips and the name of the active
camera to the consoletechniques do not properly belong in any chapter
alone, but they are nonetheless useful applications of many ideas and
concepts that we’ve seen already simply by exploring scene creation across
2D, 3D, and UI. The techniques in this chapter are presented in no special
order, and it’s likely that you’ll need to make use of them all at some point
during your career. What is, perhaps, both surprising and impressive is how
easy and straightforward Godot, as an engine, makes some of these
techniques compared to some other engines. So, let’s get started.

9.1 MOUSE PICKING
Mouse picking simply refers to being able to select objects in the scene
during gameplay, especially in 3D scenes, by using the mouse cursor and
clicking. This may seem simple at first sight, but on closer inspection, there
are quite a few complexities to contend with. For example, how should one
detect when the cursor clicks on a 3D mesh? What if another 3D object is in
front of the object you want to select? What happens if you click when a
scene has multiple cameras, which view the same object from different

angles? All of these considerations, and more, make object selection by the
mouse (or even by tapping) more complex than one might first think. Here,
we’ll consider the following example scene, as shown in Figure 9.1. This
scene features a green cube on a blue floor, seen by a 3D camera. The cube
is configured with an Area3D node and a Box collider shape.

FIGURE 9.1 A basic scene with a selectable cube object. ⏎
The Area3D node features an important signal for detecting clicks and
other types of input. Select the Area3D node in the scene, and from the
Signals tab of the Inspector, you’ll see the Input_Event signal. This signal
executes for any relevant input event. That is, if the cursor hovers over the
object, the object will be notified of any mouse events, so long as the cursor
remains hovered. See Figure 9.2.

FIGURE 9.2 The InputEvent signal will execute for any input
relevant events on an object. ⏎
Now, attach the following script in Code Sample 9.1 onto your object;
that is, onto the Area3D object. By doing this, your object will detect mouse
clicks. In our example here, we’ll print the name of the active camera to the
console.

CODE SAMPLE 9.1
extends Area3D
func _ready() -> void:
connect("input_event", _on_click)
func _on_click(_cam:Node, _input_event:InputEvent, _event_pos:Vector3,
_norm:Vector3, _shape_idx:int):
if _input_event is InputEventMouseButton:
if _input_event.pressed:
print(_cam.name)

⏎

NOTE. In a scene where multiple cameras are active at once, such as
split-screen games, you’ll probably need to check the camera name or

group during the event to ensure the click or interaction happened from
the relevant camera.

9.2 CUSTOM RESOURCES
With some game types and genres, you’ll work with lots of data. An
example is a competitive trading card game, or a battle card game, where
different cards in a deck represent different collections of statistics, such as
strength, mana, and speed. Likewise, an RPG game may feature many
character types, from warriors to mages, and each instance of a type may
share many different and complex properties. In these cases, you could
select each instance in the scene and use the Inspector to set the object’s
properties variable by variable, as needed. Setting health, mana, speed, and
so on. However, Godot allows you to create your own custom resource to
hold many properties as a preset, which can be assigned to an object
instance, and more as needed. Thereby, the data can be shared and
referenced by many. Let’s see an example of this. First, create a new script
file derived from the resource class, as shown in Code Sample 9.2.

CODE SAMPLE 9.2
&#Data for a custom character type in an example game
extends Resource
class_name CustomCharData
@export var CharacterType:String
@export_range (0,100) var Strength:int
@export_range (0,100) var Speed:int
@export_range (0,100) var Mana:int
@export_range (0,100) var Health:int
@export var BlendColor:Color

⏎

Next, create a new resource based on this script. If the script were defining
data for a character type, such as a mage or a warrior, then each resource

would represent a unique type – one resource for each. See Figure 9.3.

FIGURE 9.3 Creating a new Resource based on a custom type. ⏎
Now, by selecting the newly created Resource in the FileSystem dock,
you can set its properties in the Inspector. Remember, any objects that
reference this resource will be updated in all scenes everywhere, making
this a great option for sharing data. See Figure 9.4.

FIGURE 9.4 Setting properties for the new resource. ⏎
The remaining question now is how does a single object in a scene, such
as a character mesh, access and reference a custom resource asset, such as
character data, reading values from it, such as health? See Code Sample 9.3
below.

CODE SAMPLE 9.3
extends Node3D
@export var Starting_Data:CustomCharData
func _ready() -> void:
print("My starting health is " + var_to_str(Starting_Data.Health))

⏎

Code Sample 9.3 above allows you to attach character data, as a projectwide resource, to a specific character instance in a scene. This means that if,
later, you decide to change the core properties of a character type, you can

edit the original resource and thereby have the changes propagate
everywhere to all instances. See Figure 9.5.

FIGURE 9.5 Attaching resource data to an instance. ⏎

9.3 MIXING 2D AND 3D SCENES
We’ve seen already that Godot supports three major scene types, namely
2D, 3D, and UI. 2D scenes have a Node2D as their root by default, 3D have
a Node3D, and UI has a Control node. In 2D scenes, nodes live in a
Cartesian space of two dimensions: X and Y, corresponding to the
horizontal and vertical axes. 3D scenes are measured in three dimensions,
with an additional Z axis for the forward and backward direction. And UIs
are, essentially, in a 2D space, but with additional, precision controls to
attach scene nodes to the edges of the screen. In many cases, these scene
types never meet: a 2D side-scrolling platformer game with 2D sprites, for
example, doesn’t usually contain 3D elements, as character meshes, and a
Main Menu UI screen doesn’t usually feature gameplay, such as shooting

and jumping, in either 2D or 3D. However, there are important gameplay
scenarios where scenes do seem to blend with one another and must do so.
For example, first-person 3D games often feature a HUD (i.e., Heads Up
Display), which may contain an overhead map, health bars, and elements
presented as UI or 2D elements fixed to the screen. Similarly, a 2D Menu
Screen for character creation and customization might feature an adaptive
3D character, one that changes and updates based on settings that the player
controls, such as hair color, physical size, and costume. In all these cases,
and more, different scene types co-exist with each other in real time. Let’s
see how to set up these kinds of scene connections. Specifically, we’ll
consider two main cases.

9.3.1 Inserting UI Scenes into 3D Scenes
Let’s start with the most common case, displaying a UI scene inside a 3D
scene. Some common examples of this would be to show a health bar over a
3D character, or to show a high score or an on-screen speedometer for a 3D
racing game, or even a mini-map view for a first-person shooter. There are
many commonplace situations in games where this would be useful. So,
let’s get started and see the methodology, which scales from simple to
complex scenes. To start, create a simple UI scene and a simple 3D scene.
Consider Figures 9.6 and 9.7, which are our starting points. You can use
different scenes if preferred.

FIGURE 9.6 A UI scene. ⏎

FIGURE 9.7 A 3D scene. ⏎
Next, open the 3D scene in the editor. We should always start with the
destination scene. Let’s create a surface inside which the UI scene will be
shown as a texture. To do this, create a new MeshInstance3D and generate a
Plane. See Figure 9.8.

FIGURE 9.8 Creating a plane mesh for a UI view. ⏎
Now we’ll create a SubViewport Node. This renders the contents of its
child nodes to an internal texture, as opposed to the screen directly. By
itself, the node doesn’t show anything. Rather, it renders its children into
pixels inside a texture, which is hidden. You can use the SubViewport
rollout in the Inspector to choose the Size of the texture. Here, I’ll set the
size to 512 by 512 pixels. The size should be no larger than you need. See
Figure 9.9.

FIGURE 9.9 Setting the render texture size. ⏎

Next, drag and drop the UI scene from the FileSystem into the Scene as a
child node of the SubViewport. Make sure it’s a child of the SubViewport.
At this point, the display of the 3D view in the editor may change as it tries
to show you the contents of the UI scene. You can easily return to the
normal 3D view by selecting one of the 3D nodes from the Scene panel. See
Figure 9.10.

FIGURE 9.10 Adding a UI scene to the 3D scene. ⏎

FIGURE 9.11 Creating a new standard material.

In this configuration, the SubViewport node is now rendering its children
to a texture. Let’s now configure the newly created Plane object to display
the SubViewport texture on its surface to show the UI in the scene. To do
this, select the plane mesh and, from the Inspector, open the Surface
Material Override field. From the drop-down of slot 0, choose New
StandardMaterial3D, to create a new material.
For the ViewportTexture to work correctly and show the UI scene, you’ll
first need to scroll to the bottom of the material and enable the Local to
Scene checkbox. This ensures the material is not a project-wide resource but
a scene-specific resource. This will be needed to reference the scenespecific viewport texture in the next step. See Figure 9.12.

FIGURE 9.12 Creating a Local to Scene material. ⏎
Next, expand the material’s Albedo slot, and from the texture field dropdown, choose New Viewport Texture. See Figure 9.13.

FIGURE 9.13 Creating a new Viewport texture. ⏎

FIGURE 9.14 Connecting Albedo to the Viewport Texture.

After choosing New ViewportTexture from the drop-down, expand the
ViewportPath field and click the Assign… button. Then choose the
SubViewport object. When you do this, a connection is made between the
Albedo Texture and the internal ViewportTexture that is generated by the
SubViewport.
And that’s it! You did it. Your textured quad is now displaying the
contents of the selected UI scene, using the Viewport. See Figure 9.15.

FIGURE 9.15 Rendering the UI on a 3D surface in a 3D scene. ⏎

9.3.2 Inserting 3D Scenes into 2D Scenes
Now we’ll try another use case. Specifically, showing a 3D scene inside a
2D scene. The process is very similar to showing a UI scene in a 3D scene,
as we did above. To start, let’s create a new 2D scene and add a Camera2D

object. Then we’ll add a MeshInstance2D. This is a 2D mesh object. See
Figure 9.16.

FIGURE 9.16 Creating a Mesh2D object. ⏎
Next, move to the Inspect and click on the Mesh drop-down. From the
drop-down, choose PlaneMesh. See Figure 9.17.

FIGURE 9.17 Create a new Plane Mesh. ⏎
Now set the width and height of the mesh to 100x100. This is set in
pixels. And then set the Orientation to Face Z to align the mesh to the
camera in the 2D plane. See Figure 9.18.

FIGURE 9.18 Creating a new Plane Mesh aligned to the camera.
⏎
Next, create a SubViewport Node set to a size of 512x512, and make the
3D scene a child of the SubViewport node, using the same type of setup that
we created earlier. See Figure 9.19.

FIGURE 9.19 Creating a SubViewport node. ⏎

Finally, set the Texture field of the MeshInstance2D node to be a
ViewportTexture. Select the SubViewport node, and the 3D scene will
display on the 2D mesh. See Figure 9.20.

FIGURE 9.20 Adding a Viewport Texture to the MeshInstance2D
node. ⏎
If you want the scene background to be transparent, return to the
SubViewport node, and enable TransparentBG from the Inspector. See
Figure 9.21.

FIGURE 9.21 Enabling a transparent background. ⏎

9.4 USING CURVES
This section explores curves in Godot. The curve is not a node like a
MeshInstance, but a special type of object available in GDScript. The curve
object allows you to plot points on a graph by using the Inspector, and then
a smooth curve is generated between the points, which can be sampled in
code along the horizontal axis to read the corresponding Y value. Curves
are especially useful for creating dynamic animations, smooth motion, and
for reading statistical data, such as character stats and vehicle metrics. In
this example here, we’ll use it to repeatedly move a 3D object up and down
smoothly, such as a moving platform in a platformer game. Let’s get started.
To begin and explore the workflow, we’ll use a basic 3D scene, which
features a ground plane and a cube mesh on top. We’ll be moving the cube
up and down on the Y axis, based on a curve. Consider the following 3D
scene in Figure 9.22.

FIGURE 9.22 Starting with a 3D scene; a cube on a floor mesh.
⏎
Now consider the following code in Sample 9.4, which should be
attached to the cube mesh in the scene.

CODE SAMPLE 9.4
extends MeshInstance3D
@export var main_curve:Curve
@export var sample_speed:float = 1
var _sample_point:float = 0
func _process(delta: float) -> void:
_sample_point += delta * sample_speed
position.y = main_curve.sample(wrapf(_sample_point, 0, 1))

⏎

The above code features a Curve object, which is used later by the Sample
function. The Sample function will return the Y value of the graph by
accepting the X value as input. See Figure 9.23 to create a curve in the
Inspector. Click on the graph to add points, and then click and drag the
points to move them. Be sure to set the Max Value to control the upper limit
of the graph.

FIGURE 9.23 Creating the interpolation curve. ⏎
Click Play on the toolbar and watch the cube move up and down in the
scene. Remember to add a 3D camera in the scene to display its contents in
the viewport. See Figure 9.24.

FIGURE 9.24 Interpolating mesh, up and down. ⏎

9.5 LOCALIZATION – TRANSLATING
YOUR GAMES
You’ll probably want to translate your game into other languages, such as
Spanish, French, Norwegian, or many others. Or, at least, you’ll want to
have the potential to do so without facing the tedious prospect of scanning
through your entire project for every element of text and translating it
separately for each and every language. This is especially important for
games featuring a lot of text, such as RPG games with quest descriptions
and details or narrative games with closed captions. Godot offers a range of
useful features for localizing your games, and I recommend that you build
localization into your games at the earliest opportunity. Let’s see how it
works. First, you’ll need to create a Comma Separated Value (CSV) file,

which contains all text data in all languages for your game. This file will be
structured into key-value pairs. The Key defines the kind of text being
specified (e.g., GameTitle, PlayButtonText, OptionMenu1Text, and so on).
And the Value field defines all the variations for this element in each
language, in a structured order. Let’s see an example in Code Sample 9.5.

CODE SAMPLE 9.5
KEYS,en,es,no
GREETING,Hello!,Hola!,hallo
NEW_GAME,New Game,nuevo juego,nytt spill
QUIT,Exit,salida,gå
LOAD_GAME,Load,cargar juego,laste spillet

⏎

The first line defines all the named columns for the file, and it also defines
the order in which data will be presented. The remaining lines are all
records in a single database, one record per line. Each line expresses a
unique element in the game, such as the text for a button, the text for a
HUD element, or a single caption within a narrative sequence. The key
(which is the first column) is the global name across the project for
referring to the element, and all subsequent values are the localized versions
of that field. To import this data, you should drag and drop it as a single
CSV file into the FileSystem Tab. See Figure 9.25. As the file is imported,
Godot will automatically generate separate .translation files, one for each
language.

FIGURE 9.25 Importing localization data. ⏎
Next, you’ll need to add the generated localization files to the Godot
Project Settings. To do this, choose Project > Project Settings from the
application menu. Then select the Localization tab. See Figure 9.26.

FIGURE 9.26 Access localization data. ⏎
Now choose Add, and select all the translation files to add them. Godot
will recognize each as a separate language localization. See Figure 9.27.

FIGURE 9.27 Adding all languages to the project. ⏎
You’re now ready to localize your game through GDScript. To start, if
you need to determine which language your OS is currently in, you can run
the following code in Sample 9.6:

CODE SAMPLE 9.6
var OS_Language:String = OS.get_locale_language()

⏎

The get_locale_language will return a string in a domain code. For
example, ‘en’ means English, ‘fr’ is French, and ‘es’ is Spanish. For a full
list of domain codes, you can visit the following page at the Godot online

documentation:
https://docs.godotengine.org/en/stable/tutorials/i18n/locales.html#doclocales.
You can set the game language using the following code in Sample 9.7.

CODE SAMPLE 9.7
//’en’ can be replaced for any domain code
TranslationServer.set_locale("en")

⏎

After you’ve set the language, you can always retrieve the correct, localized
string for each string element, using the following code in Sample 9.8.

CODE SAMPLE 9.8
var translated_string:String = tr("GREETING")

⏎

The tr function will return the translated string for any named key.
NOTE. More information on translating your games can be found at the
Godot online documentation here:
https://docs.godotengine.org/en/stable/tutorials/assets_pipeline/importing_tr
anslations.html#games-and-internationalization.

9.6 PAUSING GAMES
Pausing games is an interesting but often complicated process, primarily
because most indie developers don’t really consider pausing a game until
much further along the development process. Pause behavior can be
implemented in one of two main ways: one is through an entirely artificial

process whereby you code all your functions and classes to recognize and
adapt to an established pause system that you identify and plan in advance.
This is about building your classes so that each object knows if and when
the game is paused and then responds as needed. The second method,
shown here, is a ‘true pause’ in that it causes the game tree, physics, and all
your nodes to actually pause. Consider the code in Sample 9.9. This code
should be an auto-load object, and it will become a singleton that you can
use to pause your game as and when needed.

CODE SAMPLE 9.9
extends Node
#-----------------------------------------#Use a properties system
var pause:bool: get = _get_pause, set = _set_pause
#Can the game be unpaused manually
var _pause_manual_restore:bool = false
#Can the game be paused at all?
var can_pause:bool = false
#Can the game be paused or unpaused by change in Window focus
@export var pause_deactivate:bool = true
#Event to fire when pause status changes
signal on_pause_changed
#-----------------------------------------func _set_pause(_new_value):
if !can_pause: return
_pause_manual_restore = _new_value
pause = _new_value
get_tree().paused = _new_value
emit_signal("on_pause_changed")
#-----------------------------------------func _get_pause(): return pause
#-----------------------------------------func _notification(_source):
if !pause_deactivate or _pause_manual_restore:
return
if _source == MainLoop.NOTIFICATION_APPLICATION_FOCUS_IN:
pause = false
get_tree().paused = false
elif _source == MainLoop.NOTIFICATION_APPLICATION_FOCUS_OUT:
pause = true
get_tree().paused = true
#------------------------------------------

⏎

You may not want every node to pause during a ‘Pause’. For example, when
the game is paused, you may wish to display a UI menu showing a Resume
button, which can be clicked to restart gameplay. This button, which needs
to detect and respond to the click, should not be truly paused, as it needs to
be ‘alert’. Godot offers us a powerful setting for controlling whether a node
is affected by a pause. This is the Process Mode. To ensure that an object is
not affected by a pause, be sure to set the Process Mode to Always. See
Figure 9.28.

FIGURE 9.28 Changing the pause mode of an object. ⏎
NOTE. More information on Pausing Games can be found at the
Godot online documentation here:

https://docs.godotengine.org/en/latest/tutorials/scripting/pausing_game
s.html.

9.7 DEFERRED CALLS
Imagine this scenario in GDScript: you’re iterating through a fixed loop of
100 items, and then, suddenly, someone removes one of the items during
the loop. You expected 100 items, but now there are only 99. This is a
problem. The loop could extend too far. Sometimes in Godot, this kind of
problem can happen during the _ready, _process, and _physics_process
calls. During these events, scene changes or the addition or removal of
nodes to the tree can cause problems. To protect against this, Godot offers
the call_deferred function. This function queues up your function call until
the next Idle Time. That is, when the current frame completes, the engine
can take a ‘breather’ to prepare for the next frame. This ensures that your
selected code only executes outside of critical system loops. Consider Code
Sample 9.10, which calls a function named end_level.

CODE SAMPLE 9.10
call_deferred("end_level")

⏎

9.8 PROCESSING RESOURCES
Each resource in Godot can be automated and customized through
GDScript at import time. Consider the following example: we have a single
GLTF mesh file exported from Blender and imported into Godot. This file
contains many meshes, and we want to separate each mesh into a separate
mesh resource file, one mesh per resource file. This is useful because we

can access each mesh as a separate entity. Now, we could export the meshes
separately and manually from Blender, one at a time. But this would be
tedious. Instead, we could write a custom GDScript to automate the process
inside Godot. Here, we’ll consider how to achieve this. First, Figure 9.29
shows the mesh file to be imported, which contains many meshes.

FIGURE 9.29 Importing a file with many meshes inside. ⏎
Once imported, create the following script in Sample 9.11, named
mesh_modifier.gd.

CODE SAMPLE 9.11
@tool #tool to cycle through all meshes in an imported file and separate them
into individual resources extends EditorScenePostImport
class_name MeshSeparator
var _dir var _root:Node
var _mesh_inst:MeshInstance3D = null
#run when the resource is imported
func _post_import(scene: Node):
_dir = DirAccess.open("res://meshes") #opens folder
_root = scene _loop_meshes(scene)
return scene
#separates each mesh
func _loop_meshes(node):
if node is MeshInstance3D:
var path_str := _get_parent_folder_recursive(node)
DirAccess.make_dir_recursive_absolute("res://meshes/" + path_str)
_mesh_inst = node.duplicate()
_set_owner(_mesh_inst, _mesh_inst)
_process_second_UV()
var packed_scene := PackedScene.new()
packed_scene.pack(_mesh_inst)
ResourceSaver.save(packed_scene,"res://meshes/" + path_str + "/" +
_mesh_inst.name + ".tscn") #save to file
for child in node.get_children():
_loop_meshes(child)
func _get_parent_folder_recursive(n:Node, s:String="") -> String:
var parent_node:Node = n.get_parent()
if parent_node == null:
return s
var _modified_string = parent_node.name + "/" + s
return _get_parent_folder_recursive(parent_node, _modified_string)
func _set_owner(n:Node, p:Node):
if not n == p: n.set_owner(p)
for child in n.get_children():
_set_owner(child,p)
func _process_second_UV():
#store the original mesh
var orig_mesh = _mesh_inst.mesh as Mesh
#make a new version
_mesh_inst.mesh = ArrayMesh.new()
for _id in range(orig_mesh.get_surface_count()):
_mesh_inst.mesh.add_surface_from_arrays(Mesh.PRIMITIVE_TRIANGLES,
orig_mesh.surface_get_arrays(_id))
var old_mat = orig_mesh.surface_get_material(_id)
_mesh_inst.mesh.surface_set_material(_id, old_mat)
_mesh_inst.mesh.lightmap_unwrap(_mesh_inst.transform,
ProjectSettings.get_setting("rendering/lightmapping/primitive_meshes/texel_size"

))
_mesh_inst.use_in_baked_light = true

⏎

On its own, the above code has no effect, but it can be selected and applied
to an imported resource. To use this code, select the imported mesh file in
the FileSystem dock, which contains many meshes, and then view the
Import tab. This displays file-specific properties for the imported mesh. See
Figure 9.30.

FIGURE 9.30 Importing a file with many meshes inside. ⏎
From the Import menu, scroll close to the bottom, to the Import Script
section, and in the Path field, enter the fully qualified path name to your
script file. See Figure 9.31.

FIGURE 9.31 Selecting the script to attach. ⏎
Finally, click the Reimport button. When you do this, the script will
execute, running for the selected resource. See Figure 9.32.

FIGURE 9.32 Run for the selected resource. ⏎
All the meshes in the selected mesh file will then be extracted as separate
resources. Consider Figure 9.33.

FIGURE 9.33 Separating a file into multiple meshes. ⏎

9.9 EXPORTING PROJECTS
Exporting a project is often known, in other engines, as Building or
Compiling. It refers to the process of converting a project into a standalone
form that can run ‘by itself’ as an application, outside of the game engine.
Each Export has a Target or Platform, which refers to the operating system
that you’re making the export for. This can be Windows, Linux, Mac, Web,
Android, iOS, and others. It can also include consoles under specific
conditions. The dream scenario for most game developers is that the export
process is simply a one-click process for any platform and that the export
will always work flawlessly whatever the operating system. I call this a

dream scenario because the reality is nothing like that. In practice,
exporting is complex. Every platform requires setup and platform-specific
configuration before the build can be made at all, and even after the build
has been created, you may still have further steps to pursue for the game to
run properly or optimally. Rather than go through every platform and every
setting for every case, I will focus here on how to make a Windows build.
This is the place to start if you’re building for the first time. So, let’s get
started. First, select Editor > Manage Export Templates from the
application menu. This displays the Export Template menu, as shown in
Figure 9.34.

FIGURE 9.34 Viewing the installed build templates. ⏎
Next, click the button Download and Install. This downloads all the
necessary functionality into the Godot Editor to create builds. See Figure
9.35.

FIGURE 9.35 Confirming that the export templates are installed.
⏎
Once installed, you can then make a build of your game. To do this,
select Project > Export from the application menu. See Figure 9.36. This
displays the Export dialog.

FIGURE 9.36 Confirming that the export templates are installed.
⏎
From the Export Dialog, click the Add button and choose the Windows
platform. Here, you can add potentially as many platforms as you want to
build. See Figure 9.37.

FIGURE 9.37 Choosing a build platform. ⏎
Next, select the CPU architecture that you’re building for, which varies
depending on the age of the computer and the hardware. Then scroll to the
bottom and click Export Project. Choose a destination location, and then
your application will be built, alongside any externally referenced files. If
additional files are generated, in addition to the executable, then these
should normally be shipped with the executable. See Figure 9.38.

FIGURE 9.38 Building an executable. ⏎

9.10 CONCLUSION
This chapter considered a broad range of powerful tips and tricks for Godot.
In reaching this point, you have explored the fundamentals of the engine,
alongside many tools and features for more advanced use that can be
deployed for a range of project types.
OceanofPDF.com

Index
Pages in italics refer to figures.

A
Absolute Path, 128–129
Actors, 34
Advanced Import tool, 133–134
AssetLib button, 54–55

B
Backface Culling, 42, 222
benefits and limitations
assets and libraries, 12–13
career potential, 15–16
console exports, 14–15
language support, 13–14
rendering, realism, and performance, 14
third-party integrations, 13
Blender and Godot live link editing
Absolute Path, 128, 129
advantages and disadvantages, 132–133
Blender Path field, 125–126
Editor Settings dialog, 125, 126
FileSystem hierarchy, 128

installation location, 125, 126
mesh name suffixes, 131, 132
Project Settings dialog, 127, 127
re-enabling, 128, 128
saving, 128, 130

C
call_deferred function, 346
Comma Separated Value (CSV), 341
commit command, 71
Commit History, 72
Compression option, 86, 86

D
Display Scale setting, 21

E
Editor Preferences setting, 29–34
accessing, 30, 31
application paths, 33, 33
enabling multi-window, 31, 32
Navigation Scheme, 33
scene types, 29
tweaking tabular display, 31, 32
updating control scheme, 34, 34
emit function, 173

F
FileSystem dock, 26–27, 61, 61–64, 62, 64
First Scene creation, 27–29
Free Software Foundation (FSF), 7

G
game critical events
_physics_process event, 150–151, 151
_process event, 148–150
_ready function, 147–148
Start function, 148
_unhandled_input event, 151–152
game mechanics
build environment scene, 298–300, 298–300
build player character, 300–305, 300–305
capsule mesh, 302, 302
CharacterBody3D object, 301, 301
coding camera movement, 313–315
coding head bob, 315–316
coding head rotation, 309, 309–313
configuring player controls, 306, 306
crouching behavior, 315
embodiment, 323
first-person controller, 316–322, 322
Godot project creation, 295–297, 296–297
interaction, 322

inventory, 323
lighting setup, 298, 299
move_and_slide function, 315
Player Controller script, 307–309, 307–309
_process function, 312
reactions, 324
_target_rotation function, 312
weapons, 323
GDScript, 14
GDScript language
exporting variables, 161–162, 162
game critical events
_physics_process event, 150–151, 151
_process event, 148–150
_ready function, 147–148
Start function, 148
_unhandled_input event, 151–152
Hello World program creation
accessing Godot Code Editor, 143, 144
Create a Script dialog, 141, 142
FileSystem Dock, 142–143, 143
_ready function, 145
running active scene, 145, 145
view Output panel, 146, 146–147
nodes and groups
get_node function, 174
grouping nodes, 174–177, 175–177
searching groups, 177

overview, 140–141
reading player input
accessing Project Settings, 153, 153
creating axis controls, 158, 159–160, 160–161
Input Map tab, 153–154, 154–157
reading button press, 157–158
signals and observer pattern
connecting a signal in code, 169–172, 171
creating custom signals, 172–173, 173
emit function, 173
Game Timer creation, 163–169
Marker3D object, 165, 165, 170, 171
Signal Connection Window, 167–168, 167
timeout signal, 166, 172
__Timer.connect function, 171
Timer node creation, 164, 164
VisibleOnScreenNotifier3D node, 172
Wait Time setting, 164, 164
using C# language, 141
Generate Mipmaps option, 87
.gitattributes file, 78
Git Client, 66
.gitignore file, 77–78, 77
git lfs ls-files command, 79
Git Repo, 66–69
Git version control
cloud storage, 65
commit command, 71

Commit History, 72
game development, 64
.gitattributes file, 78
.gitignore file, 77–78
git status command, 71
installation, 66
large files with LFS, 77–79
project folder creation, 66–67
Remote Repositories creation, 74–76, 75
Repository creation, 66–67, 68
revert command, 72–74
staging area, 70
working tree, 69, 70
Gizmo, 46, 47
Gnu Privacy Guard (GPG), 17
Godot
asset importing, 3
benefits and limitations, 11–16
coding and testing, 4
community, 10
configuration settings, 19–21, 20–21
cross-platform engines, 7–8
documentation, 10–11
downloading, 17–18
exporting, 4–5
free software, 7
interoperability, 11
marble runner game, 2, 2

open source, 5–6
overview, 1–2
preparation, 16–17
quick search, 5
running first time, 18
scene construction, 3–4
startup screen, 18, 19
support option, 9–11
tried and tested, 9
2D and 3D games, 8–9
typical game, 2
unpack, 18
Grid Snapping, 53

H
Hello World program creation
accessing Godot Code Editor, 143, 144
Create a Script dialog, 141, 142
FileSystem Dock, 142–143, 143
_ready function, 145
running active scene, 145, 145
view Output panel, 146, 146–147
Hidden Object games, 86
hierarchies and 3D scenes
Actors, 34
add child object, 35, 36
BoxMesh, 37

default Node3D, 34, 37
GameObjects, 34
MeshInstance3D, 35, 36, 37–38
procedural box, 37, 39
root Node, 34

I
import mesh
Advanced Import tool, 133, 134
enabling external materials, 137, 138
extracting materials, 138, 139
Root Scale setting, 135, 135
save paths, 136, 137
scale setting, 133–135
separating materials, 136–138
separating meshes, 135–136, 136
InputEvent signal, 326, 327
Inspector Dock, 27
Integrated Development Environment (IDE), 2
interface, Godot
accessing Project Settings, 57, 58
AssetLib button, 54, 55
downloading Snappy, 55, 56
Editor Preferences setting
accessing, 30, 31
application paths, 33, 33
enabling multi-window, 31, 32

Navigation Scheme, 33
scene types, 29
tweaking tabular display, 31, 32
updating control scheme, 34, 34
FileSystem dock, 26–27, 57
First Scene creation, 27–29, 28
hierarchies and 3D scenes
Actors, 34
add child object, 35, 36
BoxMesh, 37
default Node3D, 34, 37
GameObjects, 34
MeshInstance3D, 35, 36, 37–38
procedural box, 37, 39
root Node, 34
Inspector Dock, 27
object transformations
Backface Culling, 42
duplicate object, 47
duplication, 48, 49
perspective view, 48
position, 44, 48
rotate mode, 48
rotation, 44
scale, 44
Scene dock, 43, 44, 48
snapping feature, 50, 51
toggling snap, 50, 51

transform, 43, 45
translate tool, 46, 46
uniform scale, 45
wall rotation into correct orientation, 48, 49–50
Plugin tab, 59, 59
Scene Dock, 26, 26
Scene View, 26–27
viewport navigation
dolly forward and backward, 40, 41
navigation controls, 39, 40
Orbit mode, 40, 42
perspective camera, 39
6DOF (Degrees of Freedom), 41
Interface Theme setting, 21

L
Language setting, 20
Large File Storage (LFS), 66, 68

M
mesh resources
Blender startup file, 109, 109–110
exporting GLB file, 110–116, 116
importing GLB file into Godot, 116–120, 117–120
with inherited scenes, 120–124, 122–124

N
Node3D object, 29
nodes and groups
get_node function, 174
grouping nodes, 174–177, 175–177
searching groups, 177

O
object transformations
Backface Culling, 42
duplicate object, 47
duplication, 48, 49
perspective view, 48
position, 44, 48
rotate mode, 48
rotation, 44
scale, 44
Scene dock, 43, 44, 48
snapping feature, 50, 51
toggling snap, 50, 51
transform, 43, 45
translate tool, 46, 46
uniform scale, 45
wall rotation into correct orientation, 48, 49–50

P
physics and collisions
3D scenes
Areas and triggers, 247–249, 248
BodyEntered event, 247
CharacterBody3D, 243
connect function, 249
get_node function, 249
get_ normal function, 247
_on_floor function, 244
_physics_process function, 244, 247
PlayerController creation, 243–244
_process function, 244
_push_strength variable, 247
RigidBodies and movables, 244–247, 245
solid objects with colliders, 242–243
StaticBody3D node, 242
2D scenes
AnimatedSprite2D nodes, 191
CharacterBody2D object, 192, 192–193, 195
coding movable character, 194–196
CollisionShape2D object, 193, 193
configuring movable character, 192–194
cricle shape creation, 193, 194
_physics_process function, 196
static obstacle creation, 196, 197
_physics_process function, 196

Project Creation window
file-based applications, 22
project creation, 23
renderer option, 24–25
Version Control setting, 25

Q
Quit function, 279

R
renderer option
compatibility, 24–25
Forward+, 24
Mobile, 24
resource (textures)
CanvasItemMaterial, 91, 93–94
Compression option, 86, 86
drag-and-drop method, 88, 89
duplicate resource, 95, 95–97, 97
editing texture import options, 85, 85–87
exploring import files, 81–84, 82–83
external and built-in resources, 94–100, 99–100
FileSystem Dock, 88
Generate Mipmaps option, 87, 87
material resource, 88
Material section, 98, 98
Quick Load, 90, 92

Quick Selection dialog, 90, 92
Resource section, 98, 98
Sprite2D node creation, 90, 91
Sprite Blend Mode, 92, 94
3D objects
accessing scale property, 106, 106
assigning materials, 104–107, 105–107
material creation, 101–104, 102–104
Offset property, 107
Surface Material Override, 104
UV Mapping, 105
2D scene creation, 88, 89
revert command, 72

S
Scene Dock, 26
Scene View, 26–27
signals and observer pattern
connecting a signal in code, 169–172, 171
creating custom signals, 172–173, 173
emit function, 173
Game Timer creation, 163–169
Marker3D object, 165, 165, 170, 171
Signal Connection Window, 167–168, 167
timeout signal, 166, 172
__Timer.connect function, 171
Timer node creation, 164, 164

VisibleOnScreenNotifier3D node, 172
Wait Time setting, 164, 164
Space Ranger, 256

T
test-git, 66–67
3D objects, textures
accessing scale property, 106, 106
assigning materials, 104–107, 105–107
material creation, 101–104, 102–104
Offset property, 107
Surface Material Override, 104
UV Mapping, 105
3D scenes
basis.z property, 241
Constructive Solid Geometry (CSG)
connecting hallway and room, 226–229
creating a room, 222–226
Font Size controls text size, 254
get_action_strength function, 241
Label3D object, 253
lighting
Ambient Lighting, 231–234
Default Clear Color setting, 232
Directional Light, 234–236
enabling shadows, 235, 236
Energy field, 235

MeshInstance3D nodes, 229
scene creation, 230
Shadow rollout, 235
WorldEnviroment node, 232
Omni Lights, 237, 237
physics and collisions
Areas and triggers, 247–249, 248
BodyEntered event, 247
CharacterBody3D, 243
connect function, 249
get_node function, 249
get_ normal function, 247
_on_floor function, 244
_physics_process function, 244, 247
PlayerController creation, 243–244
_process function, 244
_push_strength variable, 247
RigidBodies and movables, 244–247, 245
solid objects with colliders, 242–243
StaticBody3D node, 242
physics queries
get_collider function, 252
is_colliding function, 252
Raycast object, 250, 250–252, 251
ShapeCast object, 252–253, 253
player-controlled moving object, 239
_process function, 241
rotate_y function, 241

Spotlight, 237–238, 238
text in, 253–255, 254
transform objects, 239–241
tilemaps and world design
building tile collisions, 207–210, 208–210
creating a texture Atlas, 202–207, 203–207
painting TileSet Worlds, 211, 211–212
TileMapLayer object, 204, 204
TileSet resource, 205, 205
__Timer.connect function, 171
tips and tricks, Godot
custom resources, 327–330, 328–330
deferred calls, 346
exporting projects, 350–355, 351–355
inserting 3D scenes into 2D scenes, 335–338, 336–338
inserting UI scenes into 3D scenes, 331–335, 331–335
localization, 341–344, 342–343
mouse picking, 325–327, 326
pausing games, 344–346, 346
processing resources, 347, 347–350, 350
using curves, 338–340, 339–340
Viewport Texture, 334–335, 334–335
2D scenes
add Camera2D node, 184, 185
Animated Sprites node, 185–191, 186–191
AnimationFrames Editor, 186
clipping, 218–219, 219
enable Repeat property, 199, 200

FrameEditor toolbar, 188, 188
looping animation, 189, 190, 190
modulation, 217, 217–218, 218
moving sprites, 182
paths and path following, 213–217, 214–217
physics and collisions
AnimatedSprite2D nodes, 191
CharacterBody2D object, 192, 192–193, 195
coding movable character, 194–196
CollisionShape2D object, 193, 193
configuring movable character, 192–194
cricle shape creation, 193, 194
_physics_process function, 196
static obstacle creation, 196, 197
region-restricted Sprite, 199, 201
repeating backgrounds with sprites, 198–202, 199–202
sprites and animated sprites, 179–181, 180–181
sprites and pixel art, 182–184, 183–184
tilemaps and world design
building tile collisions, 207–210, 208–210
creating a texture Atlas, 202–207, 203–207
painting TileSet Worlds, 211, 211–212
TileMapLayer object, 204, 204
TileSet resource, 205, 205

U
user interface (UI)

add a UI title, 262–264, 262–264
add background music, 292–294, 292–294
add NPC creatures, 268, 270–271
animating UI elements, 280–287, 280–287
Animation Editor object, 282, 282–283
AnimationPlayer node, 280, 281
assigning textures, 276, 277
AudioStreamPlayer2D, 293
background creation, 260, 261
button functionality, 277–280
CenterContainer node, 272, 272
close button, 279
creating a cursor, 264–267, 265
creating UI buttons, 272–277
enter_tree function, 267
GridContainer node, 273, 273–274, 276
Hero image creation, 268, 268–271
importing assets, 257
play and settings buttons, 279–280
Property Track object, 283, 284
Quit function, 279
ReImport button, 292
Singelton Design Pattern, 288–291, 288–292
TextureButton features, 274, 274
UI Scene, 257–260, 258–260
using Quick Load, 293, 293

V
Vertex Snapping, 52–60, 60
viewport navigation
6DOF (Degrees of Freedom), 41
dolly forward and backward, 40, 41
navigation controls, 39, 40
Orbit mode, 40, 42
perspective camera, 39

W
WASD keyboard keys, 41
OceanofPDF.com

