Godot From Zero to proficiency
(Advanced)
First Edition
Use advanced techniques to build both 2D and 3D
games
OceanofPDF.com

Table of Contents
Title Page
Patrick Felicia
Godot From Zero to Proficiency | (Advanced)
Credits
About the Author
Support and Resources for this Book
Table of Contents
Preface
Content Covered by this Book
What you Need to Use this Book
Who this Book is not for
How you will Learn from this Book
Format of each Chapter and Writing Conventions
How Can You Learn Best from this Book
Feedback
Downloading the Solutions for the Book
Improving the Book
Supporting the Author

Chapter 1: Reading Files and Creating Scenes Procedurally
Chapter 2: Accessing and Updating a Database
Chapter 3: Creating a Networked Multiplayer Game
Chapter 4: Creating a Memory Game
Chapter 6: Creating a Platformer
Chapter 6: Frequently Asked Questions
Chapter 7: Thank you
About the Author
OceanofPDF.com

Patrick Felicia
OceanofPDF.com

Godot From Zero to Proficiency
(Advanced)
Copyright © 2021 Patrick Felicia
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced, stored in
retrieval systems, or transmitted in any form or by any means, without the
prior written permission of the publisher (Patrick Felicia), except in the case
of brief quotations embedded in critical articles or reviews.
Every effort has been made in the preparation of this book to ensure the
accuracy of the information presented. However, the information contained
in this book is sold without warranty, either expressed or implied. Neither
the author and its dealers and distributors will be held liable for any
damages caused or alleged to be caused directly or indirectly by this book.
First published: September 2021
OceanofPDF.com

Credits
Author: Patrick Felicia
OceanofPDF.com

About the Author
Patrick Felicia is a lecturer and researcher at Waterford Institute of
Technology, where he teaches and supervises undergraduate and
postgraduate students. He obtained his MSc in Multimedia Technology in
2003 and Ph.D. in Computer Science in 2009 from University College
Cork, Ireland. He has published several books and articles on the use of
video games for educational purposes, including the Handbook of Research
on Improving Learning and Motivation through Educational Games:
Multidisciplinary Approaches (published by IGI), and Digital Games in
Schools: a Handbook for Teachers, published by European Schoolnet.
Patrick is also the Editor-in-chief of the International Journal of GameBased Learning (IJGBL), and the Conference Director of the Irish
Conference on Game-Based Learning, a popular conference on games and
learning organized throughout Ireland.
OceanofPDF.com

Support and Resources for this Book
To complete the activities presented in this book you need to download the
startup pack on the companion website; it consists of free resources that you
will need to complete your projects. To download these resources, please do
the following:
Open the page http://www.learntocreategames.com/books.
Click on your book (Godot From Zero to Proficiency (Advanced))

On the new page, please click the link that says “Please Here Click to
Download Your Resource Pack”

This book is dedicated to Mathis

[ ]
OceanofPDF.com

Table of Contents
Chapter 1: Reading Files and Creating Scenes Procedurally
Building your environment from an array
Creating an environment from a text file
Using JSON files for content creation
Creating a virtual solar system based on a JSON file
Level Roundup
Chapter 2: Accessing and Updating a Database
Introduction to online databases
Accessing a database through PHP
Passing data to a PHP script
Accessing PHP from Godot
Setting up your server
Creating new tables
Gathering data from Godot
Level Roundup
Chapter 3: Creating a Networked Multiplayer Game
Introduction
Creating a single-player scene
Implementing a multiplayer-networked mode
Level Roundup
Chapter 4: Creating a Memory Game
Introduction
Creating the interface and the core of the game
Detecting when buttons have been pressed
Creating different states for our game
Playing a sequence of colors
Creating a new sequence of colors
Waiting for the user’s input

Processing the user’s input
Generating sound effects
Level Roundup
Chapter 6: Creating a Platformer
Introduction
Creating the main character
Moving the character
Making it possible for the player to collect items
Adding sound effects
Adding a dead zone to detect when the player has fallen
Allowing the player character to climb a ladder
Creating magic doors
Creating a scene using tilesets
Creating a parallax effect
Level Roundup
Chapter 6: Frequently Asked Questions
Networking
Accessing databases
Reading files
Chapter 7: Thank you
OceanofPDF.com

Preface
This book will show you how you can very quickly use GDScript to
implement some advanced features that will improve your games.
Although it may not be as powerful as Unity or Unreal yet, Godot offers
a wide range of features for you to create your video games. More
importantly, this game engine is both Open Source and lightweight which
means that even if you have (or you are teaching with) computers with very
low technical specifications, you should still be able to use Godot, and
teach or learn how to code while creating video games.
This book series entitled Godot From Zero to Proficiency allows you
to play around with Godot’s core features, and essentially those that will
make it possible to create interesting 3D and 2D games rapidly. After
reading this book series, you should find it easier to use Godot and its core
functionalities, including programming with GDScript.
This book series assumes no prior knowledge on the part of the reader,
and it will get you started on Godot so that you quickly master all the
wonderful features that this software provides by going through an easy
learning curve.
By completing each chapter, and by following step-by-step instructions,
you will progressively improve your skills, become more proficient in
Godot, and create features that will improve your productivity and
gameplay.
Throughout this book series, you will create a game that includes
environments where the player needs to find its way out of the levels,
escalators, traps, and other challenges, avoid or eliminate enemies using
weapons (i.e., guns or grenades), and drive a car or pilot an aircraft.
You will learn how to create customized menus and simple user
interfaces using Godot’s UI system, and animate and give artificial
intelligence to Non-Player Characters (NPCs) that will be able to follow the
player character using pathfinding.
Finally, you will also get to export your game at the different stages of
the books, so that you can share it with friends and obtain some feedback as
well.
[ ]

OceanofPDF.com

Content Covered by this Book
Chapter 1, Reading Files and Creating Scenes Procedurally, gets you to
create your scenes fast using a wide range of advanced techniques so that
you can create your scene using text or image files and read them at run
time without the need to add objects manually to your scene. It is also
illustrated how these techniques can be used for data visualization by
combining advanced GDScript coding and JSON files.
Chapter 2, Accessing and Updating a Database, helps you to
understand how to transfer data between Godot and a database. It explains
how to create your database, and how to access it through the use of a
combination of GDScript, PHP and MySQL.
Chapter 3, Creating a Networked multiplayer game, explains and
illustrates how you can create a simple network game with Godot. You will
use Godot’s built-in networking features and create a simple game two
players have to remotely compete to eat as many pills as possible before
their opponent.
Chapter 4, Chapter 4: Creating a Memory Game, shows you how to
create a game where the player has to memorize and to play an increasing
sequence of colors and sounds, in a similar way as the Simon game that
was popular in the 80s. You will learn how to create and generate audio
within Godot and change the sounds’ frequency, to detect when a player has
pressed a button, to generate colors at random, and also to record the
sequence entered by the player and then compare it to the correct sequence
Chapter 5, Creating a Platformer, explains how you can create a
platform game with most of the options commonly found in this genre. You
will learn how to move and animate a 2D character, create a parallax effect,
use tilesets to speed up the design process, and many more features that will
make your game even more entertaining..
Chapter 6 provides answers to Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)
related to the topics covered in this book (e.g., networking, databases or
procedural content generation).
Chapter 7 summarizes the topics covered in the book and provides you
with more information on the next steps.
OceanofPDF.com

What you Need to Use this Book
To complete the project presented in this book, you only need Godot 3.2.4
or a more recent version and to also ensure that your computer and its
operating system comply with Godot’s requirements. Godot can be
downloaded
from
the
official
website
(http://www.godotengine.org/download), and before downloading, you
can check that your computer fulfills the requirements for Godot on the
same page.
At the time of writing this book, the following operating systems are
supported by Godot for development: Windows, Linux and Mac OS X.
In terms of computer skills, all knowledge introduced in this book will
assume no prior programming experience from you. This book includes
programming and all programming concepts will be taught from scratch. So
for now, you only need to be able to perform common computer tasks such
as downloading files, opening and saving files, be comfortable with
dragging and dropping items, and typing.
If you can answer yes to all these questions, then this book is for you:
1. Do you want to learn advanced techniques for Godot and GDScript?
2. Would you like to become proficient in the core functionalities offered
by Godot?
3. Would you like to start creating great 2D games?
4. Would you like to design and code games faster?
5. Although you may have had some prior exposure to Godot, would you
like to delve more into Godot and understand its core functionalities in
more detail?
OceanofPDF.com

Who this Book is not for
If you can answer yes to all these questions, then this book is not for you:
1. Can you already code with GDScript to implement procedural levels?
2. Can you already easily access and update a database using GDScript?
3. Are you looking for a reference book on GDScript?
4. Are you an experienced (or at least advanced) Godot user?
If you can answer yes to all four questions, you may instead look for the
next books in the series. To see the content and topics covered by these
books,
you
can
check
the
official
website
(www.learntocreategames.com/books).
OceanofPDF.com

How you will Learn from this Book
Because all students learn differently and have different expectations of a
course, this book is designed to ensure that all readers find a learning mode
that suits them. Therefore, it includes the following:
A list of the learning objectives at the start of each chapter so that
readers have a snapshot of the skills that will be covered.
Each section includes an overview of the activities covered.
Many of the activities are step-by-step, and learners are also given the
opportunity to engage in deeper learning and problem-solving skills
through the challenges offered at the end of each chapter.
Each chapter ends up with a quiz and challenges through which you
can put your skills (and knowledge acquired) into practice, and see
how much you know. Challenges consist of coding, debugging, or
creating new features based on the knowledge that you have acquired
in the chapter.
The book focuses on the core skills that you need; some sections also
go into more detail; however, once concepts have been explained, links
are provided to additional resources, where necessary.
The code is introduced progressively and is explained in detail.
You also gain access to several videos that help you along the way,
especially for the most challenging topics.
OceanofPDF.com

Format of each Chapter and Writing
Conventions
Throughout this book, and to make reading and learning easier, text
formatting and icons will be used to highlight parts of the information
provided and to make it more readable.

Special Notes
Each chapter includes resource sections, so that you can further your
understanding and mastery of Godot; these include:
A quiz for each chapter: these quizzes usually include 10 questions that
test your knowledge of the topics covered throughout the chapter. The
solutions are provided on the companion website.
A checklist: it consists of between 5 and 10 key concepts and skills
that you need to be comfortable with before progressing to the next
chapter.
Challenges: each chapter includes a challenge section where you are
asked to combine your skills to solve a particular problem.
Author’s notes appear as described below:
Author’s suggestions appear in this box.
Code appears as described below:
var score = 100
var player_name = “Sam”

Checklists that include the important points covered in the chapter
appear as described below:
Item1 for checklist
Item2 for checklist
Item3 for checklist
OceanofPDF.com

How Can You Learn Best from this Book
Talk to your friends about what you are doing.
We often think that we understand a topic until we have to explain
it to friends and answer their questions. By explaining your
different projects, what you just learned will become clearer to
you.
Do the exercises.
All chapters include exercises that will help you to learn by
doing. In other words, by completing these exercises, you will be
able to better understand the topic and gain practical skills (i.e.,
rather than just reading).
Don’t be afraid of making mistakes.
I usually tell my students that making mistakes is part of the
learning process; the more mistakes you make and the more
opportunities you have for learning. At the start, you may find the
errors disconcerting, or that the engine does not work as expected
until you understand what went wrong.
Export your games early.
It is always great to build and export your first game. Even if it is
rather simple, it is always good to see it in a browser and to be
able to share it with you friends.
Learn in chunks.
It may be disconcerting to go through five or six chapters straight,
as it may lower your motivation. Instead, give yourself enough
time to learn, go at your own pace, and learn in small units (e.g.,
between 15 and 20 minutes per day). This will do at least two
things for you: it will give your brain the time to “digest” the

information that you have just learned, so that you can start fresh
the following day. It will also make sure that you don’t “burn-out”
and that you keep your motivation levels high.
OceanofPDF.com

Feedback
While I have done everything possible to produce a book of high quality
and value, I always appreciate feedback from readers so that the book can
be improved accordingly. If you would like to give feedback, you can email
me at:
learntocreategames@gmail.com.
OceanofPDF.com

Downloading the Solutions for the Book
You can download the solutions for this book after creating a free online
account at http://learntocreategames.com/books/. Once you have
registered, a link to the files will be sent to you automatically.
To download the solutions for this book (e.g., code) you need to
download the startup pack on the companion website; it consists of free
resources that you will need to complete your projects and code solutions.
To download these resources, please do the following:
Open the page http://www.learntocreategames.com/books.
Click on your book (Godot From Zero to Proficiency – Advanced -)

On the new page, please click the link that says “Please Here Click to
Download Your Resource Pack”

OceanofPDF.com

Improving the Book
Although great care was taken in checking the content of this book, I am
human, and some errors could remain in the book. As a result, it would be
great if you could let me know of any issue or error you may have come
across in this book, so that it can be solved and the book updated
accordingly.
To
report
an
error,
you
can
email
me
(learntocreategames@gmail.com) with the following information:
Name of the book.
The page or section where the error was detected.
Describe the error and also what you think the correction should be.
Once your email is received, the error will be checked, and, in the case
of a valid error, it will be corrected and the book page will be updated to
reflect the changes accordingly.
OceanofPDF.com

Supporting the Author
A lot of work has gone into this book and it is the fruit of long hours of
preparation, brainstorming, and finally writing. As a result, I would ask that
you do not distribute any illegal copies of this book.
This means that if a friend wants a copy of this book, s/he will have to
buy it through the official channels (i.e., your e-store), or the book’s official
website: www.learntocreategames.com/books).
If some of your friends are interested in the book, you can refer them to
the book’s official website (http://www.learntocreategames.com/books)
where they can either buy the book, enter a monthly draw to be in for a
chance of receiving a free copy of the book, or to be notified of future
promotional offers.
[ ]
OceanofPDF.com

Chapter 1: Reading Files and Creating
Scenes Procedurally
In this section, we will learn how to create your game levels from scripts and
external files rather than by adding all objects manually to each scene. This will
have the advantage of saving you a lot of time creating your levels; it will also
make it easier to modify your levels relatively quickly too. Creating your
environment from a script or “procedurally” can be achieved using a wide range
of techniques from simple arrays to JSON files. So, after completing this
chapter, you will be able to:
Instantiate objects based on an array or a text file.
Create a level from an array.
Create multiple levels using simple text files.
Create more complex scenes by reading and implementing the content of a
JSON file.
Some of the skills you will also learn along the way include:
Creating and accessing a file in your project where you can store and
access resources for your game (e.g., images or text files).
Reading text files from your game.
Reading and parsing a JSON document.

Building your environment from an array
The first and simplest way to create a game environment procedurally is by
using a simple array; so to setup our first procedural environment, we will
generate an indoor level using a combination of GDScript and arrays.
We will proceed as follows:
Create an array that represents the environment.
Read the array.
Instantiate objects based on the numbers read in the array.
So let’s get started:
Please open Godot.
Open the start-up project located in the resources that you have
downloaded.
Create a new 3D scene: Select Scene | New Scene, and then select the
option 3D Scene in the new window.

Save the scene as game_level_auto, (Scene | Save Scene As), or any other
name of your choice.
Create a new Spatial node as a child of the existing Spatial node (i.e.,
right-click on this node, select the option Add Child Node and select the
node type Spatial), and rename this new node create_environment.
Create a Camera node as a child of the existing Spatial node (i.e., rightclick on this node, select the option Add Child Node and select the node

type Camera), change its rotation to (-90, 0, 0), its position to (0, 100, 0)
and its FOV, Near and Far features to 70, 0.05, and 100, respectively.
Next, we will create an object that will be used to instantiate the walls.
Please save the current scene (CTRL + S or CMD + S).
Create a new scene (Scene | New Scene).
In the new window, select the option “Other Node”.

In the new window, type the text “static” in the search field and select the
type StaticBody from the list of results.

This will create a new node called StaticBody in your 3D scene.
Please rename this node “wall” and set its scale property to (5, 5, 5).
Add a CollisionShape node as a child of the node wall.
Select this node (i.e., CollisionShape), and, using the Inspector, in the
section called CollisionShape, click on the downward arrow to the right of
the label Shape and select the option “New Box Shape”.

Finally, add a new node of type CSGBox to the node CollisionShape.
Using the Inspector, and the section CSGBox, set its Width, Height and
Depth to 2.

You can now save this scene as wall.tscn (Scene | Save Scene As).
Next, we will start to create a script that will generate our environment
procedurally:
Please switch to the scene game_level_auto.
Please select the node create_environment and attach a new script to it
(i.e., right-click on that node and select the option Attach Script).
Rename the new script generate_maze.gd.
Open this script and add the following code at the beginning of the script
(new code in bold).
extends Spatial
export (PackedScene) var wall
var array

In the previous code, we declare a new variable called wall as a
PackedScene using the keyword export which means that it will be a variable
that will be available through the Inspector. In practical terms, we will be able
to drag and drop the scene wall.tscn that we have just created to this empty slot,
so that this scene can be used as a template to create the walls in our maze.
We also create a variable called array; this variable, which is an array, will
store a combination of 1s and 0s, each defining where we should have a wall in
our maze (represented by a 1) or an empty space (represented by a 0).
Next, please add the following code to the script:
func read_array():
array = [
1,1,1,1,1,1,1,1,1,1,
1,1,0,0,0,0,0,0,1,1,
1,1,0,0,0,0,0,0,1,1,
1,1,0,0,0,0,0,0,1,1,
1,1,0,0,1,0,1,0,1,1,
1,1,0,0,1,0,1,0,1,1,
1,1,0,0,0,0,0,0,1,1,
1,1,0,0,0,0,0,0,1,1,
1,1,0,0,0,0,0,0,1,1,
1,1,1,1,1,1,1,1,1,1,
]

In the previous code:

We declare a function called read_array.
In this function we initialize the array called array.
This array is mono-dimensional and includes a series of 1s and zeros.
The values in the array are within opening and closing square brackets and
are separated by commas.
While all the data could have fitted on one line, we have here, for
convenience, written 10 numbers per line; the idea behind this layout is that
our maze will consist of 100 cells organized in 10 rows and 10 columns
(i.e., 10 x 10); so by writing 10 numbers by line, we can assess visually
how the maze will look like. In our case, we can see that there will be walls
on all sides of the maze (symbolized by 1s).
Now that we have defined the structure and content of the maze, it is time to
write the code that will translate and transform this array into actual walls, and
hence create a 3D maze based on the array.
Please add the following code after the code that you have previously
included, in the same function, just after the declaration of the array, using
proper indentation (new code in bold)
1,1,1,1,1,1,1,1,1,1,
]
for i in range (0,100,1):
var new_wall = wall.instance()
if (array[i] == 1):
add_child(new_wall)
var x_pos = 50 - (i/10) * 10
var z_pos = -(50 - (i%10) * 10)
new_wall.global_transform.origin = Vector3(x_pos,2,z_pos)

In the previous code:
We create a loop that ranges from 0 to 99 (so we have 100 steps in total; the
upper boundary of 100 is excluded, hence the range from 0 to 99 and not
100).
Within this loop, we instantiate a new copy of the template called wall and
save it in the variable called new_wall.
We then read the array and check whether the value of the array at the
current index defined by the variable i is 1.
If that is the case, we then add the new wall (i.e., the node new_wall) as a
child of the current node.
We then calculate the x and z coordinates of this new wall.

To calculate the position of the wall we need to (1) center it around the
center of the maze, (2) know in what row it should be, and (3) know in
which column it should be.
Since the maze is 100 units wide and 100 units deep, its middle will be
located at (50,50).
Because we are using a mono-dimensional array to represent the content of
the maze that is 10 x 10 (10 rows and 10 columns), and that every 10
consecutive number describes a specific row, we can deduct that the row
for a wall is defined by i/10 and the corresponding column will be i%10.
% is the modulo operator; when applied to two numbers a and b, a%b
provides the remainder of the division between these two numbers; so while
2%2 is 0, 3%2 is 1.
The x and z coordinates are based on the size of the actual wall (i.e., 10 x10
x 10) and the middle of the actual maze (i.e., 50, 50). So, in essence, we
center the wall based on the middle of the maze.
Finally, we just need to call this function from the _ready function; so please
add the following code to the script (new code in bold).
func _ready():
read_array()

In the previous code, we use the function _ready to call the function
read_array whenever the scene is loaded.
Now, we just need to finish our setup:
Please save your script (CTRL + S or CMD + S).
Return to the main scene (game_level_auto) if it is not the case already.
Select the node create_environment.
Drag and drop the file wall.tscn from the File System tab to the empty slot
labeled [empty] in the Inspector, to the right of the label Wall.

Once this is done, you can play the scene, and check the layout.

Creating an environment from a text file
Now that this works, we could take it a notch further by creating a file that
includes all the information about the maze.
You see, using arrays is great; however, it may be more convenient to use a
specific file for each level. This will at least do two things for you: (1) it will
make it possible to modify the structure of the level without having to modify
the code, and (2) it will make it possible to create (and load) individual files for
each level.
So you could virtually create a text file for every level and then load it
accordingly.
So, for this purpose, we will be using built-in functions that make it possible
to read text files from your Godot project.
First, we will create such a text file and then access it through our script.
Please create a new text file using the editor of your choice.
Add the following text to it.
1111111111
1010000001
1010101001
1010000001
1011110001
1000000001
1010101111
1001000001
1010000001
1111111111

Once this is done, we will need to save this file inside your project; to do so,
we need to identify the path to your project (or where your project is saved on
your computer).
Please switch to Godot.
Using the File System window, right-click on the folder called res://.

Select the option “Open in File Manager” from the contextual menu.

This will open the folder where all the project’s files are saved.
Please take note of the location of this folder, return to your text editor and
save the text file as maze.txt within the folder that you have just located.
Once this is done, we can modify our script so that it reads information from
the text file rather than the array and generate the maze accordingly:
Please open the script generate_maze (i.e., click on the script logo to the
left of the node create_environment)
Comment (or remove) all the code already present in the _ready function.
Please add the following code at the beginning of the script (new code in
bold):
extends Spatial
export (PackedScene) var wall
var array
onready var file = 'res://maze.txt'

In the previous code, we declare a variable called file that refers to the text
file that you have created earlier; this code assumes that the file was saved at the
root of the project folder.
Please add the following code to the script (e.g., at the end of the script).
func read_file():
var f = File.new()
f.open(file, File.READ)
var full_text = ""
while not f.eof_reached():
full_text += f.get_line()

f.close()

In the previous code:
We create a new function called read_file that will be used to read the text
file you have just created and to generate a maze accordingly.
We create a variable called f which is a new file instance. This new file will
be used to extract the content from the text file that we have created earlier.
We then use this file instance to open the file defined earlier as file (i.e.,
maze.txt) using the keyword open and specifying how we want to use this
file (i.e., READ).
We create the variable full_text and set it to an empty string.
We then create a while loop, a type of structure that checks for a specific
condition and then loops based on this condition. In our case, we just check
that we have not reached the end of the file yet; and if that is the case, we
add every new line read from this file to the variable full_text.
Finally, we close the file as we have finished reading it.
It is now time to add the walls based on the data read in the file:
Please add the following code to the function read_file (new code in bold):
f.close()
for i in range (0,100,1):
var new_wall = wall.instance()
if (full_text[i] == "1"):
add_child(new_wall)
var x_pos = 50 - (i/10) * 10
var z_pos = -(50 - (i%10) * 10)
new_wall.global_transform.origin = Vector3(x_pos,2,z_pos)
In the previous code, we proceed as we have done previously for reading the
array: we check the value read in the file, and if it is one, we instantiate a new
wall at a position defined by i.
So that we can use this new function, we just need to call it from the _ready
function, so please modify the _ready function as follows (new code in bold):
func _ready():
#read_array()
read_file()

As you play the scene, it should look as per the next figure:

You should see that the scene has been generated as previously, but with the
difference that the content is now read from a text file that is saved within your
project.
Following this principle, you could have several files that correspond to each
game level, each with a different name, and you could then load these depending
on the level to be displayed.

Creating an environment from an image file
While the previous techniques are quite interesting and useful, there is
another way to create your level, using a more artistic approach, that is: by
drawing the outline of your levels as an image, and then by reading this file and
instantiating objects based on the color of each pixel present in the image.
Let’s see how this can be done:
Please create a simple jpeg image, using an image editor of your choice, for
example Adobe Photoshop, Microsoft Paint or Gimp.
As you create your image, you can use the brush tool, and ensure that its
size is 1 so that you can draw pixel-by-pixel.
For this particular application, we will leave empty spaces white, and any
other pixel painted using the color of your choice.

The previous figure is my outline; again, it is very simple for the time
being; it uses white pixels for empty areas and colored pixels for walls.
This image is 500 by 500 pixels, simulating an area that is 500 meters wide
and 500 meters long. If you wish, you can find and use this outline from the
resource pack (i.e., outline.png).
You can save this image to any format of your choice; in my case, I have
saved it as a png file (i.e., outline.png).
Note that you can use the file outline.png that is already present in the File
System tab.
When this is done, you can open Godot, open your current project, and
import the image that you have just created by dragging and dropping it from

your Operating System to the File System tab in Godot (in the folder called
res://).
At this stage, we have an image that is ready to be used and read; so all we
need to do is to write the code that will create the environment based on this
image:
Please open the script called create_environment.
Please add the following code at the start of the class (new code in bold).
extends Spatial
export (PackedScene) var wall
var array
onready var file = 'res://maze.txt'
var image = load("res://outline.png")

In the previous code, we create a new variable called image that refers to the
image that you have previously created and saved in the current Godot project.
Please add the following function to the script (e.g., at the end of the
script):
func read_image():
var data = image.get_data()
data.lock()
for i in range (0,10,1):
for j in range (0,10,1):
var pixel = data.get_pixel(i,j)
if (pixel != Color.white):

In the previous code:
We create the function read_image that will be used to read every pixel in
the image that you have created previously, and, upon finding a pixel that is
not white, create a corresponding wall.
We gather the data from the image (i.e., its pixels) using the built-in
function get_data.
Then, we lock the file, to prevent any file corruption.
We then read the image, one pixel at a time, using two loops.
For each pixel present in the image and determined by its x and y
coordinates, we save its color using the method get_pixel to the array that
we have defined earlier.
Once this is clear, please add the following code just after the previous one
(new code in bold):
if (pixel != Color.white):
var new_wall = wall.instance()

add_child(new_wall)
var x_pos = 50 - (i) * 10
var z_pos = -(50 - (j) * 10)
new_wall.global_transform.origin = Vector3(x_pos,2,z_pos)

In the previous code, if the color of the current pixel is not white, then an
object is created accordingly, as we have done in the previous sections.
The last thing that we need to do is to call the function read_image from the
_ready function; so please, comment all the code in the _ready function, and
add this code to it (new code in bold).
func _ready():
#read_array()
#read_file()
read_image()

Once the code has been saved; please check that it is error-free; you can
then play the scene and it should look like the following figure.

For this technique and all the other procedural generation techniques covered
in this chapter, you can of course navigate the scene by adding a First-Person
Controller. This, for example, can be done when you edit the scene by doing
the following:
Duplicate the scene call wall.tscn and rename the duplicate ground.tscn.
Open the scene ground.tscn.
Rename the node wall to ground and sets its y coordinate to -1.
Select the node called CollisionShape.

Using the Inspector, modify its scale attributes to (500, 1, 500).
You can also select the node CSGBox and add a new Material to it so that
it appears blue or choose any other color or texture of tour choice.
Save this scene.
Switch to the scene game_level_auto.
Add the ground scene: right-click on the node Spatial, select the option
Instantiate Child Scene, and select the scene ground.tscn. This will create
a new
Add a first-person controller: right-click on the node Spatial, select the
option Instantiate Child Scene, and select the scene player.tscn.
This will create a new node called KinematicBody.
Change the position of the node KinematicBody to, for example, (0, 1, 0),
so that it is above the ground.
Now, while this works, there are many ways in which we could optimize this
script; we could, for example, include specific prefabs when a color is found in
the file. For example, we could use red for doors, and blue for walls with
different colors, and so on.

Using JSON files for content creation
Using text files to generate an environment at run time is great; however,
this could be limited if we wanted to have more control over the properties of
the objects to be instantiated; for example, we could use numbers in our file, and
employ 3 for a tree and 2 for a wall; but what if we would like to instantiate
different types of walls with each a different texture, size, or rotation. You can
see here that using a text file, while useful, may be limited; instead, we could
use something a bit more advanced such as JSON files; A JSON file will make it
possible to provide more information about the object (or nodes) that we want to
create in our game. The nice thing about this feature is that it can also be used
for complex visualization techniques to visualize data that is stored in the JSON
format, including data on weather, financial transactions, scientific
measurements, or news information. Many of these JSON files are freely
available and can be accessed and processed. So, for example, you could create
a 3D environment that simulates scientific data such as temperatures, or streams
in oceans, and so forth; and since these files are usually updated on a regular
basis, you could provide a 3D application that simulates real-life phenomena.
Now, before you can move to these complex applications, we will just create
a relatively simple application that reads data from a JSON file to configure the
game; we will then create another simple file to add objects to be included to the
levels, along with settings their properties, all of this from a JSON file.
So first, what is a JSON file?
JSON stands for JavaScript Object Notation. As you will see in the next
code examples, these files use the extension .json and have a common structure
that makes them easy to read.
Let’s look at a JSON file that we could create to describe a scene; it could
look like the following.
{
"obj1":{"name":"wall1", "color":"red", "location":"10,0,10", "rotation":"0,0,0", "scale":"1,2,1",
"level":1},
"obj2":{"name":"wall1", "color":"green", "location":"10,0,10", "rotation":"90,0,0", "scale":"1,2,1",
"level":1}
}

The file starts and ends with curly brackets.
It then includes a succession of objects.
Each object is defined by an identifier within double quotes; followed by a
colon, followed by opening and closing curly brackets.
Within these curly brackets, we define the attribute of the object using an
attribute/value pair separated by a comma. The name of the attribute is

usually within double quotes, and the corresponding attribute may (if this
is a string) or may not use quotes.
For example, in this file we have two objects with the id obj1 and obj2.
The first object has the attributes name, color, location, rotation, scale
and level and values associated with each of these attributes.
The same applies to the second object.
The beauty of this file format is that you can create your own JSON files
using the attributes of your choice to best reflect and serve the requirements of
your game or application; you could save information about each scene, about
the NPCs (e.g., what paths they can use), or the weapons. So yes, you could
virtually save any type of information with these files, using an easy-to-read
format.
Now that the JSON format is clearer, let’s see how we can read a JSON file
to create a simple scene.
In the next section we will:
Load a JSON file.
Open this file.
Navigate through each object within the file.
For each of these objects, create the corresponding game nodes defined for
this scene.
The file that we will be using will has the following content (explained in the
previous section):
{
"obj1":{"name":"wall1", "color":"red", "location":"10,0,10", "rotation":"0,0,0", "scale":"1,2,1",
"level":1},
"obj2":{"name":"wall1", "color":"green", "location":"10,0,10", "rotation":"90,0,0", "scale":"1,2,1",
"level":1}
}

As you can see from the previous code, this file describes two objects,
along with their name, color, location, rotation, scale, and level.
So at this stage, we have a JSON file, and we want to access it, to read its
content and to create a scene accordingly;
First, we will copy this file from the resource pack to our project:
Please copy the file called scene.json from the resource pack to the
FileSystem folder in Godot (e.g., drag and drop).

Next, we will create the code that reads this file.
Please open the file generate_maze.gd.
Add the following function to it (e.g., at the end of the file).
func read_json_file():
var file = File.new()
file.open("res://scene.json", file.READ)
var json_data = parse_json(file.get_as_text())
var json = to_json(json_data)
var dictionary : Dictionary = JSON.parse(json).result
for key in dictionary:
var name = dictionary[key].name
var color = dictionary[key].color
var location = dictionary[key].location
print ("Name:"+ name +", Color:"+ color + ", Location: "+location)

In the previous code:
We create a function called read_json_file.
We instantiate a new file using the code File.new and save it in the variable
called file.
We then specify that this file will refer to the file called scene.json, and that
we will be reading it.
We read the entire file using the built-in function get_as_text, this text
content is then parsed (i.e., formatted in a way that can be used for JSON in
our case) as a dictionary.
A dictionary is a structure that holds a series of key/value pairs. In our file,
for example, each object has a key/value pair for its color, location, etc.
This dictionary is then saved to the variable json using the built-in function
to_json.
We then create a new variable of type dictionary and save the variable json
inside it.
Once this is done, we loop through our dictionary, and then save and
display the value of the attributes name and color for each object in the
file.
The keyword for in can be used to go through each attribute for an object
defined in the file.
Last but not least, please modify the code in the _ready function so that the
function read_json_file can be called (new code in bold).

func _ready():
#read_array()
#read_file()
#read_image()
read_json_file()

As you save your code and play the scene, you should be able to see the
following message in the Output window.
Name: wall1, Color:red, Location: 10,0,10
Name: wall1, Color:green, Location: 10,0,10

This is just a short introduction to reading JSON files and the next sections
will delve more into this topic to create a solar system based on a JSON file.

Creating a virtual solar system based on a JSON file
So at this stage, we know how to read a JSON file. Based on this knowledge,
we could simulate the generation of a virtual solar system from a JSON file. So
the idea here would be to include all information related to planets (e.g., size,
orbital velocity, etc.) in a JSON file, and then to load this information to create a
simple visualization of this data in Godot. So in the next section, we will do the
following:
Create a scene for a planet that will include variables that can be changed
such as size or orbital velocity.
Read the JSON file that includes information about all these planets.
Instantiate the planets in Godot and simulate their movement.
So let’s get started:
Please create a new 3D scene: Select Scene | New Scene and then the
option 3D Scene in the new window.
This will create a new scene with a default node called Spatial.
Save this scene as solar_system or another name of your choice (Scene |
Save Scene As).
Create a new CSGSphere node, add it as a child of the node Spatial and
rename it sun.
Set its location to (0, 0, 0) and its scale to (45, 45, 45).
Set its color to yellow (i.e., create a new Spatial Material and set its
Albedo attribute to yellow).

So at this stage, we have created the node that represents the sun and we will
now create a scene called planet that will be used to instantiate all planets
included in the JSON file:
Please save the current scene (CTRL + S or CMD + S).
Please create a new scene.
In the new window, select the option Other Node.
In the next window, select the node type CSGSphere.
This will create a new scene with a default node called CSGSphere.
Save it as planet.tscn (Scene | Save Scene As).
Rename the node called CSGSphere to planet.
Set its color to red.
Save the scene (CTRL + S or CMD + S)
Once this is done, we just need to set this planet in movement using a simple
script.
So let’s create this script:
Using the scene planet.tscn, select the node called planet and add a script
to it.
Name this script planet.gd.
Add this code at the beginning of the script (just after the first line of code).
var rotational_speed = 10
var orbital_speed = 0.2
var orbital_angle = 0.0

var angle = 0.0
var orbital_rotational_speed = 20
var distance_to_sun = 150
onready var sun = get_node("/root/Spatial/sun")

In the previous code:
We set the parameters for this planet including rotational_speed (the speed
at which the planet revolves around its axis), orbital_speed (the speed at
which the planet revolves around the sun), orbital_angle (the rotation
angle around the sun), angle (the rotation angle around the planet’s axis),
orbital_rotational_speed (the speed at which the planet revolves around
the sun), and distance_to_sun.
We also declare a node called sun that will be used as the center of the
rotation for the planet.
Please modify the _ready function as described in the next code snippet
(new code in bold).
func _ready():
global_transform.origin = Vector3(distance_to_sun,0,distance_to_sun)

In the previous code, we set a temporary position for the planet.
We can now work on the rotational movement of the planets; this includes a
rotation around the planet’s axis as well as a rotation around the sun (i.e., orbital
rotation).
Please add the _process function as follows:
func _process(delta):
rotate_y(rotational_speed * delta)
var tempx
var tempy
var tempz;
orbital_angle += delta * orbital_speed
tempx = sun.global_transform.origin.x + distance_to_sun * cos(orbital_angle);
tempz = sun.global_transform.origin.z + distance_to_sun * sin(orbital_angle);
tempy = sun.global_transform.origin.y;
global_transform.origin = Vector3 (tempx, global_transform.origin.y, tempz)

In the previous code:
We rotate the planet around its y-axis.
We then rotate the planet around the sun using its distance to the sun along
with the Sine and Cosine of the angle defined by its position in relation to
the sun.

If you are not used to Cosine and Sine: if you consider a circle, its center O,
and any point on this circle M. The coordinates of this point M can be
determined by the radius of the circle and the corresponding angle defined by
the position (angle) of the point M on the circle.
We use three temporary variables called tempx, tempy and tempz to store
the position of the planet and to create a corresponding vector.
We can now save our script and play the scene.
Please save your script.
Save the scene called planet.tscn (CTRL + S or CMD + S).
Open the scene called solar_system.tscn.
Right-click on the node called Spatial and select the option “Instance
Child Scene”.
In the new window, search for and select the scene planet.tscn and click on
the button called “Open”.

This should add a new child node called planet to the node Spatial.
Add a child node of type Camera to the node Spatial, change its Far
property to 9000, its translation to (0, 250, 0), and its rotation to (-90, 0, 0).
Once this is done, please play the scene.
You should see the planet object orbiting around the sun as per the next
figure.

If you can hardly see the planet, you can temporarily modify the function
_ready in the script planet.gd by adding the following line, so that the planets
look bigger.
global_scale(Vector3(5, 5, 5))

The next figure shows how the planet should look like after the previous
code modification.

While this is working, it may be difficult to locate the planet that is orbiting
around the sun and we could create a trail that shows the full orbit of the planet.
To do so, we will use ImmediateGeometry nodes and vertices; these are often
used to draw lines in Godot. In our case, as we want to create an ellipse (or a
circle, in our case, to simplify the code), we will create a succession of infinitely
small lines, which, seen together, will be perceived as an ellipse (or a circle). For
example, the next figure shows that by increasing the number of vertices (i.e.,
corners) of a polygon, we can progressively approximate its shape from a box to
a circle.

Please add the following function to the beginning of the script planet.gd
(e.g., just after the first line).
var points = Array()
var length_of_line_renderer = 100
var c1:Color = Color.red

In the previous code:
We define an array called points that will store all the vertices that will
make up the ellipsoidal trajectory of our planet.
We define the number of lines that will be used to draw the orbital trail; in
our case, there will be 100 lines (but we could use more if needed).
We define the color that will be used to draw our lines.
We can now create the function that will draw a planet’s orbit:
Please add the following function to the script (e.g., at the end of the
script).
func draw_orbit():
var im1
im1 = get_node("/root/Spatial/Earth")
for i in range(0,length_of_line_renderer,1):
var unit_angle = (2*3.14)/length_of_line_renderer
var current_angle = unit_angle*i;
var pos:Vector3 = Vector3(distance_to_sun *cos(current_angle), 0, distance_to_sun*sin(current_angle))

In the previous code:
We declare a function called draw_orbit.
We initialize the variable im1 so that it is linked to a node called Earth that
we have yet to create. This node will be an ImmediateGeometry node that
will make it possible to draw a geometry made of vertices in our 3D
environment.

We create a loop with a counter that starts at 0 and increases up to 100 (i.e.,
the value of the variable length_of_line_renderer).
We then define, for each point on this path, an angle and a position. To
create what will look like a circle, we divide 360 degrees (i.e., 2*3.14
radians) by 100 to find the angle between each of these points.
Once this angle is found (let’s call it unit_angle), we multiply it by the
rank of the point; for example, the first point (rank 0) will be at an angle
unit_angle * 0 (0.0628 * 0), the second point will be at an angle
unit_angle* 1 (0.0628*1), and so on.
We then set the position of each point based on the planet’s distance to the
sun and the current angle (i.e., unit_angle)
We can now start to add these pouts to an array and to create the actual lines:
Please add the following code after the previous one (within the loop) in
the function draw_orbit:
points.append(pos)
im1.clear()
im1.set_color(c1)
im1.begin(Mesh.PRIMITIVE_LINE_LOOP)
for point in points:
im1.add_vertex(point)
im1.end()

In the previous code:
We add the new point (or vertex) to the array called point.
We clear everything that was drawn previously.
We set the color to be used to draw the lines.
We start to draw using the keyword begin and we specify that we will be
drawing lines between the vertices defined in the array, ensuring that the
line between the last point and the first point is also drawn (hence the
PRIMITIVE_LINE_LOOP keyword).
We then loop through all the points in the array of points and add these as
vertices of the geometrical shape.
Finally, we end the drawing.
Now that the code for the trail has been created, we just need to call it from
the _ready function.
Please add the following code to _ready function:

draw_orbit();

Finally, we just need to create a new ImmediateGeometry node to the scene
so that our trail can be displayed:
Please add a child node of type ImmediateGeometry to the node Spatial,
and rename the new node Earth.
Please save your code, play the scene and observe the orbital trail we have
just defined.

So, we have a planet that orbits around the sun. The idea now is to create
other planets from a JSON file and instantiate their corresponding node in the
scene using the template/scene planet.
So let’s get started.
The JSON file that we will be using is structured as described in the next
snippet.

As you can see, it consists of:

Opening and curly brackets at the start and end of the file.
Several objects are defined by their id (e.g., “earth”), and a series of
attributes such as name, diameter, distance_to_sun, etc. All these
attributes, except the one called name, will be relative to the settings for
the planet Earth (i.e., the settings for the planet Earth have already been
defined earlier in the script planet.gd).
So the goal here will be to read this JSON file (this will be file planets.json
that is already in your project), and, for each planet defined within, to create (or
instantiate) a node with the corresponding properties.
Please hide the node planet located in the scene solar_system, for the time
being.
Select the node Spatial, and add a new child node of type Spatial to that
node, and rename it load_planets. This node will be used to add (and
execute) the script that will load all the planets.
Add a new script to the node load_planets, and name it load_planets.gd.
Please add the following code at the beginning of the file (i.e.,
load_planets.gd), just after the first line:
export(PackedScene) var planet_template

In the previous code, we declare a variable called planet_template, which
will effectively be a placeholder to which we will be able to drag and drop the
scene planet.tscn to use it as a template for all the plates to be added to the solar
system.
Please add the following code to the _ready function.
func _ready():
load_all_planets()

We will now create the code for the function load_all_planets.
Please add the following function to the script:
func load_all_planets():
var file = File.new()
file.open("res://planets.json", file.READ)
var json_data = parse_json(file.get_as_text())
var json = to_json(json_data)
var dictionary : Dictionary = JSON.parse(json).result

In the previous code:
We declare the function load_all_planets.

We instantiate a new file using the code File.new and save it in the variable
called file.
We then specify that this file will refer to the file called scene.json, and that
we will be reading it.
We read the entire file using the built-in function get_as_text; this text
content is then parsed (i.e., formatted in a way that can be used for JSON in
our case) as a dictionary.
This dictionary is then saved to the variable json using the built-in function
to_json.
We then create a new variable of type dictionary and save the variable json
inside it.
Now that we have opened and parsed the JSON file, it is time to extract its
content, so please add the following code to the function load_all_planets, just
after the previous code:
for key in dictionary:
var name = dictionary[key].name
var diameter = dictionary[key].diameter
var distance_to_sun = dictionary[key].distance_to_sun
var rotation_period = dictionary[key].rotation_period
var orbital_velocity = dictionary[key].orbital_velocity

In the previous code, we loop through our dictionary, and then save the value
of the attributes name, diameter, distance_to_sun, rotation_period, and
orbital_velocity.
At this stage, it would be great to know if we can effectively read the content
of the JSON file, so please do the following:
Add this code just after the previous code in the script load_planets.gd, to
be able to print the name of each planet read from the file, in the function
load_all_planets.
print("Name of Planet: "+name)

You can now open the scene solar_system and play it, and you should see
the following message in the Output window.
Name of Planet: Earth
Name of Planet: Jupiter
Name of Planet: Mars
Name of Planet: Mercury
Name of Planet: Neptune
Name of Planet: Pluto
Name of Planet: Saturn
Name of Planet: Uranus
Name of Planet: Venus

So this is working so far and now that the information relative to each planet
has been extracted, we just need to create a new planet (based on the template
planet.tscn) and apply these features (i.e., attributes) to it.
Please add the following code to the script load_planets just after the
previous code (new code in bold):
print("Name of Planet: "+name)
var g = planet_template.instance()
g.set_distance_to_sun(distance_to_sun)
g.set_orbit_speed(orbital_velocity)
g.set_rotational_speed(1/rotation_period)
g.set_name(name)
g.set_radius(diameter)
add_child(g)

In the previous code, we instantiate a new node based on the scene
planet.tscn, we set the name of this new node, and then call functions that we
yet have to define for the script planet.gd to be able to set the planet’s distance
to the sun, its orbital speed, its rotational speed or its radius. Finally, the new
planet is added as a child of the current node.
So at this stage, you can manage to load the JSON file and to read its
content; so the next phase will be to read the attributes of all the planets and to
instantiate the corresponding nodes; however, before this can be done, we will
modify our initial script, called planet.gd, so that it is possible to modify the
properties of each object instantiated from this prefab; so we will create several
functions that can be used to set the attributes of the planets that will be
instantiated.
So let’s create these functions:
Please add the following code to the script planet.gd (e.g., at the end of the
script):
func set_rotational_speed(s):
rotational_speed = s * rotational_speed;
func set_orbit_speed(os):
orbital_speed = os * orbital_speed
func set_distance_to_sun(d):
distance_to_sun = distance_to_sun*d;
func set_name(new_name):
name = new_name;
func set_radius (radius):
global_scale(Vector3(radius, radius, radius))

In the previous code:

We create five methods set_rotational_speed, set_orbit_speed,
set_distance_to_sun, set_name, and set_radius.
For most of these methods, we use the values passed as parameters to
modify the properties of the planet that is instantiated in the scene, bearing
in mind that the values included in the JSON file are defined in relation to
the planet Earth (i.e., multipliers).
Next, we just need to create ImediateGeometry nodes that will be used for
each planet to display their respective trajectories:
Please open the scene solar_system.
Create a new Spatial node as a child of the existing Spatial node in the
scene, and rename the new node render. This node will be used as a folder
to store all the ImmediateGeometry nodes.
Please drag and drop the node Earth as a child of the node render.
Duplicate this node (i.e., Earth) eight times to create the corresponding
nodes for the other planets: Jupiter, Mars, Mercury, Neptune, Pluto,
Saturn, Uranus, and Venus.

Once this is done, please modify the script planet.gd as follows (new code
in bold):
var im1
im1 = get_node("/root/Spatial/render/Earth")
if (name == "planet"): im1 = get_node("/root/Spatial/render/Earth")
else: im1 = get_node("/root/Spatial/render/"+name)

In the previous code, we make sure that the ImmediateGeometry node that
you have just created is used for the relevant planet based on its name.

Before we can previoe the scene, please do te hfollowing:
Select the node called load_planets in the Scene Tree.
Drag and drop the file planet.tscn to the empty field to the right of the label
Planet Template, in the Inspector.

Once this is done, please save your code, and play the scene. As you play the
scene, you should be able to see some of the planets orbiting around the sun with
their corresponding trajectories.

While this is working, and because some planets are extremely far away
from the sun (compared to planet Earth), it will not be possible to show (and
see) them all; so we will just make sure that the user can zoom in and out to be
able to see the planets that are both close and far away from the sun:
Please select the Camera node already present in the scene.
Attach a new script to it and rename the script move_camera.
Add the following function to the script:

func _input(event):
if (Input.is_key_pressed(KEY_Q)):
global_transform.origin = Vector3(0, 8000,0)
if (Input.is_key_pressed(KEY_W)):
global_transform.origin = Vector3(0,2000,0)
if (Input.is_key_pressed(KEY_E)):
global_transform.origin = Vector3(0,250,0)

In the previous code:
We detect the keyboard keys pressed by the user.
If the user presses the Q key, the y coordinate of the camera will be
changed to 8000 to zoom out and see the planets that are further away from
the sun.
If the user presses the W key, the y coordinate of the camera will be
changed to 2000 to zoom in slightly and see the planets that are closer to
the sun.
If the user presses the E key, the y coordinate of the camera will be
changed to 250 to zoom in and see the planets that are the closest to the
sun.
You can now play the scene, and use the keys Q, W, and E to zoom in and
out and see the planets orbiting around the sun.

Level Roundup
In this chapter, we have learned how to create a level procedurally. We became
more comfortable with reading text and JSON files. We managed to create levels
that can be modified easily either through a simple text file, an image, or even a
JSON file. Finally, we have also learned to add and access assets from a JSON
file from our script. So, again, we have covered considerable ground to save you
considerable time when creating your scenes.
Checklist
You can consider moving to the next stage if you can do the
following:
Create a simple scene from an array.
Read a text file from a script.
Read the content of a JSON file from a script.
Understand the concept of keys and attributes when
reading a JSON file.

Quiz
Now, let’s check your knowledge! Please answer the following questions
(the answers are included on the next page) or specify whether these statements
are either TRUE or FALSE.
1. The class called File can be used to open files from your script.
2. JSON stands for JavaScript Object Notation.
3. Please find one error in the following JSON file
{
"obj1":{"name":"wall1", "color":"red", "location":"10,0,10" "rotation":"0,0,0", "scale":"1,2,1",
"level":1},
"obj2":{"name":"wall1", "color":"green", "location":"10,0,10" "rotation":"90,0,0", "scale":"1,2,1",
"level":1}
}

1. It is possible to create JSON files for your own use, provided that they
follow proper syntax.
2. If a JSON file is located in your project, you will be able to read it from
your code.
3. So that an image can be read pixel by pixel, it just needs to be imported
into your project.
4. The attributes stored for all nodes in JSON files are saved as float variables.
5. A JSON file consists of key/value pairs for every object listed within.
6. A dictionary can be used to store information present in a JSON file.
7. To keep data intact, it is sometimes necessary to lock a file while reading it.

Answers to the Quiz
1. TRUE.
2. TRUE.
3. A comma is missing after the attribute location for both objects.
{
"obj1":{"name":"wall1", "color":"red", "location":"10,0,10" "rotation":"0,0,0", "scale":"1,2,1",
"level":1},
"obj2":{"name":"wall1", "color":"green", "location":"10,0,10" "rotation":"90,0,0", "scale":"1,2,1",
"level":1}
}

1. TRUE
2. TRUE.
3. TRUE.
4. TRUE.
5. TRUE.
6. TRUE.
7. TRUE.

Challenge 1
Now that you have managed to complete this chapter and that you have
improved your skills, you could use these to make the level creation and loading
more efficient. So for this challenge, you will be creating and loading three
different levels:
Create three different text files, each describing the content of a level, using
0s and 1s, as we have done at the start of this chapter.
Save these files with different names to your project folder.
Create a function that loads any of these levels based on a parameter passed
to this function. For example
Fun load_level(level:int)

Create a menu level with three buttons, one for each level.
When the player presses a button, the corresponding level should be
generated (i.e., loaded).
Challenge 2
In this challenge, you will be modifying an existing JSON file and also
creating and using your own JSON file:
Modify the planets.json file to add three imaginary planets of your choice
and test the scene.
Create a new color attribute for all planets, that will be used for the
trajectory of each planet. You can use any of the following colors: blue,
cyan, yellow, gray, green, magenta, red, or white.
Read this attribute and set the color of the trajectory path accordingly (i.e.,
the circle that represents the orbit).
Challenge 3
In this challenge, you will also be creating and using your own JSON file:
Create your own JSON file and create a scene based on this file.
You can also, if you wish, load the JSON information from an existing
JSON file.
OceanofPDF.com

Chapter 2: Accessing and Updating a
Database
In this section, we will learn how to interact with a database from Godot,
using some simple but effective techniques.
After completing this chapter, you will be able to:
Understand basic database concepts.
Understand how online databases can be accessed through scripting.
Understand how to access a database from Godot.
Access this database to read or update information about the player.

Introduction to online databases
As it is, you may know how to save information from a game so that it
is kept between scenes using global variables. This being said, in many
situations, there is data that you may like to keep centrally, so that it can be
accessed by players (or Godot) regardless of the computer or device used
by the player. This can, for example, consist of a list of high scores, players’
preferences, or players' details. In this case, as for many web-based
applications, these details are stored on a server in an online database.
So what's a database?
To put things simply, a database is a collection of tables; each table
contains specific information arranged in columns and rows. Each column
corresponds to a specific attribute (e.g., name, score, etc.), while a row
refers to a particular data set (each data set has the same type of attributes,
but the values may differ between rows). For example, you could have a
table that includes details about a player such as: login, password, highscore, last room explored, etc. So, to access this information, you would
usually need to access the database and then select this particular table;
once the table is selected, you would then look at the row that includes the
information for a particular user or player. Each player could be identified
by an id, or by their nickname. So, that’s it in a nutshell.
Now, in web development, accessing the database is usually performed
with what is called a server-side script; a server-side script is a script, or a
piece of code, that is saved on the server; when called, it is executed on the
server and the results are then sent to the client (for example, your browser).
These scripts can be written in several types of languages including PHP
(Personal Home Page or Hypertext Preprocessor), a very popular serverside scripting language.
So, in a typical setting, you would do the following:
Write a PHP script.
This script would then be saved on a server.
When executed (e.g., when a url that points to the script is entered in a
browser), this script can do several things, including returning text
(e.g., displayed on screen), performing calculations, or accessing a
database hosted on the same server.
In the latter case, the database can be a MYSQL database.

So let’s look at what a PHP script looks like:
<?PHP
echo "Hello";
?>

In the previous script:
The code <?PHP indicates that we start PHP commands.
The second line uses the command echo to print (or output) the text
Hello.
The third and last line indicates the end of the PHP commands.
Since PHP is a web-based server-side scripting, it is possible to mix
both PHP commands and HTML code in a given PHP script; to differentiate
between these, PHP commands are usually included between the tag <?php
(or <?) and the tag ?>.
We could then usually save this script on a server and give it a name
(e.g., hello.php)
We would then typically execute this script by requesting the page
hello.php and typing its url in a browser, for example:
yourserver.com/hello.php
You would then see the text "Hello" in your browser
In other words, by entering the url of the script, you are asking the
server to execute the script; and in this case, the script will display, through
the command echo, the text "Hello"
Now, of course, more complex tasks, including database access, can be
done through PHP, but this is the general idea behind executing server-side
scripts.
When you want to access an online database with Godot, the process is
quite similar in the sense that you do the following:
Create a script in Godot.
Within this script, provide the url of the PHP script to be called.
Call this url from Godot, so that the script is executed.
Record the result sent from the PHP script in Godot (e.g., by using
GDScript).

So now that you have a clearer idea of what server-side scripting is, let’s
have a closer look at the nitty-gritty of accessing a database before we can
translate this skill to Godot.

Accessing a database through PHP
To access a database, you usually need the following:
an IP address.
a user name.
a password.
When a database has been set up, it is often associated with a user, its
password, along with access permissions. The permissions for this user
define what this user can or can’t do with the database (e.g., read or write).
Once a database and the corresponding user have been created, tables can
be created for this database; put simply, tables are similar to a spreadsheet
with columns and labels for each column, and a new row for every new
record. For example, we could create a table that is labeled player and that
includes details about each player; details about each player would then be
recorded in a corresponding row; these details could be, for example, an id,
a password, or a high-score. As for the variables used in GDScript, each of
these rows has a type: the id and the score could, for example, be integers,
and the login could just be text.
So let’s look at a code example that illustrates how a database could be
accessed through PHP. You don’t need to write this code yet; this is just
provided as an example, and we will get to create such scripts later in this
chapter.
<?php
function connect()
{
$host="localhost";
$database="mydatabase";
$user="user1";
$password = "mypassword";
$error = "Cant connect";
$con = mysqli_connect($host,$user,$password);
mysqli_select_db($con, $database) or die("Unableto connect to database");
}
?>

In the previous code snippet:
We create a function called connect that will perform a connection to
the database of our choice.

We declare variables that will be used to establish a connection with
the database (note that each variable starts with the $ sign in PHP).
$host: this variable defines the address of the host or the server that we
would like to connect to; in our case, we will use the server where the
PHP script is stored; this is usually referred as the localhost.
$database: this variable refers to the database that we want to access;
we will see, later in this chapter, how to set up this database along with
users that can access it.
$user: this refers to the user we have defined for this database.
Note that several users can be granted access to a database, all with
different levels of permissions. It is usually a good idea to define at least
two levels of permissions; for example, one user with read-only access,
and another user with read and write access.
$password: this refers to the password defined for the user (s) stated
above.
$error: this will be the error displayed if PHP can’t manage to connect
to the database.
We then create a connection to the server using the variable defined
previously through the command mysqli_connect. This is a built-in
PHP function.
We finally select the database defined previously; if this is not possible
(i.e., error when trying to access the database), we display an error
message.
So at this stage, we can understand some of the code that can be used to
connect to a server and a corresponding database; we will now look at how
it is possible to read from a database in PHP.
In PHP, it is possible to request information from a database using what
is called a query. This query is usually performed using what are usually
called SQL commands. SQL commands make it possible to select a
database and a table to, for example, read information from or write data to
a table. These commands can only be processed once a connection has been
established with the server and the database.
So let’s say that we’d like to read all the records from a specific table;
we could then use the following code:
$query = "SELECT * FROM players";

$result= mysqli_query($con, $query);
$n = mysqli_num_rows($result);
for ($i = 0; $i < $n; $i++)
{
$name = mysqli_fetch_assoc($result)["name"];
$score = mysqli_fetch_assoc($result)["score"];
echo $name."\t";
echo $score."\n";
}

In the previous code:
We create a new string called $query; this string includes an SQL
query that basically selects all records from the table called players.
The star character * indicates that all records are selected (we will see,
later on, how we can focus on or select a specific record).
We then execute this query using the command mysqli_query; the
result of the query (the information returned by the database) is then
stored inside the variable called $result.
Because the table may include several records, we could obtain several
records in the results and the number of records, in this case, is stored
in the variable called $n;
We then loop through all the records sent back from the database (in
response to our query), and for each record, we access a particular
attribute (or column). So the attribute name is saved in the variable
$name, and the attribute called score is saved in the variable called
$score
using
the
command
mysqli_fetch_assoc.
The
mysqli_fetch_assoc command includes two parameters: (1) the result
(records) returned by the database based on the query, and (2) the
attribute that we are interested in.
Finally, we display the corresponding name and score.
Note that using SQL commands, it is also possible to sort the results
based on specific criteria; for example, we could ask the database to return
the name and score, and to order these in ascending or descending order of
scores.
Let’s look at the next code snippet to illustrate this principle.
$query = "SELECT * FROM players ORDER by score DESC";

In the previous code, the SQL query requests all records from the table
players; it also requests that these should be ordered in descending order of
scores.

We could also, to make this even neater, limit the result to the top three
scores using the following query.
$query = "SELECT * FROM players ORDER by score DESC LIMIT 3";

In the previous code, we add the command LIMIT to limit the number
of records returned from the database to 3.
One of the other interesting things we can do is to write data to a
database; for example, you may register a new player in the database and
save or update its score; this, again, can be done with SQL queries. So let’s
see how this can be done.
The following example illustrates an SQL query that inserts a new
player as well as its score in the database.
$name = “Paul”;
$score = 25;
$query = "insert into players values ('$name', '$score');";

In the previous code:
Two variables are declared for both the name and the score of the
player.
We then create a query that will insert a new record in the table called
players; for this new record, the two columns for the player’s name
and score will be set with the values previously defined.
Now, the previous scenario may happen only when the user registers for
the first time in the database; what may happen next, is that the player may
need to save or update its score after each subsequent game. In this case,
because the player’s information has already been recorded in the database,
we could use another type of SQL command, the command UPDATE, as
illustrated in the next code.
$name = “Paul”;
$score = 25;
$query = "UPDATE players SET score = '$score' WHERE name = '$name'";

In the previous code:
We define the variables $name and $score.
We then create a query that updates the columns score in the table
called players for the record with the name $name. So here, we need
to be more specific so that we can access a particular row; this row is
identified by its attribute called name; so it is assumed that all players
have a different name in this case.

So, as you can see, using SQL commands you can do several things
including reading a table, writing to a table, or even updating a table. For
the latter, you need to specify an attribute that will identify the row that you
need to specifically modify; this is often an id, but it can consist of other
types of variables if need be.

Passing data to a PHP script
One of the last things that will be of help when transferring data
between Godot and a database, is the ability to pass information to a PHP
script; in many cases, you will want, not only to receive information and
data from the script, but also to be able to pass data to the script, so that this
data can be processed by the script and used to, for example, to update the
database or to check for some information (e.g., login details). For example,
you may want to check the login or password for a particular user, or
specify what record should be updated and what data should be used in this
case.
In PHP you can pass variables along with their values by adding them to
the url of the PHP page as follows:
http://www.mysite.com/index.php?playerName=john&score=100

In the previous code:
We first use the url of the PHP page and then add variables after the url
of the page.
http://www.mysite.com/index.php

A question mark is added to the url.
http://www.mysite.com/index.php?

Then the name of the variable and its value are passed using the syntax
variable = value.
http://www.mysite.com/index.php?playerName=john&score=100

The & character is used between each pair of variables and values.
So here, we have two variables (playerName and score) along with
their corresponding values (john and 100).
So once this information is passed to the PHP script, it can be captured
(and used) by the PHP script as follows:
<?PHP
$name = $_GET[‘playerName’];
$score = $_GET[‘score’];
?>

In the previous code:

We define two variables $name and $score.
The first variable is initialized with the value of the variables
playerName passed to the PHP script through the url (as we have seen
earlier).
The same is done for the second variable, except that this time we use
the variable score.
So that’s pretty much it as far as PHP and MYSQL are concerned; there
is, of course, more to SQL and PHP programming; however, to be able to
access the database, the previous sections should be sufficient to understand
how this works.

Accessing PHP from Godot
So when your PHP scripts have been created and your database set up,
the last thing you will need to do will be to connect to the PHP script
through Godot. This can be done using the WWW class, a class that makes
it possible to retrieve content from a url, as illustrated in the next code
snippet.
onready var http_request = get_node("../HTTPRequest")
...
http_request.connect("request_completed",self, "post_request_completed")
...
http_request.request("http://localhost:8888/updateScore_b.php”)

In the previous code:
We create a new variable called http_request that refers to an existing
HTTPRequest node; this type of node is used to make http requests,
that is, opening pages from a specific url.
We then connect the event called request_completed to a specific
function, in our case the name of the function is
post_request_completed.
Finally,
we
perform
a
request
to
open
the
url
http://localhost:8888/updateScore_b.php.
Once the server has processed this request, the function
post_request_completed will be called and we can use it to process
the information sent to us by the server.

Setting up your server
Great. So I hope that the whole principle behind accessing a database
from Godot is clearer now (and if it’s not, the next section will help you to
put this knowledge into practice). So in the next sections, we will create a
simple system whereby:
A player will be asked for his/her id.
If the id is already in the database, then the database will be updated
with the new score.
If the id is not in the database, then a new record will be created for
this player with an id of his/her choice, along with the new score.
Once the score has been saved, the top 5 scores (i.e., the high scores)
will be displayed on screen with their corresponding names.
So the workflow will be as follows:
Set up the database and associated users.
Create a new table with some players and corresponding scores.
Create PHP scripts that will be able to either insert, update, or read
data in the database we have created.
Save these scripts on the server.
Design a simple user interface in Godot whereby players can enter
their id or register.
Access the PHP scripts that we have created previously in order to
perform the previous tasks.
So first, let’s set up your server. In order to execute the PHP scripts,
these scripts need to be saved on a dedicated server. This server will also
make it possible to create and set up your database. If you already have
your own website, the chances are that you also have different packages
installed that make it possible to set up a database, as described in the next
figure.

Figure 1: Database tools included in web packages

For example, in the previous figure, you can see some of the standard
tools offered as part of your control panel (if you have a control panel
included in your website package), to manage databases, including
PHPMyAdmin, and MySQL Databases. The former will make it possible
to create new databases, while the latter will make it possible to create and
update new tables.
Now, you may not have a website with these tools, and that’s perfectly
fine too. In fact, if you have never done any server-side scripting before, I
would suggest that you use a local server for the time being. You could, in
this case, use a tool called WAMP (if you are using a windows machine) or
MAMP (if you are using a Mac). This software includes an Apache server,
one of the world’s most used webservers, and PHP (so that you can run
PHP scripts), along with MySQL. MAMP is available from the official
website: https://www.mamp.info/en/.
AMP stands for Apache (the webserver), MySQL, and PHP. It is a
package that includes all the elements needed to run PHP scripts and access
a MYSQL database. I would suggest that you use this package (instead of a
webserver) for the next sections of the chapter, as it should make the
creation of your database much easier.
When you are using this software (i.e., M-AMP or W-AMP), the only
difference is that your server is hosted on your own computer (rather than
online), which makes testing easier, because you do not need to be
connected to the Internet in order to access the server or connect to the
database. Once your code has been tested locally (i.e., using WAMP or
MAMP), you can then create the database on the remote server and upload
your PHP code so that the application runs “live”, and so that it is
accessible from anyone through the Internet.
Whether you are using a local server (i.e., MAMP or WAMP) or a
remote server, you will connect to the server using the address localhost or
127.0.0.1 because the pages will be hosted where the server is (either on the
remote or the local server).
So, if you are using a remote server (but again, I suggest that you use
W/MAMP instead, as explained in the next sections), you will need to do
the following:
Create a new database using the MySQL Databases tool

Create a user with sufficient rights to access the database and complete
some commands such as READ, WRITE or UPDATE.
Add tables and their content to the database using PHPMyAdmin.
Creating your database using a remote server
You can skip this section if you are using (or prefer to use) a local server
(e.g., W/MAMP). In fact, I would strongly suggest that you skip to the next
section, called Creating a database using a local server, if you don’t
already have some experience with PHP or PHPMySQL or setting up a
remote server.
So, let’s get started!
Please note that the look and feel of the control panels may differ across
hosting companies; however, the principles and the steps explained in this
section should remain relevant.
To create your database:
Connect to your website.
Open your control panel.
Click on MySQLDataBase tool.

Once the new page opens, enter the name of your database and click
on Create Database.

The following page will then be displayed to acknowledge that the
new database has been created.

You can then click on the button labeled Go Back, to return to the
previous page.
At this stage, you should see that your new database has been created,
as described on the next figure.

However, you will see that it doesn’t have any associated users who
could be using it, or corresponding access rights. So we will need to add
such users:
Please scroll down to the section called MySQL Users.
Create a new user by setting a name and a password.

Please take note of the name of the user, along with its password, as we
will need this information later on when accessing the database through
PHP.
Once this is created, a confirmation page should be displayed as
follows.

You can then click on the button labeled Go Back, to return to the
previous page.
The last thing we need to do now is to associate this new user to the
database that we have just created:
Please scroll down to the section called Add User to Database.

Make sure that the correct user and database are selected (using the
drop-down menus). For example, in the previous figure you can see
that I am setting privileges for the user learntoc_admin (created
previously) to be linked to the database learntoc_book4_players.
Then click on the button labeled “Add”.
This will open a new window labeled Manage User Privileges.

In this window, select the privileges SELECT, INSERT and
UPDATE, as described on the previous figure. These are the key
commands that we will need to perform.
Once this is done, click on the button labeled “Make Changes”.
The following window should then appear:

Please click on the button called “Go Back”
So at this stage, if you are using a remote server (i.e., your web host),
you have managed to create a database, an the associated user, along with
access rights for this user: so we are almost there :-).
Creating a database using a local server
So if you are using a local server (i.e., W/MAMP), the steps to create
your database and associated user will be slightly different; however, the
idea and principles will remain similar.
Please download the software MAMP (if you are using a Mac) or
WAMP (if you are using a Windows-based computer) from the
following site:
https://www.mamp.info/en/downloads/.
Install it on your computer following the instructions.
Once it is installed you can launch it, and the following (or similar
window) will appear.
Bear in mind that the examples provided in the next section are from a
Mac Operating System (i.e., using MAMP), so the screen on Windows
computers may differ slightly; however, the layout should be similar.

Launch the application by clicking on “Launch MAMP”.

In the next window, click on Start Servers (as described in the
previous figure).
After a few seconds, you should see that the icons located in the topright corner of the window are ticked (green) indicating that the
Apache Server and MySQL servers have started.
A new page will also open in your browser, as described in the next
figure.

This page includes some important information, including a default host
name, a user name, and a password for this user to access the server through
PHP, along with a PHP example.

So, at this stage, our servers are running; the only thing that we need to
do is to create a database; note that because this set up will be used locally,
we can use the default user root which has, by default, all access privileges

to the database (e.g., READ, WRITE, UPDATE, and SELECT, etc.). So
let’s create a new database:
Select the tool PHPMyAdmin from the drop-down menu located at
the top of the browser in the page that is already open (as described in
the next figure).
If the MAMP window is not opened yet, you can open it using the url
http://localhost:8888/MAMP/?language=English

Note
that
you
can
also
use
the
address
http://localhost:8888/PHPMyAdmin/ to access PHPMyAdmin on your
computer. This will open a new window with information on your MYSQL
database.
Click on the tab labeled Databases.

Give a name to your database, for example, players, and click on the
button labeled Create (leave the Collation default option).

At this stage, as the database has been created, you will see it listed in
the left frame of the window, as well as at the top of the window.

Please click on the tab called Privileges.

You should see that, by default, a user root has already been created; the
default password for this user is root.

So at this stage, we have managed to create a database on the local
server (or the remote server if you have followed the previous section), and
it is time to create a table that will hold information about the players’
scores.

Creating new tables
The following can be performed whether you use a local or a remote
server. The only difference is the way you access PHPMyAdmin; you can
use the address http://localhost:8888/PHPMyAdmin/ if you are using a local
server.
Please open PHPMyAdmin.
Select your database (i.e., click on players in the left-hand menu).

Select the tab called Structure. This section makes it possible to
define the structure of a table including the name and the type of the
columns within.

Within this tab, specify a new name for the new table, for example,
high_scores, and a number of columns (2: one for the name and one
for the score), as illustrated in the next figure.

Click on the button labeled Go, located at the bottom of the page, to
complete the creation of the table.

In the new window, that will be used to specify the name and type of
the variables stored in the table, please enter the following
information:

First row:
Name = name
Type = TEXT
Length/Values = 100
Leave all other options as default.
Second row:
Name = score
Type = INT
Leave all other options as default.
Once this is done, please click on the button labeled Save, located in the
bottom-right corner of the window, as illustrated in the next figure.

Then the following window will appear, indicating that the table was
successfully created; it should include the columns that we have
defined previously (e.g., name and score).

So at this stage, we just need to add information to this table so that we
can access it and test it accordingly from PHP.
Please select the tab called Insert from the top of the window; this
section is used to insert rows (i.e., data) into our table.

Insert two new records as follows:

First Record:
Name = player1
Score = 10
Second Record:
Name = player2
Score = 20
You can then click the button labeled Go located after the second
record.
Note that you can add one or several records (or rows) at a time. This
can speed up the process of setting up your tables.

Although we don’t need it now, for those used to SQL commands, the
following could have been used within the SQL window (i.e., the SQL tab).
This will have the same effect as creating the previous record manually.
INSERT INTO `players`.`high_scores` (`name`, `score`) VALUES ('player1', '10'), ('player2', '20')

So now that this has been done, it is time to use some PHP code to
access the database.
Creating and running your PHP script
In this section, we will locate where to create and execute your PHP
script on your computer, and then write the necessary code to access our
database from your script.
If you are using a remote server, your script can be added anywhere
within the public_html or www folder; this folder is usually the folder
where all webpages to be accessed by Internet users can be seen and/or
executed. So, if your script is called accessDB.php and is stored in the
public_html
folder,
then
it
will
be
accessible
using:
http://yoursiteaddress/accessDB.php. In order to add this file to the
public_html folder, you can either use file managers included in your web
package or an ftp client.
An FTP client is a software that makes it possible to connect to your
website and to transfer files from or to it. If you are using an ftp client, you
will need to connect using the details provided by your host (the name of
the server, along with an ftp user and password).
If you are using WAMP or MAMP, the location for your PHP files (also
referred as the www folder) will be as follows;
For MAMP (Mac OS) the folder is: Applications/Mamp/htdocs
For Wamp (Windows) the folder is: C:\wamp\www\
From now, this folder will be referred as the www folder, whether you
are using a local or remote server.
So, if your script is called accessDB.php and is stored in the www
folder, it will be accessible using: http://yoursiteaddress/accessDB.php, if
you are using a remote server, and http://localhost:8888/accessDB.php if
you are using a WAMP or MAMP server.
When using a local server through MAMP or WAMP, the url used to
access your PHP script includes the address of the server (i.e., localhost), as
well as a default port for AMP (8888). The port can be compared to a phone
line through which the server listens to and replies to queries.

Next, we will be specifying the PHP version that we will be working
with; for the code introduced in this chapter, version 5 of PHP will be used,
although if you read this book a few months or years after it has been
released, this version may or may not be available. There are slight
differences across PHP versions; this being said the concepts introduced in
this chapter shall remain similar across versions (e.g., +/- minor necessary
changes).
If you are using a local server:
Open the MAMP admin.
Click on the icon called Preferences.

In the new window, select the tab called PHP.
Select the Standard Version 5.6.25.
Please note that these PHP versions may differ over time; however, the
principle explained in the next pages should remain similar.

Click OK.
The server will then restart; you can then check that the correct version
is running by opening the url: localhost:8888/MAMP/ in your
browser, and then by clicking on the tab called phpinfo.

This should display your PHP version at the top of the page.

Next, we will also make sure that any PHP error is displayed on screen,
so that we can see if and where these occur; to do so, we will need to
modify a file called PHP.ini; the location of this file is provided in the
phpinfo window in the section labeled Configuration File. So if you open
the url localhost:8888/MAMP/, and then click on the tab called phpinfo,
you should see the corresponding section, as described in the next figure.

Please note that the previous figure shows the path to the file PHP.ini
on a Mac OS computer; the path for a windows machine should be

different.
So we can now access and modify this file using the path provided by
phpinfo.
Please open this file (i.e., php.ini) using a text editor of your choice.
Search for the text display_errors.
Once you have found it, please replace the text display_errors = Off
with display_errors = On, as described in the next figure.

Please save the file.
So that this change can be applied, we need to restart the server:
Please stop the server using the AMP control panel.
And restart it again.

So let’s test our PHP settings:
Please create a new file with the text editor of your choice, and save it
as updateScore.php inside the www folder.

For Mac OS computers, the www folder is located in
Applications/Mamp/htdocs
For Windows computers the www folder is located in C:\wamp\www\
Add the following code to it.
<?php
echo "Hello World";
?>

Once this is done, save the file, and open this page in your browser, for
example, by typing the following address.
http://localhost:8888/updateScore.php
If you are using a remote server, the url may look like:
mywebsever.com/updateScore.php.
This should display the text “Hello World”.

Once this is done, we can try to connect to our database. Note that if
you are using a remote server, you will need to use the information that you
created when initially you set up the database.
Please add the following code (in bold) to the file updateScore.php.
<?php
echo "Hello World";
$host="localhost" ;
$database="players";
$user="root";
$password = "root";
$error = "Cant connect";
$con = mysqli_connect($host,$user,$password);
mysqli_select_db($con, $database) or die("Unableto connect to database");
?>

In the previous code:
As we have seen in the previous sections, we connect to our database
using the default user and password for our localhost.
If no error message is displayed, then the connection has been
successful.
Next, we will try to read some records from the database.
Please add the following code to the PHP script:
$query = "SELECT * FROM high_scores";
$result= mysqli_query($con, $query);
$n = mysqli_num_rows($result);
while ($row = mysqli_fetch_assoc($result))
{
$name = $row["name"];
$score = $row["score"];
echo "Name:".$name;
echo "Score:".$score;
}

Save your PHP file.
Switch to your browser and refresh the following page.
http://localhost:8888/updateScore.php

The following should be displayed:

If you see this output, you have successfully managed to access and
read data from the database. Congratulations!

Gathering data from Godot
Now that we know that our PHP script works and that we can access the
database, we will modify it and create a new script in Godot so that we can
read and display this information in Godot.
Please comment the following line in your PHP script, as follows:
//echo "Hello World";

In PHP, you can comment your code using // to comment only one line
or /* and */ at the start and the end of the section that you would like to
comment.
Now that it is done, let’s work on the Godot side of things and try to
access this PHP script and gather its output (i.e., the list of players and their
score) from Godot.
Please launch Godot.
Create a new Scene (Scene | New Scene).
In the new window, select the option 2D Scene.
This will create a new scene with a node called Node2D by default.
Please add a new node of type HTTPRequest as a child of the node
Node2D.
Add a new script to this node (i.e., HTTPRequest) and name this
script HTTPRequest (this is the default name for the script).
Open this script.
Add the following code to it (new code in bold).
extends HTTPRequest
func _ready():
connect("request_completed", self, "_on_request_completed")
request("http://localhost:8888/updateScore.php")
func _on_request_completed(result, response_code, headers, body):
var message = body.get_string_from_utf8()
print(message)

In the previous code:
We declare two functions.
In the first function called _ready, we connect the event
request_completed to the function _on_request_completed, and we
then open the url http://localhost:8888/updateScore.php.

We then define the function _on_request_completed; this function is
called when the data has been received from the server following the
previous request.
In this function, the data received is saved in the variable called
message, and then displayed accordingly in the Output window.
Please, save your scene as db.tscn (Scene | Save Scene As). When this
is done, you can make sure that the MAMP server is running, and play the
scene, and check the Output window which should look like the following
figure.

So if you see this (or a similar) message, you have successfully
managed to connect to the database and to read its content from Godot.
Well done!
Now, while we have managed to collect this information, we could try
to display it in a text field; this will mean that we need to create a field,
write this confirmation to it, but also format our text, as for the time being,
the text gathered from the PHP script may not be easily readable.
Please open the PHP script that you have created earlier.
Modify it as follows.
Change the code...
echo "Name:".$name;
echo "Score:".$score;

to...
echo $name."\t";
echo $score."\n";

In the previous code:
We have modified the line of code that displays the name by adding
the character “\t” which is a tabulation.

We have modified the line of code that displays the score by adding
the character “\n” which includes a line break.
Now that this change has been made, we can save the PHP script and
focus on our script.
Please save the PHP script (CTRL + S or CMD + S).
Switch back to Godot.
Add a new node of type TextEdit as a child of the node Node2D, and
rename this new node txt_field_name.
Using the Inspector, change its Rect | Size property to (200, 70).
Using the Inspector, scroll down to the section entitled Custom Fonts
and click on the downward-facing arrow to the right of the label Font,
as per the next figure.

From the contextual menu, select the option New DynamicFont.

Then click on the downwards-facing arrow to the right of the
DynamicFont label and select Edit from the contextual menu.

In the new window, expand the section called Font and drag and drop
the file called BebasNeue-Regular.ttf from the File System tab to the
section called Font Data.

You can now expand the section called Settings, and set the font size
(e.g., 50).

Move the node to the center of the screen using the Move tool.
You can type some text in the Text attribute of this node, to check how
the text will look when the game is running.

Finally, we will create a button that will be used to validate the data
entered in the text field; this is because the user will enter its name in the
text field and then press a button so that its score is saved in the database
accordingly.
Please, add a node of type Button as a child of the node Node2D.
Place this button just below the text field that you have just created,
using the Move tool.
Change the label of this button to “LOGIN” using the Inspector, by
modifying the attribute called Text in the section called Button.

Change the font for this button as we have done for the previous text
field.
Now that the user interface has been defined, it is time to create a script
that will process the entry from the player, and update the database
accordingly, when the button is pressed.
Please select the node Button, add a script to it, and rename the script
save_score.gd.
Add the following code at the start of the script (new code in bold).
extends Button
onready var http_request = get_node("../HTTPRequest")
onready var txt_field_name = get_node("../txt_field_name")
var player_name
var player_score

In the previous code:
We create a new variable called http_request that refers to the node
called HTTPRequest.
We create a variable called txt_field_name that refers to the text field
that we have created earlier.
We then create two additional variables called player_name and
player_score that will be used to save and/or update the player’s name
and score.
We will now add the code that processes the entry from the player:
Please add the following code to the script (new code in bold):
func _ready():
connect("pressed",self,"save_score")
http_request.connect("request_completed",self, "post_request_completed")

In the previous code:
We define the function _ready.
We then connect the event pressed to the function save_score. This
means that whenever the button is pressed, the function save_score is
called.

We also link the event request_completed related to the node
http_request to the function post_request_completed.

Please add the following code (e.g., at the end of the script):
func save_score():
player_name = txt_field_name.text
player_score = 787878
print("Starting to Save Score")
http_request.request("http://localhost:8888/updateScore_b.php?
name="+player_name+"&score="+ str(player_score))

In the previous code:
We create the function save_score.
We save the text entered in the text field to the variable player_name.
We save the value 787878 in the variable player_score.
We print the message “Starting to Save Score”.
We then launch an http request, opening a url that includes two parts.
The
first
part
is
the
address:
http://localhost:8888/updateScore_b.php; it opens a php page hosted
on the server.
The
second
part
is
?name="+player_name+"&score="+
str(player_score); this passes the value for the parameters
player_name and score as we have done beforehand with PHP files.
We use the keyword str to convert the value of the variable
player_score.
Once this is done, we just need to define the function
post_request_completed; so please add the following code to the script:
func post_request_completed():
print("DB updated")

In the previous code, we just print the message “DB updated” once the
function post_request has been called.
You can now test your scene: please play the scene, enter the name
player1 and press the button; as you check the database, you should notice
that the score stored for this player is now 787878 instead of 100. You
should also see the following message in the Output window.
Starting to Save Score
name: player1Found 1 record

Similarly, you can enter the name NEWPLAYER1000 and press the
button; as you check the database, you should notice that a new user called
NEWPLAYER1000, along with its score, have been created. You should
also see the following message in the Output window.
Starting to Save Score
name: NEWPLAYER1000Sorry not registered

Level Roundup
Well, this is it!
In this chapter, we have learned about communicating with a database,
setting up a server, creating a database and tables, and finally reading from,
writing to or updating a database through Godot. In the process we were
also introduced to PHP and MYSQL commands, and we finally managed to
create a system whereby the player’s score is saved in this database. So yes,
we have made some considerable progress, and we have by now looked at
some simple ways to store and access information about the game and the
players on a server.
Checklist
You can consider moving to the next chapter if you can
do the following:
Create a database.
Create tables.
Access a database through PHP and Godot.
Understand the links between Godot, PHP, and a
MYSQL database.

Quiz
It’s now time to check your knowledge with a quiz. So please try to
answer the following questions (or specify whether the statements are
correct or incorrect). The solutions are included on the next page. Good
luck!
1. The event request_completed is called whenever an http request was
processed successfully.
2. To be able to access a database a user with proper privileges needs to
be set up.
3. Crossdomain restrictions apply if you are trying to access a database
on your local server.
4. Write the missing PHP code to select all records from the table players.
$query = "SELECT MISSING CODE

1. Find two errors in this PHP code.
$result= mysqli_queries($con, $query);
$n = mysqli_numrow($result);

1. The event pressed is called whenever a button has been pressed.
2. The keyword IEnumerator when added before the name of a function
indicates that it is a co-routine.
3. Find one error in the following code, assuming that we want to resume
the function once data was sent back from the PHP script.
string url = "http://localhost:8888/updateScore_b.php";
url += "?name=" + playerNname + "&score=" + score;
WWW www = new WWW(url);
return;

1. Data can be passed to a PHP script using its url.
2. The PHP function $_GET can be used to receive (or get) data from a
MYSQL database.

Solutions to the Quiz
1. TRUE.
2. TRUE.
3. FALSE.
4. Write the missing PHP code to select all records from the table players.
$query = "SELECT * from players”;

1. Find two errors in this PHP code.
$result= mysqli_queries($con, $query);
$n = mysqli_numrow($result);

1. FALSE.
2. TRUE.
3. Find one error in the following code, assuming that we want to resume
the function once data was sent back from the PHP script.
string url = "http://localhost:8888/updateScore_b.php";
url += "?name=" + playerNname + "&score=" + score;
WWW www = new WWW(url);
yield return;

1. TRUE.
2. FALSE (it is used to gather information passed in the url).

Challenge 1
Now that you have managed to complete this chapter and that you have
improved your skills, let’s modify the scripts to add more interaction.
Add a new column to the database that you have already created to
save a number (i.e., int) that will represent the last level achieved by
the player.
In Godot, create a splash-screen, along with three other scenes.
In the splash screen, ask the user for its name, and either load the first
scene if s/he is not registered in the database, or load the corresponding
last level achieved stored in the database for this user.
OceanofPDF.com

Chapter 3: Creating a Networked
Multiplayer Game
In this section we will discover how to create a multiplayer game that will
be played over the network.
After completing this chapter, you will be able to:
Understand key and necessary concepts to be able to network your
game.
Understand how these concepts can be used in Godot for a multiplayer
game.
Understand the principle of client and server.
Create a simple multiplayer game.

Introduction
So far, in the previous three books in the series, we have learned to
create a First-Person Shooter (FPS) whereby the player could collect and
use weapons against a Non-Player Character (NPC). While this format is
quite challenging, and interesting, many of you would have already played
multiplayer games where they can compete directly against remote friends.
This is usually a lot of fun, and this is the reason why it would be
interesting to create such a game. The main difference between the games
that we have created to date and this type of game is that the game is played
over a network. The players are in different locations (on the same or
different sub-networks) and can play (and share) the same virtual
environment.
So, the game is usually hosted on a server, clients (i.e., players) connect
to this server, and can play the game. Such games also pose several
challenges, in comparison to single-player games, because all the resources
provided (and shared) in the game need to be synchronized across the
network and between players so that all players obtain a seamless
experience. In addition, network speed may also add to the challenges
posed by the design of this type of games.
As we will progress through this chapter, we will get to understand the
key similarities between single- and multiplayer games; and we will also
discover network concepts that will help you to better understand how the
game needs to be structured. By creating a network game, you will
understand key concepts that you will be able to use in other environments
and games; and while you may not become a network specialist, it will
always be an advantage to understand and develop skills related to
networked games, as many companies usually add a multiplayer option to
their games; so it may be a good asset if you would like to pursue a career
in the gaming industry or just create games casually.
The high-level scripting api
When you are creating networked games in Godot, you are creating a
system whereby several users will communicate and share resources over a
network. This could be over the Internet or even over a Local Area Network
(LAN). For example, the players could be located in the same office, in the
same house, or in the same university. When developing networked
applications, programmers often use what are called low-levels API to be
able to network their game. An API is, put simply, a set of tools that provide

you access to resources or to special features. This being said, in Godot, to
make this process easier, you have the possibility to use what is called a
High-Level API. Using this API, you can access networking features
without having to know too much about what is going on under the hood.
Using this API, you will, for example, be able to create a networked
multiplayer game, make it possible for players to send messages to eachother, send different types of data between the players, synchronize the
view for each player, and to create clients as well as servers.
Adding networking capabilities to your game, may also open your (and
any of the computers joining this game) to be compromised, as it may
happen when creating a networked application; so in any case, when you
release your multiplayer game, you will need to consider and address any
security concerns.
The way we will create our game is quite similar to what we have done
in the last three books in the series, and it will involve the following steps:
Creating a simple 3D world with game objects.
Adding networked features so that it possible to “share” and
“synchronize” the game between players.
Managing connections between the players and the server.
Managing the game from the point of view of the server or the client,
and ensuring that the data shared between players is always up-to-date.
Throughout this chapter, we will be using some of the built-in
components provided by Godot’s High Level multiplayer API to implement
our game. This API will be referred to as HLMAPI from now on in this
book.
About clients and servers
When creating a networked game, you will often hear about the
concepts of clients and servers; these concepts are, of course, present in
most network applications. So what are they?
In computer science terms, a server provides services that may be
requested by clients. So usually clients would connect to the server to avail
of a service. In terms of web development, a server will deliver a page or
execute a programme and provide the output to a client (e.g., through a
client browser). In a networked game, and in the particular case of the game
that we will be creating in this chapter, the server will host the entire game,

and the clients will connect to the server to access the game; the server will
also handle some of the updates in the game (e.g., when new objects are
created), so that all players play the same version of the game; in other
words, we want all clients to see the same version of game. So the clients
and the server, once connected, will continuously exchange information.
Because of the amount of information involved, as we will see later, we will
also have to think about the frequency at which this information is
exchanged, and there will be a balance to be found between updating the
server regularly and keeping the game running smoothly with no or little
lag or delays.
So in Godot, using the HLMAPI, you can see the game (or virtual
world) from the perspectives of both the clients and the server.
Generally, a player will usually be seen as a client; it will connect to the
server to update the server on its own features (e.g., position, health, or
ammos), and the server in turn will send each player information about
other players (e.g., position, health, ammos) or objects that are part of the
game (e.g., whether an ammo pack is still present in the environment).
Again here the idea is that, because the game is shared between players who
are in different locations, all the data in the game is synchronized (i.e., the
same) across players. So for example, if player1 picks-up an ammo in the
game, the game should be updated so that player2 (and other players) can’t
see this ammo anymore. The same applies to health, if player1 is hit by a
projectile, its health should decrease, and the next time this happens, its
health should be known by at least the server, so that the projectile either
inflicts further damage or eliminates the player.
As for web development, a server can be a dedicated computer that acts
solely as a server, or it can also be a computer that both acts a server and a
client (as we have done on the second chapter).
Connection between clients and servers
To be able to exchange data, a client and a server need to be connected.
So, typically a server would have an address and be contacted at this
address through a port (i.e., similar to a channel) by a client. It’s a bit like
having to contact a friend. You can contact your friends by dialing their
mobile number, by dialing their landline number, or by emailing them. In
all cases, your friends will be waiting for your call or email by using (or
listening to) a specific channel (e.g., mobile phone, landline, or email).

So a server would usually be contactable using an IP address. An IP
address is a succession of numbers, separated by dots that help to identify
(and connect to) a computer on a network (over the Internet or a local
network). For example, the IP address 17.142.160.59 is linked to a server
that is used to store the web pages for the website apple.com, or the IP
address 75.126.59.147 is linked to a server that is used to store the web
pages for the website Godot3d.com. If you enter these addresses in a
browser, both sites should come-up. In fact, you could try to guess the IP
addresses for a particular site by opening a command prompt in Windows
or Terminal on a mac computer and typing ping followed by the name of
their website; the system will then return the IP address linked to the server
where the pages are hosted. The addresses mentioned above are public, in
the sense that the servers linked to these addresses can be accessed directly
because there is no firewall between the client and the server. A firewall
would typically restrict access to the devices on its network (e.g., clients or
servers) and hide the actual IP address of these also
However, a server can also use a private address; this is usually the case
when the server is installed behind a firewall. By default, in Godot, and we
will see this later, if the server is hosted on your own computer, the address
of the server will be 127.0.0.1, which, in computer terms, usually defines
your own computer. So by typing 127.0.0.1 in a browser, and if you have an
active server listening to the web port (i.e., http), a page should be
displayed. In Godot, you can specify the network port for your game.
When you access a computer on your own Local Area Network (LAN),
the address of the computer acting as a server may be determined by the
firewall. So for example, if you have a router/firewall at home, the router is
the point of contact between the outside world (i.e., the Internet) and your
local network. So the router will have a public address; however, all the
computers on the network (including yours) will have a private address that
will not be seen by the outside world (i.e., a private address), but that will
be allocated by the router. For example, if you are on a network at home,
your IP address may look like 168.0.0.2 for example (168.0.0.1 would
typically be allocated to the router). This is usually referred as NAT
(Network Address Translation), whereby your router/firewall will allocate
private addresses to computers on the same network.
So generally, the simplest case is when the server has a public address;
in this case, a client may access this server, provided that the client uses the

correct address and port, and that the port is actually open on the server
(i.e., that the server is listening for a client’s request through this port.) In
case we deal with a server with a private address, more complex methods,
including NAT punch-through may be employed.
DNS and IP addresses
As we have seen in the previous section, a public server can be
contacted using a public IP address, and to make things more simple, it is
possible to use an actual name (using alphanumeric characters) to express
this IP address. To take the example provided earlier, instead of having to
remember the IP address 17.142.160.59, we can, instead type apple.com in
a browser window, and this will directly open the Apple site. So there is a
correspondence between the IP address and the actual corresponding url,
and this is done using DNS which stands for Domain Name System. In
short, using DNS, a table that operates the translation between an IP address
and the corresponding domain name is kept on a server so that a site (or
server) can be contacted either using its IP address or the corresponding
domain name. So as you will be using Godot and creating a server for your
game, this server will be contactable using either its IP address or a domain
name.
Managing clients and servers using HLMAPI
When no dedicated servers have been set up to host your game, you can
use a client (e.g., your own computer) to also act as a server.
In Godot when your networked multiplayer game has been created, it
can run as a host or a remote client. A host will include both a local server
and a local client; the remote client usually connects to and communicate
with the host remotely (via the network), whereas the local client and server
connect directly.
In this case, your computer becomes a host. This host is therefore both a
client and a server. In other words, it will be able to host the game, but it
will also have a local client that will be able to access the local server. So,
on the host computer, you would have, in this case, a server and a local
client. We could compare it to owning your own shop or a family shop;
your shop would be comparable to the host (as you will be selling and
providing goods and services); one of your family members can act as a
cashier while another member of the family could be a client (i.e., buy
goods from your shop). So in this case, both members of the family are

hosts (they live in the same building and are part of the family who owns
the shop), and they can be either customers (at times) or sellers.
In addition to the host, remote clients can connect to the host to request
services. So, in this case you have two types of clients: local clients (from
the same computer) and remote clients (from a different computer). So,
typically, a player hosting the game will be a host; this player will have a
server to which other players can connect to and access the game, as well as
a client for the player (who hosts the game) to also play the game.
This feature is interesting as it will make it possible for us to simulate a
networked multiplayer game using only one computer. As you will see later,
we will create a host, with a local server and local client on your computer.

Creating a single-player scene
So, I hope that the network concepts are clear at this stage, if not, not to
worry, these will be explained in context in the next sections. For now, we
will get started on creating our networked scene and using some of the
built-in networking components available in Godot.
The plan for the next sections is to do the following:
Create a simple scene where the player is initially represented by a
capsule and is controlled using the arrow keys: the player will be able
to collect pills and increase its score.
Add networking capabilities so that this scene can be played by (and
shared amongst) several players over the same network.
Make sure that every time a new player joins the scene, s/he is
represented by a capsule in the virtual world and that s/he can see the
other players accordingly.
This will be done step-by-step and all the networking aspects will be
covered in detail, so that you get a solid grasp of implementing a simple
networked game; once you understand how to create such a game, you will
be able to transfer these skills to a game of your choice.
Creating a the player character
To start with our game, we will create a simple environment with a
ground symbolized by a scaled box and a capsule. We will also add
movement to the capsule.
First, let’s create the player’s capsule.
Please create a new scene (Scene | New Scene).
In the new window, please select the option “Other Node”.

In the new window, select the node type “Kinematic Body” and click
on “Create”.
This will create a scene with a default node called KinematicBody.
Add a child node of type Collision Shape to the node
KinematicBody.
Add a child node of type MeshInstance to the node CollisionShape.

Select the node CollisionShape, and using the Inspector, scroll to the
section called CollisionShape, click on the downward-facing arrow to
the right of the label Shape, and select the option New CapsuleShape
as illustrated in the next figure.

In the section called Translation, change the Rotation property to (90,
0, 0).

Select the node MeshInstance, and using the Inspector, scroll to the
section called MeshInstance, click on the downward arrow to the right
of the label Mesh, and select the option New CapsuleMesh.
In the section called Material, click on the downward arrow to the
right of the number 0, and select the option New SpatialMaterial as
illustrated in the next figure.

Once this is done, click on the white disc in the same section, scroll
down to the Albedo section, and select a color of your choice (e.g.,
blue).

Now that we have created the player character, let’s create a script that
will be used to move the player character around the level:
Please save the current scene as net_player.tscn (Scene | Save Scene
As).
Please select the node KinematicBody.

Add a script to this node by right-clicking on that node and selecting
the option “Attach Script” from the contextual menu, name it as
move_net_player.gd.
Once the script is open, please add the following code to it (new code
in bold)
extends KinematicBody
var speed = 3
var score = 0
var direction = Vector3()

In the previous code:
We create three variables: speed, score and direction.
The variable called speed will be used to set the speed of the player
character.
The variable called score will be used to save the score of the player
character as it collects pills.
The variable direction is a vector that will store the current direction
of the player character.
Once these variables have been declared, we will start to handle the key
pressed by the player to move the player character.
Please add the following function to the script:
func _physics_process(delta):
if (Input.is_action_pressed("move_left")):
direction -= transform.basis.x
elif (Input.is_action_pressed("move_right")):
direction += transform.basis.x
elif (Input.is_action_pressed("move_up")):
direction -= transform.basis.z
elif (Input.is_action_pressed("move_down")):
direction += transform.basis.z
else: direction = Vector3(0,0,0)
direction = direction.normalized()
move_and_slide(direction*speed,Vector3.UP)

In the previous code:
We declare the function _physics_process which will be called every
frame.

In this function we test whether the player has pressed the keys
mapped as “move_left”, “move_right”, “move_up”, and
“move_down”.
This will correspond to the left, right, up and down arrow keys and this
mapping will be completed through the project’s settings in the next
sections.
When the player presses one of these keys, the vector called direction
will be changed to left (negative direction along the x axis), right
(positive direction along the x axis), up (negative direction along the z
axis), and down (positive direction along the x axis).
If no keys are pressed, then the direction is (0, 0, 0).
The vector called direction is normalized, meaning that speed will
remain constant even if the player keeps the key(s) pressed.
Finally, we move the player character using the built-in function
move_and_slide; when using this function, we specify that the
moving direction is determined by the vector called direction and the
variable speed; we also specify what is the up direction in this game,
and in our case it is the Vector3.UP.
Creating the game scene
Now that we have created our player, we will create a simple scene for
the game, and also test whether the player character can be moved around
this environment.
Please save the current scene (Scene | Save).
Create a new scene (Scene | New Scene).
In the new window, please select the option “3D Scene”.

This will create a new scene with a default node called Spatial.
Please rename this node “main”.
Save this scene as networked_scene.tscn (Scene | Save As).
Add a new node of type Spatial to the node main and rename this new
node level1.
Add a MeshInstance node as a child of the node level1.
Select this new node, and, using the Inspector, scroll down to the
section MeshInstance, click on the downward-facing arrow to the
right of the label called Mesh and select the option New CubeMesh.

Click on the white cube to the left of the label Mesh, and change the
size of this mesh to (50, 2, 50).
Now that we have created a basic ground for the game, we can add the
player and test if it is possible to move it:
Please right-click on the node level1 and select the option Instance
Child Scene.
In the new window, select the scene called net_player.tscn and press
the button labeled Open.

This will create a new child node called KinematicBody to the node
level1.
Please set the position of this new node to (-11, 0.3, -10) or any other
location as long as it is slightly above the ground.
Please add a new node of type Camera as a child of the node level1;
set the position of this new node to (0, 36, 1) and its rotation to (-90,
0, 0).
Finally, now that the environment and the player have been set up, we
just need to map the keys that will be used to move the player character, so
please do the following:
Open the Project’s Input preferences (Project | Project Settings |
Input Map).
In the new window, add new actions called “move_up”,
“move_down”, “move_left” and “move_right” if they don’t already
exist, and map them to the arrow keys “up”, “down”, “left”, and
“right” respectively, as per the next figures.

Once this is done, you can now play the scene networked_scene and
check that you can move the player character by using the arrow on the
keyboard.
Completing the design of the level
Now that we can move the character player around the environment, we
will complete the design of the level by adding the following features:
External and internal walls.
Pills that the player can collect to increase the score accordingly.
Speed pills that when collected by the player will increase the speed of
the player character.
First, let’s create a template for the walls that will be used in the level:
Please create a new scene (Scene | New Scene).
In the new window, please select the option “Other Node”.

In the new window, select the node type “Static Body” and click on
“Create”.
This will create a scene with a default node called StaticBody
Please rename this node wall.
Add a child node of type Collision Shape to the node wall.
Add a child node of type CSGBox to the node CollisionShape.

Select the node CollisionShape, and using the Inspector, scroll to the
section called CollisionShape, click on the downward arrow to the
right of the label Shape, and select the option New BoxShape.
Select the node CSGBox, and using the Inspector, scroll to the section
called CSGBox, and set the width, height and depth attributes to 2.

In the section called Material, click on the downward arrow to the
right of the label Material, and select the option New SpatialMaterial
as illustrated in the next figure.

Once this is done, click on the white sphere in the same section, scroll
down to the Albedo section, and select a color of your choice (e.g.,
green).

Please save the scene as net_wall.tscn (Scene | Save Scene As).
Once this is done, please do the following:
Open (or switch to) the scene networked_scene.tscn so that we can
add walls to it.
Using the Scene Tree window, right-click on the node level1, select
the option Instance Child Scene from the contextual menu, select the
scene net_wall.tscn, and click on “Create”; that will add a child
called wall to the node called level1.
Select this node (i.e., wall)
Using the Inspector, set its position to (-25, 1, 0) and its scale to (1, 1,
25).

Duplicate and rotate this node four times to obtain the following
layout.

Next, we will create the internal walls:

Please duplicate the node called wall, and rename the duplicate
square_wall.
Select the node square_wall, change its scale to (3, 1, 3) and add it
near the bottom left corner, for example, at the position (-1, 1, 18), as
per the next figure.

Duplicate this node several times to obtain the layout described in the
next figure, ensuring that the y coordinate of the duplicate is 1.

Once this is done, you can test the scene and ensure that the player can
navigate through it and not go through the walls.

Adding pills to be collected
At this stage, you can move the player character, and we will add a new
feature whereby the player will be able to collect pills and increase its
score; in case a speed pill is collected, the player character’s speed will be
increased.
Please save the current scene (Scene | Save Scene).
Please create a new scene (Scene | New Scene).
In the new window, please select the option “Other Node”.

In the new window, select the node type “Area” and click on
“Create”.
This will create a scene with a default node called Area.
Please rename this node pill.
Add a child node of type Collision Shape to the node pill.
Add a child node of type CSGSphere to the node CollisionShape.

Select the node CollisionShape, and using the Inspector, scroll to the
section called CollisionShape, click on the downward arrow to the
right of the label Shape, and select the option New SphereShape.
This will create a new node called CSGSphere.

Select the node CSGSphere, and using the Inspector, scroll to the
section called CSGSphere and check that the radius is set to 1.
In the section called Material, click on the downward arrow to the
right of the label Material, and select the option New SpatialMaterial
as illustrated in the next figure.

Once this is done, click on the white sphere in the same section, scroll
down to the Albedo section, and select a color of your choice (e.g.,
blue).

Save your scene as pill.tscn (Scene | Save Scene As).
Now that we have created the scene pill.tscn, we can use this template
to add pills around our level.
Please open (or switch to) the scene networked_scene.
Right-click on the node called level1.
From the contextual menu select the option Instance Child Scene.

In the new window, select the scene pill.tscn and then click on the
button Open.
This will add a node called pill as a child of the node level1.
When this is done, please select this new node and check that its y
coordinate is 1 so that it is just above the ground.
Once you have checked this information, please duplicate the node pill
several time to obtain a layout similar to the one illustrated in the next
figure, with 20 pills in total.

Once this is done, it is time to add other types of pills: speed pills; these
pills, when collected by the player, will increase its speed. For this purpose,
we will proceed as we have for the scene called pill:
Please save the current scene (Scene | Save Scene).
Please create a new scene (Scene | New Scene).
In the new window, please select the option “Other Node”.

In the new window, select the node type “Area” and click on
“Create”.
This will create a scene with a default node called Area.
Please rename this node speed_pill.
Add a child node of type Collision Shape to the node pill.
Add a child node of type CSGSphere to the node CollisionShape.
Select the node CollisionShape, and using the Inspector, scroll to the
section called CollisionShape, click on the downward arrow to the
right of the label Shape, and select the option New SphereShape.
Select the node CSGSphere, and using the Inspector, scroll to the
section called CSGSphere and check that the radius is set to 1.
In the section called Material, click on the downward arrow to the
right of the label Material, and select the option New SpatialMaterial
as illustrated in the next figure.

Once this is done, click on the white sphere in the same section, scroll
down to the Albedo section, and select a color of your choice that is
different to the one you have already chosen for the regular pills (e.g.,
purple).
Please save your scene as speed_pill.tscn.

Now that we have created the scene speed_pill, we can use this
template to add speed pills around our level.
Please open (or switch to) the scene networked_scene.
Right-click on the node called level1.
From the contextual menu select the option Instance Child Scene.
In the new window, select the scene speed_pill.tscn and then click on
the button Open.
This will add a node called pill as a child of the node level1.
When this is done, please select this new node and check that its y
coordinate is 1 so that it is just above the ground.
Once you have checked this information, please duplicate the node
speed_pill several time to obtain a layout similar to the one illustrated
in the next figure, with six speed pills in total.

Managing the collection of pill s and the score
At this stage, we have managed to create a player character that can
navigate in the virtual environment, along with objects that need to be
collected; so in this section, we will add the necessary code for the player
character to collect the pills, and increase the score and the player
character’s speed.
First, let’s work on the collection of the regular pills:
Please save the current scene (Scene | Save Scene).
Open (or switch to) the scene pill.tscn.
Please select the node called pill.
Add a script to this node and save this script as pill.gd: right-click on
the node pill, select the option Attach Script, type “res://pill.gd” in
the new window, and then click on the button labeled “Create”.
Select the tab called Node | Signal located in the top right corner of
Godot (if it doesn’t appear, click on a different node, and then click
again on the node pill), as described in the next figures.

In that tab, expand the section called “Area” (if it is not already
expanded), and then double-click on the section called “body_entered
(body:Node)”.

In the new window, select the node pill.

Leave the default text in the field “Receiver Method” and press on
“Connect”.

That should open the script pill.gd and show that a new function
named _on_pill_body_entered has been created.
This function will be called every time a node of type
KinematicBody, including the player, will enter the area defined by its
collision shape.
Please modify this function as follows (new code in bold):
func _on_pill_body_entered(body):
if (body.is_in_group("player")):
body.update_score(5)
queue_free()

In the previous code:
We check whether the object entering this area is a node that belongs
to the group called player.
If this is the case, then we call the function update_score (that we
have yet to define) passing 5 as a parameter.
We then destroy the pill.
Now that we have defined the script that will handle the collision, we
will need to create the function update_score so that the score can be
updated accordingly.
Please save the current script (CTRL + S or CMD + S).
Open (or switch to) the scene net_player.tscn.
Click on the script logo to the right of the node KinematicBody, so
that the script move_net_player.gd, that is linked to this node, opens.

Once the script is open, please add the following function to it:
func update_score(new_increment):
score += new_increment
print(“Score: ”+str(score))

In the previous code:

We create a function called update_score that takes one parameter
referred to as new_increment within this function.
We add the value of the variable new_increment to the variable score.
We then print the value of the variable score in the Output window.
Before we can test the scene, we just need to make sure that the node
for the player character belongs to the group called player, so that the
collision between the pills and the player can be detected.
Please open (or switch to) the scene net_player.
Select the node KinematicBody.
Select the tab Node | Groups located in the top-right corner of Godot
(if the Group tab doesn’t appear, please click on a different node, and
then click on the node KinematicBody again).
Add the group player to this node (i.e., type the word player in the
text field below the label Manage Groups, and then click Add).

Once this is done, you can open and run the scene networked_scene
and check that after collecting a pill that the score is increased and
displayed in the Output window.
Managing the collection of speed pill s and the score
In this section, we will write the necessary code to collect the speed
pills and to increase the speed of the character player accordingly.
Please open the scene speed_pill.tscn.
Select the node called speed_pill.
Add a script to this node and save this script as speed_pill.gd: rightclick on the node pill, select the option Attach Script, type
“res://speed_pill.gd” in the new window, and then click on Create.

Select the tab called Node | Signals located in the top right corner of
Godot, as described in the next figure.

In that tab, expend the section called “Area”, and then double-click on
the section called “body_entered (body:Node)”.

In the new window, select the node speed_pill.

Leave the default text in the field “Receiver Method” and press on
“Connect”.

That should open the script speed_pill.gd and show that a new
function named _on_speed_pill_body_entered has been created.
This function will be called every time a node of type
KinematicBody, including the player, will enter the area defined by its
collision shape.
Please modify this function as follows (new code in bold):
func _on_speed_pill_body_entered(body):
if (body.is_in_group("player")):
body.speed += 5
queue_free()

In the previous code:
We check whether the object entering this area is a node that belongs
to the group called player.
If this is the case, then we increase the value of the variable speed that
is part of the script attached to the player node (i.e., the script
move_net_player.gd).

We then destroy the speed pill.
You can now save your script and scene, open and run the scene
networked_scene and check that after collecting a speed pill that the player
character’s speed has been increased.

Implementing a multiplayer-networked mode
So at this stage, we have a single-player game whereby the player
character can navigate the level, collect pills, increase its score and also
collect speed pills that will increase its speed.
Our goal is now to network this scene so that it can be played
simultaneously by two remote players.
First, we will do as follows:
Create a lobby: the lobby will be the first scene where players can join
the game by clicking on a button.
There will be two buttons available: a button to host the game, and a
button to join the game.
One player will create a server that will host the game by clicking on
the corresponding button.
The second player will join the game hosted by the first player by
clicking on the corresponding button.
Once the second player has joined the game, the scene
networked_scene will be loaded for both players.
Both scores will be displayed on screen.
The first player who has managed to collect 10 pills will win the
contest and each player will then see a message indicating whether
they have won or lost.
Defining default network settings and functions
Before we create the scene for the lobby (the place from where players
can host or join the game), we will need to create a script where information
can be saved persistently across scenes and with functions that can be
accessed throughout our project. For this purpose, we will create a singleton
script, a script only instantiated once that will be used to initialize the
networked game, by creating the server, and connecting new players to the
server.
Please switch to the Script workspace.

Create a new Script (File | New Script).

Name this script Global.gd.
Please add this code to the script (new code in bold).
extends Node
const DEFAULT_IP = "127.0.0.1"
const DEFAULT_PORT = 31400
const MAX_CLIENTS = 2
var player1_id = 0
var player2_id = -1
var player1_score = 0
var player2_score = 0

In the previous code:
We specify that the default address for the server is 127.0.0.1.
The default port will be 31400.
The maximum number of clients connected to the server will be 2.
Now that the defaults settings have been specified for our networked
game, we will define two functions, each to be used whenever a player
either creates a new game server, or joins a game server.
Please add the following function to the script:
func create_new_server():
var peer = NetworkedMultiplayerENet.new()
peer.create_server(DEFAULT_PORT, MAX_CLIENTS)
get_tree().set_network_peer(peer)
print("Just created Server")

In the previous code:
We create the function create_new_server.
This function will be called whenever the player will decide to create a
new server (and a game).
We create a variable called peer and it is created using the function
NeworkedMultiplayerENet.new. This variable (i.e., peer), is a

NetworkMultiPlayerPeer node, a type of node that is required when
creating a networked scene.
The NetworkMultiPlayerPeer node is then initialized as a server,
with its corresponding listening port and its maximum number of
clients.
Finally, the NetworkMultiPlayerPeer node is associated with the
current scene.
We also display a message confirming that the server has been created
in the Output window.
Now that the code that manages the creation of a game server has been
created, we can create the code that handles the addition of a new player to
a game server.
Please add the following function:
func join_new_server():
var peer = NetworkedMultiplayerENet.new()
peer.create_client(DEFAULT_IP, DEFAULT_PORT)
get_tree().set_network_peer(peer)
print("Just joined server")

In the previous code:
We create the function join_new_server.
This function will be called whenever a player will decide to join a
new server (and a game).
We create a variable called peer and it is created using the function
NeworkedMultiplayerENet.new. This variable (i.e., peer), is a
NetworkMultiPlayerPeer node, a type of node that is required when
creating a networked scene.
The NetworkMultiPlayerPeer node is then initialized as a client, with
the address of the server and its corresponding listening port.
Finally, the NetworkMultiPlayerPeer node is associated with the
current scene.
We also display a message confirming that the client has joined the
server in the Output window.
So at this stage, the script called Global.gd has been created, and we
aim to use it as a singleton; to do so, we need to modify our project’s

settings so that the singleton script is loaded whenever the main scene is
open.
Please save the script (CTRL + S or CMD + S).
Please open the AutoLoad project settings: Select Project | Project
Settings | AutoLoad.
In the new window, click on the white folder to the right of the label
“path”, as per the next figure.

In the new window, select the file Global.gd that you have created
earlier, and press the button labeled “Open”.
In the next window, press the button labeled “Add”.

This will create a new line with a path to the script that we have just
added as a singleton.

Please make sure that the option “Enable” is selected.
You can now press the button “Close” to close this window.
Creating the lobby
Once the default settings and functions have been created, it is time to
create the lobby where the players will be able to create a game server or
join an existing one.
Please create a new scene (Scene | New Scene).
In the new window, please select the option “Other Node”.

In the new window, select the node type “Node2D” and click on
“Create”.
This will create a scene with a default node called Node2D.
Please rename this node main.
Add a child node of type Button to the node main and rename the new
node bt_create_server.
Change the label of this button to “CREATE SERVER” and use the
font of your choice for this button.

Duplicate this button, rename the duplicate bt_join_server, change its
label to “JOIN SERVER”, and move this button just below the
previous one.
Save this scene as network_lobby.tscn (Scene | Save Scene As).

Once these buttons have been created, we will need to handle clicks on
these buttons and to execute a specific function when this happens. To keep
everything tidy, we will create just one script that will include both
functions to be called when either of the buttons are pressed, and we will
store this script on the node called Main.
The general sequencing of the events is as follows:
If one player clicks on the CREATE button, the system will create a
new server.
If another player clicks on the JOIN button, the system will try to
connect him/her to the server, and then notify the game using the event
“connected to server”.
Once we receive this event, we can load the new scene (i.e., the scene
networked_scene that we have created earlier) and hide the lobby.
Let’s create this code:
Please open (or switch to) the scene network_lobby.tscn.
Attach a new script called main.gd to the node main and call this
script main.gd.
Modify the function _ready as follows (new code in bold).

func _ready():
get_tree().connect("network_peer_connected",self,"player_connected")

In the previous code, we connect the event “network_peer_connected”
to the function player_connected; this signal/event is triggered once a
client has joined the server and is emitted to both clients and the server.
Please add the following function to the script:
func player_connected(id):
Global.player2_id = id
var game = preload("res://networked_scene.tscn").instance()
get_tree().get_root().add_child(game)
hide()

In the previous code:
We create the function player_connected
This function is called whenever a client connects to the server, and its
id is also passed as a parameter, so that it can be used later on to
identify the player.
We set the id of the second player.
Finally, we just need to create the two functions to be called whenever
we press the button CREATE or JOIN.
Please add the following two functions to the script.
func on_create_bt_pressed():
Global.create_new_server()
func on_join_bt_pressed():
Global.join_new_server()

In the previous code, we create two functions on_create_bt_pressed
and on_join_bt_pressed; these will be used when a player presses the
CREATE and JOIN buttons, respectively; this being said, we still need to
link the press event on any of these buttons to one of these function, and
that will be done in the next sections.
Finally, we need to link the two buttons to these functions:
Please select the node bt_create_server, select the tab Node | Signals,
and double-click on the event called pressed, as per the next figure.

In the new window, select the node main.

Type on_create_bt_pressed in the text field “Receiver Method” and
press Connect.

Repeat the previous steps with the node bt_join_server, except that
the function for the Receiver Method field should be
on_join_bt_pressed.

Adding and controlling players remotely
So at this stage, we have created a user interface for the lobby, where a
player can create the server, and the other one join the server; when this is
done, each player should be able to see the networked scene; however, we
still need to add each player to the scene and ensure that their movement is
synchronized across the network; so the idea in this section is to:
Define default positions for each player when the game starts.
Add these players at their corresponding starting positions.
Make sure that these player characters are only controlled by their
corresponding players.
Synchronize the movement of these player characters over the
network.
So first let’s define and allocate the position for each player:
Please save the current scene (Scene | Save Scene).
Please open the scene networked_scene.
Remove the node for the player (i.e., KinematicBody): right-click on
the node KinematicBody and select “Delete Node” from the
contextual menu.
Add a Spatial node as a child of the node called level1.
Rename this new node player1_pos, and move it to a location on the
left side of the maze where there are no pills, for example the position
(-11, 0.3, -10), as illustrated in the next figure.

Duplicate this node and call it player2_pos.
Move the node player2_pos to a location on the right side of the maze
where there are no pills, for example the position (11, 0.3, -10), as
illustrated in the next figure.

Now that we have defined the locations for each player, we will modify
our script so that the player characters are effectively moved to these
locations at the start of the game.
Please open the scene networked_scene.tscn.
Select the node level1. Add a new script to it an call the script
main_net_game.gd.
Please open the script main_net_game.gd.
Add the following code at the start of the script (new code in bold).
extends Spatial
onready var player1_pos = get_node("player1_pos")
onready var player2_pos = get_node("player2_pos")

In the previous code, we declare two variables player1_pos and
player2_pos which refer to the two nodes that we have created previously.
Please modify the function _ready as follows:
func _ready():
var player1 = preload ("res://net_player.tscn").instance()
player1.set_name(str(get_tree().get_network_unique_id()))

player1.set_network_master(get_tree().get_network_unique_id())
player1.global_transform = player1_pos.global_transform
add_child(player1)
var player2 = preload ("res://net_player.tscn").instance()
player2.set_name(str(Global.player2_id))
player2.set_network_master(Global.player2_id)
player2.global_transform = player2_pos.global_transform
add_child(player2)

In the previous code:
We declare the variable player1 that is an instance of the scene
player.tscn.
We set the name of the node player1.
We ensure that the master of this node is the server.
We change the position of this node so that it matches the position of
the node player1_pos.
We then add the player1 node to the scene.
For the second player (i.e., the client) the procedure is similar, except
that the name of the node will be set with the id that has been saved
previously (in the script Global.gd), and we ensure that the second
player, who is the client, is the master of its corresponding player
character.
Next, we will need to synchronize the position of the players over the
network; for this purpose, we will modify the script called
move_net_player.gd:
Please open the script move_net_player.gd.
Modify the script as follows (new code in bold):
else: direction = Vector3(0,0,0)
direction = direction.normalized()
if (direction != Vector3()):
if (is_network_master()):
move_and_slide(direction*speed,Vector3.UP)
rpc_unreliable("set_remote_pos", global_transform.origin)

In the previous code:
We make sure that the player character only moves when a direction
has been set (this is to avoid any jittery movement)
We check whether the player can move the current player character.

If this is the case, then we move the player character.
We also call the function set_remote_position passing the position of
the node as a parameter; to call this function, we use the keyword
rpc_unreliable, so that this information is sent to the other peer (i.e.,
the other player); the rpc_unreliable method is usually employed to
synchronize positions across the network; because this instruction is
sent almost every frame, even if the network is unreliable, the data will
eventually arrive, and fast.
Please add the following code to the script move_net_player.tscn.
remote func set_remote_pos(pos):
global_transform.origin = pos

We can now start to test the networked scene to see if both players can
see each other:
Please launch another instance of Godot, and open your project again,
so that you have the project open twice: you can go navigate to your
file system where the project is saved and double click on the file
called project.godot.
In the first project, please select: Editor | Editor Settings | Network|
Debug.
Set the Remote Port attribute to 6007.

Using the second instance of Godot, please set the remote port to 6008:
select: Editor | Editor Settings | Network| Debug and set the set the
Remote Port attribute to 6008.
You can now open the scene network_lobby.tscn and play it in the
first instance of the scene and select to “Create” a server.

You can now open the scene network_lobby.tscn, play it in the second
instance of the Godot, and select to “Join” the server.

This should open the main scene twice, once for the client and once for
the server, as per the next figure.

Once this is done, you can click on one of the windows and use the
arrow keys, you should see that your movement is replicated in the other
window.
Updating the score
So at this stage, we have managed to create a networked game with two
players who can collect pills and move around the level, while their position
is synchronized over the network.
In this section, we will keep track of the score for each of the players,
and also display this score on screen.
Please open the scene networked_scene.
Add a child of type Label to the node level1.
Rename this new node label_game_info.
Using the 2D workspace, move this node at the top of the screen and
resize it, with a font of your choice, as per the next figure.

Next, we will control how the score is displayed in this node.
Please open the script move_net_player.gd.
Add this code at the beginning of the script (after the line that starts
with extends).
onready var game_info = get_node("../label_game_info")

In the previous code, we create a new variable that is linked to the node
that we have just created.
Please modify the function update_score as follows:
func update_score(new_increment):
if (is_network_master()):
Global.player1_score += new_increment
score = Global.player1_score
else:
Global.player2_score += new_increment
score = Global.player2_score
rpc("update_score_remote")
#score += new_increment
#print("Score: "+str(score))

In the previous code, we save the score in the variables
Global.player1_score or Global_player2_score, depending on whether
the current player is the server (i.e., player1) or the client (i.e., player2).

We also make an rpc call (to the other peer) to the function
update_score_remote (that yet has to be created) so that the scores are
updated for both players.
Please add the following function to the script move_net_player.tscn:
remotesync func update_score_remote():
game_info.text = "You:"+ str(Global.player1_score)
str(Global.player2_score)

+

"\n"+

"Opponent

:"

+

In the previous text we display both scores on screen.
You can now test the game by opening the lobby in two different
instances of Godot, and by collecting items; you should see that the
score is updated for both players as per the next figures.

After collecting a pill, both screens should be updated, as per the next
figure:

The last step is to detect when one of the players has reached a given
score, for example 15, and to then display a screen that specifies who won.
Please open the scene networked_scene, if it is not already open.
Create a new Control node as a child of the node Main.
Call the new node end_scene.
Add a ColorRect node as a child of the node end_scene.
Using the Scale tool, scale-up this node so that it covers the entire
visible screen area and set its color to black, or any other color of your
choice.

Add a label node as a child of the node end_scene, and call the new
node label_end_scene.

Modify the size and position of the note label_end_scene, so that it
occupies the center of the screen.

Add a new script to the node label_end_scene and call this script
label_end_scene.gd.
Open the script, and modify it as follows (new code in bold).
extends Label
func _ready():
text = ""
remotesync func update_ui():
if (Global.player1_score > Global.player2_score):
text = "YOU WON"#+str(Global.player1_name)
elif(Global.player1_score < Global.player2_score):
text = "YOU LOST"# +str(Global.player2_name)

In the previous code we display a message depending on whether the
player has lost or won.

Next, because we want this message to appear only when the game is
over, we need to hide the end_scene node at the beginning of the game, so
please, open the script main_net_game.gd and modify the code as follows
(new code in bold):
onready var label_end_scene = get_node ("../end_scene")
func _ready():
label_end_scene.hide()

In the previous code, we create a new variable called label_end_scene
that is linked to the node end_scene, we then hide this node when the game
starts.
Next, we need to display the end_scene node whenever the game is
over:
Please save the script main_net_game.gd.
Open the script move_net_player.gd.
Add the following code at the beginning of the script (after the first
line).
onready var label_end_scene = get_node("../../end_scene/label_end_scene")
onready var end_scene = get_node("../../end_scene")

In the previous code, we create two variables that will be used to refer
to the end scene, or to the label present in the end scene.
Please modify the function update_score as follows (new code in
bold)
else:
Global.player2_score += new_increment
score = Global.player2_score
if (score >= 15) : rpc("end_game")
rpc("update_score_remote")

In the previous code, we call the function end_game if the score of the
current player is equal to or greater than 15.
Please add the following function to the script move_net_player.gd:
remote func end_game():
end_scene.show()
label_end_scene.rpc ("update_ui")
hide()

In the previous code:

We create a function called end_game.
It displays the end scene.
It also calls the function update_ui from the label present and the end
scene.
You can now play the game and test hat after one of the player has
reached 15 points that an end screen is displayed for each player with a
message that displays either “You Won” or “You Lost”.

Level Roundup
Summary
In this chapter, we have become familiar with networking concepts and
we have created a simple multiplayer game. Along the way, we have used
several network components as well as some interesting ways to call
functions (e.g., rpc calls).
Checklist
You can consider moving to the next stage if you can
do the following:
Identify the difference (s) between a client and a
server.
Understand the role of the network master.
Use singletons.
Quiz
Now, let’s check your knowledge! Please answer the following
questions (the answers are included on the next page) or specify whether
they are TRUE or FALSE.
1. A server usually hosts the game, while a client connects to the game.
2. A server is usually contactable only through a port number.
3. The event “body_entered” can be used with Area nodes to detect
objects entering this area.
4. A lobby can be used to manage the creation and setup of a networked
game.
5. When creating a network game, a peer can be created using the
following code:
var peer = NetworkedMultiplayerENet.new()

1. Once a network peer has been created it can only be set as a server.
2. One a network peer has been created and set up it is usually associated
with the current scene using the following code:
get_tree().set_network_peer(peer)

1. A singleton is created and instantiated only once in the lifecycle of the
game.
2. The rpc_unreliable method is usually employed to synchronize
positions across the network
3. Rpc requests can used for communication between network peers.

Solutions to the Quiz
1. TRUE.
2. FALSE (an IP address may be required).
3. TRUE.
4. TRUE.
5. TRUE
6. FALSE (It can also be a client).
7. TRUE
8. TRUE.
9. TRUE
10. TRUE.

1.
Challenge:
For this chapter, your challenge will be to modify the game as follows:
Modify the speed pills so that their effect only lasts for five seconds.
Add pills that will randomly either increase or decrease the speed of
the player.
OceanofPDF.com

Chapter 4: Creating a Memory Game
In this section, we will learn how to create a memory game similar to the
Simon Game, whereby the player needs to remember a sequence of colors
associated with a sound. As the game progresses, the sequence will become
longer, hence, increasing the challenge for the player.
After completing this chapter, you will be able to:
Generate sound effects from Godot and to modify their frequency.
Detect when a player has pressed a button.
Generate colors at random.
Generate a sequence of colors and sound.
Record the sequence entered by the player and compare it to the
correct sequence.

Introduction
In this chapter, we will learn how to create visual and audio effects. We
will also create a process by which a sequence of colors is created, and then
compared to the sequence entered by the player.
The game will consist of four colored boxes that the player will need to
press to reproduce a sequence created randomly by the game.

Creating the interface and the core of the game
In this section, we will create the interface for the game; it will consist
of four buttons of different colors that the player can click on.
So let’s proceed:
Please save your current scene (File | Save Scene).
Create a new scene for this new game (File | New Scene).
In the new window, select the option “Node2D”.

This will create a new scene with a default node called Node2D.
Please rename this node main.
Save this new scene as simon_game (Scene | Save Scene As).
Once this is done, we can start to create the buttons that will be used for
our game.
Please create a new Button node as a child of the node main.
Rename this button red_bt.
Using the Inspector’s Control | Rect section, change its position to (0,
200) and its size to (150, 150).

We will now add a color to this button. In Godot, whenever you want to
add style (e.g., color) to items that belong to the user interface, you often
need to create and apply a new theme and this is what we are about to do:
Please select the node red_bt.
Using the Inspector, locate the section Control | Theme.
Expand the section called Theme (by clicking on the downwards
arrow to the left of the label Theme)
Click on the downward-facing arrow, to the right of the second label
Theme, and select the option “New Theme” from the contextual
menu.

Expand the section Custom Styles, using the arrow to the left of the
label Custom Styles.

Click on the downward arrow to the right of the label Normal, and
select the option New StyleBoxTexture from the contextual menu.

Click on the label New StyleBoxTexture to the right of the label
Normal. This will display additional attributes, including Texture
(you may need to scroll down).

Please drag and drop the texture called red.jpg from the File System
tab, to the empty placeholder to the right of the label Texture.
Your button should now turn to red.

At this stage, we have managed to create a red button and we now need
to create three additional buttons: a green, a blue, and a yellow button.
To do so, please repeat the previous steps (i.e., create new buttons and
corresponding themes) to create new buttons (bt_green, bt_blue, and
bt_yellow) that will look like and be laid out as the next figure:

If you decide to duplicate the red button, please make sure that you
define a new theme for each duplicate; otherwise, using the main theme will
mean that the buttons will also have the same color.

Detecting when buttons have been pressed
So at this stage we have four buttons, and we need to detect when the
player has pressed one of them; for this purpose, we will do the following:
Detect the event “press” for each button, which is triggered when a
button has been pressed.
Connect the “press” event to a function that will be part of a script that
is linked to the node main.
Specify which button was pressed, by passing a unique parameter to
that function when the button is pressed.
Write a message that confirms which button has been pressed.
So let’s get started:
Please attach a new script to the node main, and name this script
simon_main.gd
Add this new function to the script.
func press_bt(name_of_bt):
print("Button Pressed is: "+str(name_of_bt))

In the previous code:
We define a function called press_bt.
This function takes one parameter referred to as name_of_bt within
the function.
We then print a message that includes the value of the parameter
passed to that function.
The message uses the keyword str to convert the parameter from int to
String.
Next, we need to detect and connect the press event on the buttons:
Please select the node red_bt.
Open the tab: Node | Signal.
Double click on the event pressed.
In the new window, select the node called main.

In the field called Received Method, please type press_bt (this is the
name of the function in the script linked to the node main, that we
want to call, in case the player presses this button).

Once this is done, please click on the button labelled Advanced (to the
right of the text field)

In the new window, please select the int type from the drop-down
menu, and press Add, as per the next figure.

Once this is done, a new line will appear in the section called Extra
Call Arguments.

Please enter 1 in the right field; this means that the parameter passed to
the function (i.e., press_bt) is 1. This will be a way to keep track of
the button that was pressed; for example, for the second button, we
will use the same mechanism, and include 2 as a the parameter passed
to the function.

Once you have entered this value, please press the button labelled
Connect.
Please repeat the previous steps to connect the buttons green_bt,
blue_bt, and yellow_bt, ensuring that the parameter passed to the
function is 2, 3, and 4, respectively.
Now that all buttons are connected, please save and play your scene. As
you press the buttons, you should see the corresponding messages in the
Output window; for example “Button Pressed is 1”.

Creating different states for our game
At this stage, we have four buttons that the player can press, and we can
also detect which button was pressed. The next phase is to start to manage
the different phases of the game; generally for this game:
A new sequence of color is displayed.
The player is asked to reproduce this sequence by pressing on the
corresponding buttons.
The player’s entries are assessed to check whether they correspond to
the initial sequence.
To start, let’s declare the different states that will apply to our game.
Please open the script called simon_main.gd.
Add the following code at the beginning of the script (e.g., just after
the first line).
const STATE_PLAY_SEQUENCE = 1
const STATE_WAIT_FOR_USER_INPUT = 2
const STATE_PROCESS_USER_INPUT = 3

In the previous code:
We declare three constants; these are variables that will not change
throughout our game. Although they are integers, their name will be
easier to remember than numbers.
All these variables are there to define a state in which the game will be
at any given time.
So the game will be in one of these states:
Playing a sequence of colors: once a new color has been created, the
new sequence that includes all the colors generated is played. Every
turn, one new color is added to the sequence.
Waiting for the user’s input: After a new sequence has been
played/displayed by the game, the player needs to click on the boxes in
the correct order to reproduce this sequence.
Processing the user’s input: Once the user has pressed the different
buttons, the game will need to process this information to determine

whether the player has remembered and played the previous sequence
correctly.
Once this is done, the game will either add a new color to the
sequence, or restart from the beginning.
The core of our game will be based on all these states; so we will now
modify the _process function to mirror these different states.
Please add the following code at the beginning of the script:
var current_state

Please add the following code in the _ready function:
current_state = STATE_PLAY_SEQUENCE

In the previous code, we just specify that at the start of the game, the
game will play the new sequence.
Please add the _process function as follows:
func _process(delta):
match (current_state):
STATE_PLAY_SEQUENCE:
pass
STATE_WAIT_FOR_USER_INPUT:
pass
STATE_PROCESS_USER_INPUT:
pass
_:
pass

In the previous code:
We create a match statement; this is comparable to branching
instructions based on a specific variable; in our case, we will execute
code based on the value of the variable called current_state.
So if the value of the variable current_state is
STATE_PLAY_SEQUENCE, we will go to the corresponding
section called STATE_PLAY_SEQUENCE.
The idea of this structure is that all branches are mutually exclusive
which means that you can be in only one state at any given time. So

the game will either be playing a new sequence of colors, waiting for
the user’s input, or assessing the user’s inputs.

Playing a sequence of colors
Next,
we
will
be
dealing
with
the
state
called
STATE_PLAY_SEQUENCE; in this state, the game should do the
following:
Pick a color at random.
Add it to the existing sequence of colors.
Play the new sequence of colors (including the last color) and light up
the corresponding boxes sequentially.
Note that if we are at the start of the game, only the new color that has
been generated will be displayed (i.e., the corresponding boxed will be
lit up).
For this purpose, we will need to do the following:
Generate a new color at random.
Store the sequence of colors in an array.
Hide all the boxes currently displayed on screen.
Display (and subsequently hide) each individual box that is part of this
sequence.
First, let’s create the code that will generate a random number.
Please add the following code at the beginning of the script (i.e., after
the first line):
var sequence_of_color = []
var index_of_color = 0

In the previous code, we define the array that will be used to store the
sequence created by the game.
Please add the following code to the _ready function:
current_state = STATE_PLAY_SEQUENCE
for i in range(0,100):
sequence_of_color.append(0)

In the previous code, in addition to specifying the current state, we
initialize the array sequence_of_color; as it is, it should handle up to 100
items.

Please add the following code just before the end of the script:
func generate_new_color():
var rnd = RandomNumberGenerator.new()
rnd.randomize()
var r = rnd.randi_range(1, 4);
sequence_of_color [int(index_of_color)] = r
index_of_color += 1

In the previous code:
We declare a function called generate_color.
We create a new random number with a value that can range between 1
and 4.
We then add this number to the array that stores the sequence of colors
generated by the game.
We then increment the index of the array index_of_color. This is so
that the next time a color is created, it will be added at the index (or
position) index in the array.
Next, we will create a function that will hide all the boxes; this is
because we want to clear the screen before displaying each of the boxes that
are part of the sequence.
Please add the following code at the beginning of the script.
onready var red_bt = get_node("red_bt")
onready var green_bt = get_node("green_bt")
onready var blue_bt = get_node("blue_bt")
onready var yellow_bt = get_node("yellow_bt")
var array_of_bts = []

In the previous code, we declare four nodes red_bt, green_bt, blue_bt,
and yellow_bt that refer to the buttons that we have created earlier. We also
declare an array called array_of_bts.
Add the following code to the _ready function (new code in bold).
for i in range(0,100):
sequence_of_color.append(0)
array_of_bts = [red_bt, green_bt, blue_bt, yellow_bt]

In the previous code, we initialize the array with the name of each of the
buttons on the interface.

Please add the following function at the end of the script.
func hide_boxes():
for a_button in array_of_bts:
a_button.hide()

In the previous code, we loop through the four boxes that we have
created earlier (i.e., the boxes that are on screen) and hide them.
Next, we will need another function that displays a specific box; this is
so that we can display individually each of the colors included in the
sequence generated by the game.
Please add the following function at the end of the script.
func display_box(index_of_box):
for a_button in array_of_bts:
if (a_button.is_in_group(str(index_of_box))):
a_button.show()

In the previous code:
We declare a new function called display_box, that will be used to
display a particular box.
We loop through the four boxes and detect the box that belongs to the
group defined by the value of the variable index_of_box.
In that case, we just display that box.
Before we can test our script, we just need to set a group for each of the
buttons on the interface.
Please select the node red_bt, select the tab Node | Groups, create a
group called 1 and add it to that node.
Please repeat the previous step so that the buttons green_bt, blue_bt
and yellow_bt are associated with the groups 2, 3, and 4 respectively.
Please save your script. At this stage, you can test the functions
hide_boxes and display_box by adding the following code to the
_ready function.
hide_boxes ();
display_box (1);

As you play the scene, you should see that only the red box is displayed.

Creating a new sequence of colors
Now that we can hide and display boxes, we will get to do the
following:
Pick a color/box at random.
Add it to a new sequence.
Display the sequence.
Make sure that there is a delay between the display of each box, so that
the sequence can be identified clearly by the player; otherwise, the
sequence would be displayed too fast to be remembered.
Wait for the player to reproduce this sequence by clicking on the
corresponding boxes.
First, we will create a timer to display each of the colors that are part of
the sequence generated by the game.
Please add the following code to the beginning of the script:
var new_color_has_been_generated
var all_boxes_displayed
var start_timer;var waiting_timer_activated
var waiting_time_elapsed; var timer
var waiting_time; var time_delay_between_displays
var animation_index; var nb_colors_submitted

In the previous code, we declare a set of variables that will be used for
the state called STATE_PLAY_SEQUENCE; each of these variables will
be explained in the next sections.
Please add the following code to the _ready function:
new_color_has_been_generated = false;
start_timer = false;
waiting_timer_activated = false;
waiting_time_elapsed = false;
all_boxes_displayed = false;
timer = 0;
waiting_time = 0;
animation_index = 0;
time_delay_between_displays = 2;
nb_colors_submitted = 0;

In the previous code:

We set the variable new_color_has_been_generated to false.
This variable is used to know whether the game has already selected a
new color at random.
We also declare a series of variables that will be explained in detail
later.
Once this is done, we can look at what the game should do in the state
called STATE_PLAY_SEQUENCE.
Please add the following code to the match section that corresponds to
the state STATE_PLAY_SEQUENCE (new cod in bold).
STATE_PLAY_SEQUENCE:
if (!new_color_has_been_generated):
init_timer ();
generate_new_color ();
new_color_has_been_generated = true;
all_boxes_displayed = false;
hide_boxes ();

In the previous code:
We are in the state called STATE_PLAY_SEQUENCE, a state where
the game is supposed to pick a new colored box at random, add this
color to the existing sequence, and then play the full sequence
(including the last color picked).
If a new random color has not yet been picked, we proceed as follows:
we call a function called init_timer that we yet need to define; this
function will basically initialize the timer that will be used to make
sure that there is enough time or delay between the display of each box
in the sequence.
We call the function generate_new_color; if you remember well, this
function picks a color at random and adds it to a sequence.
Next, we specify that we have picked a new color by setting the
variable new_color_has_been_generated to true.
Finally, we hide all the boxes and set the corresponding value of the
variable all_boxes_displayed to false.
So we can now add the function init_timer at the end of the script as
follows:
func init_timer():

start_timer = true
timer = 0;
animation_index = 0

In the previous code:
We set the variable start_timer to true, so that the timer can start
ticking.
Its initial value is 0.
The animation index is set to 0; when we successively display a new
sequence to the player, we effectively create an animation that includes
several stages depending on the box in the sequence that is currently
displayed as part of the animation. So we will start with the first
element of the animation (i.e., the first box in the sequence).
We
can
now
resume
STATE_PLAY_SEQUENCE.

the

structure

of

the

state

Please add the following to the code that you have already included in
the
match
portion
that
corresponds
to
the
state
STATE_PLAY_SEQUENCE, but not within the same if statement
(new code in bold).
timer += delta;
if (start_timer && timer >= time_delay_between_displays && !waiting_timer_activated) :
timer = 0
hide_boxes ()
display_box (sequence_of_color [animation_index])
animation_index += 1
if (animation_index >= index_of_color) :
start_timer = false
animation_index = 0
waiting_timer_activated = true

In the previous code:
We increase the value of the variable timer by one every second.
This timer is used to determine when we should display the next part
of the animation.
This is the case when the timer has started (i.e., when start_timer is
true), and when we have reached the threshold called
time_delay_between_displays
(i.e.,
timer
>=
time_delay_between_displays).

We also use a variable called waiting_timer_activated; this is
employed to add a slight delay at the end of the animation; without this
delay, the last color would be displayed too briefly; so we create a
waiting timer that will be used once we have reached the end of the
sequence; this is why, in this particular case, we also require
waiting_timer_activated to be false.
When these three conditions are fulfilled, we do perform the next
steps.
The timer is reset to 0.
We hide all the boxes.
We display the box at the current index (i.e., animation_index) in the
sequence.
We increase the value of the variable animation_index by one.
If we have reached the end of the animation (i.e., animation_index >=
index_of_color), we reset the timer, as well as the animation_index,
and we also specify that we will add a slight delay at the end of the
sequence
by
activating
the
waiting
timer
(i.e.,
waiting_timer_activated = true).
Please add the following to the code that you have already included in
the
match
portion
that
corresponds
to
the
state
STATE_PLAY_SEQUENCE (if ensure about the indenting, please
check the solution code). The start of this if statement should be
indented once from the code STATE_PLAY_SEQUENCE:.
if (waiting_timer_activated):
waiting_time += delta
if (waiting_time >= time_delay_between_displays):
waiting_time = 0;
waiting_timer_activated = false;
waiting_time_elapsed = true;

In the previous code:
This code is used when the waiting timer is activated at the end of the
sequence.
Once it is activated, we just increase its time every second.
Whenever it has reached a specific threshold (i.e., waiting_time >=
time_delay_between_displays) we then reset this timer.
Then, the variable waiting_time_activated is set to false (since the
delay has already been applied).

Please add the following code just after the code that you have typed
(i.e., within the same if statement), at the same level of indentation as the
code that starts with if (waiting_timer_activated):.
if (waiting_time_elapsed):
current_state = STATE_WAIT_FOR_USER_INPUT;
nb_colors_submitted = 0

In the previous code: if we have reached the end of the animation and
applied the slight delay at the end (i.e., waiting_time_elapsed = true), then
we move on to the next state where the user needs to repeat this sequence.
We can also add the code to re-initialize all the variables used in the
animation in the _ready function, as follows.
index_of_color = 0;
start_timer = false;
waiting_timer_activated = false;
waiting_time_elapsed = false;
all_boxes_displayed = false;
timer = 0;
waiting_time = 0;
animation_index = 0;
time_delay_between_displays = .5;
new_color_has_been_generated = false;
for i in range(0,100):
sequence_of_color.append(0)
sequence_of_color [0] = 1
sequence_of_color [1] = 2
sequence_of_color [2] = 3
sequence_of_color [3] = 4
sequence_of_color [4] = 2
index_of_color = 4;

The last part of the code creates a virtual sequence of colors and sets the
variable index_of_color to 4 (remember: for an array, the first element
starts at the index 0, so here the index of the last element in this array is not
5 but 4), indicating that the last element of the sequence (or array) is at the
index 4.
You can now save your script and play the scene, you should see that all
the boxes disappear and that a sequence of 5 random boxes is displayed on
screen.

Waiting for the user’s input
So, at this stage we are able to generate a random color and to play a
sequence; so the next step will be to wait for the user’s input; so, in this
section, we will write code that will do the following:
Wait for the user’s input.
Let the player select (i.e., click on) a sequence of boxes.
Record the boxes that were selected by the player.
Record the number of boxes selected.
When the expected number of boxes has been reached (e.g., if the
sequence includes two colors, we expect the player to choose two
boxes), we will then check if the correct sequence was entered by the
player by comparing it to the sequence previously generated by the
game.
In case the sequence entered by the player is correct, the game will
restart the process by generating a new color, and add it to the previous
sequence.
In case the sequence entered by the player is incorrect, the game will
restart with just one color initially.
First, we will record the sequence entered by the player:
Please add the following code at the beginning of the script
simon_main.gd
var sequence_of_colors_submitted = []
var color_submitted

Please add the following code to the _ready function.
for i in range(0,100):
sequence_of_colors_submitted.append(0)

In the previous code, we declare and initialize an array that will be used
to store the sequence of colors chosen by the player.
Please add the function submit_color as follows.
func submit_color(name_of_color):
print("You have pressed color:" + str(name_of_color));
if (current_state == STATE_WAIT_FOR_USER_INPUT):

color_submitted = int(name_of_color);
sequence_of_colors_submitted [nb_colors_submitted] = name_of_color;
nb_colors_submitted += 1;
if (nb_colors_submitted == (index_of_color)) :
current_state = STATE_PROCESS_USER_INPUT;

In the previous code.
We record the color (or the corresponding group) of the box that was
just selected by the player.
We increase the index of the variable called nb_colors_submitted, so
that we know how many boxes the player has selected.
Then, if the player has selected the required number of boxes, we then
proceed to the state called STATE_PROCESS_USER_INPUT.
We can then make a few more changes.
Please, add the following code to the _process function (new code in
bold):
STATE_WAIT_FOR_USER_INPUT:
if (!all_boxes_displayed):
set_box_colors ()
all_boxes_displayed = true

In the previous code:
We check whether all the boxes are displayed.
This is because, in the previous state, the colors are displayed one by
one; however, now the player needs to be able to choose the correct
sequence; therefore, all boxes should now be displayed, so that the
player can click on them.
We call a function called set_box_colors which we yet have to define,
that will display all the boxes.
Please add the following code to the class:
func set_box_colors():
for a_button in array_of_bts:
a_button.show()

In the previous code, we display all the boxes.

Processing the user’s input
In this section, we will process the user’s input.
Please modify the _process function as follows (new code in bold) in
the script simon_main:
STATE_PROCESS_USER_INPUT:
var ok_result = assess_user_move ()
if (ok_result):
animation_index = 0;
new_color_has_been_generated = false
timer = 0
waiting_timer_activated = false
waiting_time_elapsed = false
current_state = STATE_PLAY_SEQUENCE
else:
load_lose_level ()

In the previous code:
We are in the state where the game is processing the user’s inputs.
We create a Boolean variable that will store the result returned by the
function assess_user_move; this function, that we yet have to define,
will return true if the user has entered the correct sequence, and false
otherwise.
So if the player has entered the correct sequence (i.e., if ok_result is
true), then the variable animation_index is set to 0 (so that the
animation can start from the first element of the next sequence); we
also re-initialize several of the variables linked to the state
STATE_PLAY_SEQUENCE,
including
new_color_has_been_generated, timer, waiting_timer_activated,
waiting_time_elapsed, and current_state.
If the sequence is incorrect, we call the function load_lose_level, that
we yet have to define, which loads a scene with a message that
indicates that the player has lost.
So next, we can start to create the function assess_user_move, so that
we can check if the player has entered the correct sequence.
Please add the following function at the end of the script:
func assess_user_move():

var all_perfect = true;
for i in range (0, index_of_color):
var a = sequence_of_color [i]
var b = sequence_of_colors_submitted [i]
print("Comparing "+str(a)+" and "+str(b))
if (int(a) != int(b)):
all_perfect = false
print("Not a match")
if (all_perfect):
print ("WELL DONE!")
return true
else:
print ("NOT RIGHT!")
return false

In the previous code:
We define a Boolean variable called all_perfect and set it to true. This
variable will be used to determine if all the colors selected by the
player were entered in the right sequence; if any error was made, this
variable (i.e., all_perfect) will be set to false.
We then loop through the colors entered by the player; the variable
index_of_color indicates the number of colors entered by the player;
so we go from the first to the last color chosen by the player. The
sequence of colors entered by the player is stored in the variable
sequence_of_colors_submitted and the correct sequence of colors is
submitted in the array sequence_of_color; so we compare these two
arrays at the current index (e.g.., for the first or the second color
chosen).
If the colors are different at the current index, then the variable
all_perfect is set to false; so at the end of the loop, if one of the colors
amongst the sequence chosen by the player is incorrect, the variable
all_perfect is set to false and the value false is returned by the
function.
Otherwise, the value true is returned.
Last but not least, we will create the function load_lose_level that will
be called when the player has entered the incorrect sequence along with the
corresponding scene.
Please add the following code at the end of the script.
func load_lose_level():

SimonSingleton.player_score = index_of_color - 1
get_tree().change_scene("res://end_simon_game.tscn")
print("You just lost")

In the previous code:
We define the function load_lose_level.
We refer to a script called SimonSingleton; this script, that we have
not created yet, will be created and set up so that it is a singleton, and
as such, it will be accessible throughout the game, and its variables
will be persistent; in other words, we will be saving the score in this
script, and the score will be kept regardless of whether we change
scene.
In this function, we save the score which is basically the length of the
sequence that the player has managed to reproduce. So, for example, if
the player has managed to remember a sequence of two colors but has
failed to remember (and to reproduce) the next sequence, then the
score will be 2. Because index_of_colors is incremented just before
we start a new sequence, we need to subtract one from this number to
calculate the correct score if the current sequence was not reproduced
correctly.
We then load the scene called end_simon_game (that we yet have to
create).
So, before we go any further, let’s create and set up the script
SimonSingleton.
Please open the Script workspace, by clicking on the Script icon
located at the top of the window.
Then create a new script: Select File | New Script.
Name this script simon_singleton.gd.
Open this script.
Add this code at the beginning of the script (new code in bold).
extends Node
var player_score

In the previous code, we declare the variable player_score that will be
used to save the player’s score across scenes.
Now, we just need to declare this script as a singleton.

Please open the AutoLoad project settings: Select Project | Project
Settings | AutoLoad.
In the new window, click on the white folder to the right of the label
“path”.

In the new window, select the file simon_singleton.gd that you have
created earlier, and press the button labeled “Open”.
In the next window, press the button labeled “Add”.
This will create a new line with a path to the script that we have just
added as a singleton.

Please make sure that the option “Enabled” is selected.
You can now press the button “Close” to close this window.
Now that this is done, and before we check for incorrect answers from
the player, we can just check if the game works for correct inputs.
Please comment the following code in the script simon_main.gd :
# sequence_of_color [0] = 1
# sequence_of_color [1] = 2
# sequence_of_color [2] = 3
# sequence_of_color [3] = 4
# sequence_of_color [4] = 2
# index_of_color = 4

Add the following code to the function press_bt:
func press_bt(name_of_bt):
print("Button Pressed is: "+str(name_of_bt))
submit_color(name_of_bt)

Please save your script and check that it is error-free
You can play the scene.
The game will display one color, then wait for your input. As you click
on the correct color, it should now display two colors, and wait for
your input again. You should also see the following (or similar)
messages in the Output window.

Now that you have checked that the game plays correctly, we can now
create the scene called end_simon_game.tscn, so that the game also
accounts for incorrect inputs; the new scene will include a Label node that
will be used to display the score as well as a button that the player will be
able to click to restart the game.
Please save the current scene.
Create a new scene (Scene | New Scene).
In the new window select the option Other Node.

In the new window, select the node type Control.
This will create a new scene with a default node called Control.
Add a child of type Label to this node, and set it up so that it displays
the message “YOU JUST LOST” in the middle of the screen.

Add a new child of type Label to the node Control bor duplicate the
current Label node), and rename the new node score_ui.
Set it up so that it features text that is displayed at the top of the screen,
as per the next figure.

Add a new child node of type Button to the node Control, and set up
this button so that it appears at the bottom of the screen and displays
the label “>> Restart <<”, as per the next figure

When this is done, we just need to create a script that we will link to this
object and that will display the score through the node called score_ui.
Please add new script to the node score_ui and call it score_ui.gd.
Modify the _ready function as follows (new code in bold).
func _ready():
text = "Score: " + str(SimonSingleton.player_score)

In the previous code, we display the score using the object score_ui

Please save your scene as end_simon_game.tscn, as well as your script.
We just need to detect when the player presses the Restart button and to
reload the main scene accordingly when this happens.
Please attach a new script to the button that you have created
previously and call this script restart_bt.gd.
Add the following function to it.
func press_bt_restart():
get_tree().change_scene("res://simon_game.tscn")

Using the Scene Tree view, click on the button.
Select the tab Node | Signals and double click on the “pressed” event.
In the new window, select the node Button from the list, and enter the
text press_bt_restart in the field Receiver Method.
You can now save the current scene, and re-open and play the main scene.
As you play the main scene, and enter an incorrect sequence, a new
scene should appear with your score, and a button to restart the game, as
illustrated in the next figure.

Generating sound effects
Ok, so the game works well at present; however, so that the players can
obtain additional information on their move, we could add a few more
features to our game, including:
A text field that displays the current score (or the number of colors that
the player has managed to memorize so far) during the game.
A specific sound for each of the colors, so that the player associates
(and remembers) the colors associated with a sound.
So, first, let’s create the on screen text for the score:
Please open the main scene.
Add a new child of type Label to the node main, and rename the new
node nb_memorized.
Place this node at the top of the screen and set up the font type and size
(e.g., 50).

Once this is done, we will create a function that displays the
corresponding information in this text field.
Please open the script simon_main.gd.

Add this code at the beginning of the script (i.e., before the _ready
function).
onready var nb_memorized = get_node("nb_memorized")

Add the following function to this script.
func update_ui():
nb_memorized.text = str(index_of_color)

Please add the following code at the end of the _ready function.
update_ui();

Add the following code in the function assess_user_move (new code
in bold).
if (all_perfect):
update_ui()
print ("WELL DONE!")
return true;
else:

In the previous code, we update the user interface when the user has
guessed the sequence correctly.
You can now save your script, play the scene, and check that your
score is displayed at the top of the screen.

Once this is done, we can start to add some audio. For this, we will
create a note for which the pitch will be linked to the label of the color
being displayed, or the color chosen by the player. For this purpose, we will
first create an AudioStreamPlayer node, and then use it to generate a
sound effect at run-time. So, let’s get started:
Please open (switch to) the scene simon_game.tscn.
Add a child node of type AudioStreamPlayer to the node main, and
change the name of the new node to audio_player.
Drag and drop the file beep.wav from the File System window to the
empty slot in the section AudioStreamPlayer | Stream in the
Inspector, as per the next figure.

Once this is done, we can start to modify our script to be able to
generate different notes.
Please open (or switch to) the script simon_main.gd.
Add the following code at the beginning of the script.
onready var audio_stream_player = get_node("audio_player")
Add the following function to it.
func play_note(note_to_play):
audio_stream_player.pitch_scale = int(note_to_play)
audio_stream_player.play()

In the previous code:
We define a new note based on the button pressed.
The pitch of the sound is based on this button.
We then play the sound at the pitch defined earlier.
Now that we have defined the function play_note, we can then call it
whenever a box is displayed or when a box has been selected by the player.
Please add the following code at the beginning of the function
submit_color.
play_note (name_of_color)

Please add this code at the end of the function display_box.
play_note(index_of_box)

You can now save your script and test the scene; you will notice that a
different sound is played every time a color is displayed or selected by
the player.

The last thing we need to do now is to be able to check whether the
player is selecting the right color: at present we have to wait for the full
sequence to be entered before completing the test. So, what we could do
instead is to perform this check every time the player selects a box (instead
of waiting for the player to enter a full sequence).
For this purpose, we will create a new function called
assess_user_current_move and call it whenever the user has selected a
box.
Please open (or switch to) the script simon_main.gd.
Add the following function before the end of the script.
func assess_user_current_move():
if
(int(sequence_of_colors_submitted
int(sequence_of_color[nb_colors_submitted-1])):
return true
else:
return false

[nb_colors_submitted-1])

==

In the previous code:
We define the function assess_user_current_move.
We check if the color chosen by the player matches the corresponding
color in the sequence created by the game.
Next, we will just need to modify the function submit_color as follows
(new code in bold):
if (current_state == STATE_WAIT_FOR_USER_INPUT):
color_submitted = int(name_of_color);
sequence_of_colors_submitted [nb_colors_submitted] = name_of_color;
nb_colors_submitted += 1;
var right_move = assess_user_current_move()
if (!right_move): load_lose_level()
if (nb_colors_submitted == (index_of_color)) :
current_state = STATE_PROCESS_USER_INPUT;

In the previous code, as we have done earlier, we check if the player’s
move is correct (i.e., right color selected) and then call the function
load_lose_level otherwise.
You can test your scene and check that after an incorrect move, the
game will display the scene called lose, without waiting for you to enter the
complete sequence.
That’s it!

Level Roundup
In this chapter, we have learned about creating a relatively simple
memory game with interesting features such as: displaying or hiding
objects, playing sounds and generating frequencies for this sound, creating
a finite-state machine, arrays to store a sequence, and a timer to play this
sequence. So, we have covered some significant ground compared to the
last chapter.
Checklist
You can consider moving to the next chapter if you can
do the following:
Create a singleton.
Use match statements to create different states for
your game.
Display or hide objects from your script.

Quiz
It’s now time to check your knowledge with a quiz. So please try to
answer the following questions (or specify whether the statements are
TRUE or FALSE). The solutions are on the next page.
1. In GDScript, when using match statements, you need to add a break
statements for each case.
2. The following code will create a constant variable.
const STATE_PLAY_SEQUENCE = 1

1. The following code will hide a node.
my_node.hide()

1. Provided that audio_stream is an AudioStreamPlayer node for
which an audio file has been allocated, the following code will play
this audio file.
audio_stream_player.play()

1. The following code, if added within the function _process will add one
to the variable timer every seconds.
timer += delta

1. The following code will create a new array.
var sequence_of_color = []

1. When a variable is declared and saved in a singleton script, it will be
available throughout the game.
2. The following variable will be accessible from the Inspector.
export var my_variable:int

1. When connecting a button to a function based on an event through
Godot’s user interface, it is possible to specify what value is passed to
this function in that case.
2. The following code will initialize the array called sequence_of_color:

for i in range(0,100):
sequence_of_color.append(0)

Answers to the quiz.
1. FALSE (this is not necessary when using GDScript).
2. TRUE.
3. TRUE.
4. TRUE.
5. TRUE.
6. TRUE.
7. TRUE.
8. TRUE.
9. TRUE.
10. TRUE:

Challenge 1
Now that you have managed to complete this chapter and that you have
improved your skills, let’s do the following.
Modify the texture of each box so that, instead of displaying colored
boxes, the game displays an image; this image needs to be different for
each box.
Add a splash-screen where the player can press on a start button to
start the game.
OceanofPDF.com

Chapter 6: Creating a Platformer
In this chapter, we will be creating a platformer game that includes most of
the features found in common platformers including:
An animated 2D character that will be able to jump and walk.
Simple platforms.
A camera that follows the player.
Objects that you can collect.
Ladders that the player character can climb.
Magic doors that will teleport the player character to specific areas.
A 2D environment that gives the illusion of depth using parallax.
A polished 2D environment that uses tiles.
Dead zone areas that detect when the player has fallen off a platform.
So, after completing this chapter, you will be able to:
Create an animated 2D character from a sprite sheet.
Control this character, and include gravity.
Use areas to detect collision with objects.
Configure and use a tilemap.
Use Sprite and ParallaxLayer nodes.
Adjust the sped of each layer comprised in the parallax effect.
Destroy objects upon collision.

Introduction
In this chapter we will create a simple level with a 2D character
following this:
Create an animated character.
Control the animated character.
Add simple platforms on which the character can move and jump.
Add objects to collect.
Add sound effects.
Define a dead zone that detects when the player has fallen.
Add ladders that the player character can climb.
Add magic doors.
Add a tile map.
Add a parallax effect.

Creating the main character
The very first thing that we will do is to create an animated 2D
character that the player will be able to control. This character will be able
to walk left, and right, and to jump also. The process will be as follows:
Import the images that will make up the animations for the character.
Create animations from these files (e.g., walking left, walking right,
being idle, or jumping).
Detect the player’s keyboard inputs, move the character accordingly
(e.g., walk, or jump) and apply the corresponding animation to the
player character.
So let’s get started:
Please create a new scene, if the previous project is already open
(Scene | New Scene).
In the new window, please select the option Other.
In the next window, select the node type KinematicBody2D.
This will create a new scene with a default node called
KinematicBody2D.
Please rename this node player.
Add a child node of type AnimatedSprite to the node player.
Select the node labelled AnimatedSprite.
Using the Inspector, scroll down to the section called Transform and
change the scale to (0.5, 0.5).
Add a child node of type CollisionShape2D to the node player. We
will set-up this node later.
Add a child node of type Camera2D to the node player.
At this stage we have added all the elements that will be necessary to
design our character; our next step will be to create the animations that will
be used for this character.
Please select the node AnimatedSprite.
Using the Inspector, scroll down to the section AnimatedSprite |
Frames, click on the downward-facing arrow to the right of the label
Frames and select the option New SpriteFrames, as per the next
figure.

.
Once this is done, please click to the left of the downward-facing
arrow, on the item labeled SpriteFrames,

The SpriteFrames window should open (at the bottom of the screen),
as per the next figure.

If it doesn’t open, please press the tab SpriteFrames located at the
bottom of the window.

Click on the button to create a “New Animation”, as per the next
figure.

This will create a new animation label NewAnim.

Please double click on this label and change its name to idle.
Select the button labeled “Add a texture from File”, as per the next
figure.

In
the
new
window,
navigate
to
the
folder:
res”//animations/player_character, and select the file called
character_maleAdventurer_idle.png.
To be able to see the files more clearly, you may use the option “View
Items as List”, as illustrated in the next figure

Once you have selected the file, please press the button labeled
“Open”. This should add one image to the animation idle.

So far we have managed to create the animation for the idle state, when
the player character is not moving; to be completely accurate this is not
animation, because there is no change in the image over time; this being
said, for the next state (i.e., walking), we will, indeed, create a new
animation (i.e., that includes more than one image).
Please create a new animation by clicking on the corresponding button.

Rename the new animation walking.
Click on the button labeled “Add a texture from File”, as we have
done for the previous animation.
In
the
new
window,
navigate
to
the
folder:
res”//animations/player_character, and select the file called
character_maleAdventurer_idle.png, as we have done earlier.
This time, select the following eight files (SHIFT + CLICK or CTRL
+ CLICK):
character_maleAdventurer_walk0.png,
character_maleAdventurer_walk1.png,
character_maleAdventurer_walk2.png
character_maleAdventurer_walk3.png,
character_maleAdventurer_walk4.png,
character_maleAdventurer_walk5.png,
character_maleAdventurer_walk6.png,
character_maleAdventurer_walk7.png.
Once this is done, please press the button labeled “Open”.
This should add these eight images to the animation walking, as
illustrated in the next figure.

Please change the speed of the animation to 20 FPS, using the
corresponding text field located in the bottom-left corner of the
window, as per the next figure.

You can preview the animation by zooming-in on the character in the
view port and by then setting the option Playing | On to true in the
Inspector.

Please reset the option Playing | On to false after checking that the
animation works well.
Now that we know that the animation is working, we just need to create
an additional animation for the jumping movement; it will consist in, as for
the idle state, just one image.
Please create a new animation, rename it jumping, and associate it
with the image character_maleAdventurer_jump.png.
You can also delete the animation called default, by selecting it and
then pressing the button symbolized by a bin, as illustrated in the next
figure.

So at this stage, you have created three animations for the idle, walking
and jumping states.
The next thing we will need to do is to configure the CollisionShape2D
node attached to the player character; this is so that collisions can be
detected between the player character and other objects such as platforms or
items to collect.
Please select the node CollsionShape2D.
Using the Inspector, scroll down to the section CollisionShape2D,
click on the downward-facing arrow to the right of the label Shape,
and select the option New CapsuleShape2D.

Click on the new item labeled CapsuleShape2D that has just been
created.

You should now see, in the viewport, a green capsule that is
superimposed atop the character player.

This capsule defines the boundary of the collision shape; please drag
the red handles (i.e., the red dots) to modify its width and height so
that the capsule covers most of the torso and legs of the player
character, as illustrated in the new figure.

If in doubt, you can switch to the Inspector, scroll down to the section
CollisionShape2D and change the radius and height of the
CollisionShape2D to 15 and 23 respectively.

So we now have a character with animations for its different states,
along with the ability to collide with other items in the game. The next step
will be to move this character.
Please save your scene as player_character.tscn (Scene | Save Scene
As).

Moving the character
In this section, we will detect the player’s keyboard inputs so that the
player character can be moved accordingly; in our game we will be using
the following scheme:
The left and right arrow keys will move the character to the right and
to the left.
The space bar will make the character jump.
When the player is not pressing any of these keys, then the character
will be idle.
To perform all these actions, we will be creating a script attached to the
player character
So let’s get started:
Please open (or switch to) the scene player_character.tscn (i.e., the
one that you have just created).
Select the node called player.
Attach a new script to this node and name the script character.gd.
Please add the following code to the script (new code in bold):
extends KinematicBody2D
const SPEED = 100
const GRAVITY = 4
const JUMP_FORCE = 180
var velocity = Vector2(0,0)

In the previous code we define the constants SPEED, GRAVITY, and
JUMP_FORCE which will be used to define the speed of the character
when it moves to the left and to the right, the gravity, and the speed of the
jumps, respectively. We also define a Vector2 variable called velocity that
will define the overall velocity of the character.
Please add the following function to the script:
func _physics_process(delta):
if (Input.is_action_pressed("move_right")):
velocity.x = SPEED
if (is_on_floor()):
$AnimatedSprite.play("walking")
$AnimatedSprite.flip_h = false
elif (Input.is_action_pressed("move_left")):

velocity.x = -SPEED
if (is_on_floor()):
$AnimatedSprite.play("walking")
$AnimatedSprite.flip_h = true
else:
$AnimatedSprite.play("idle")

In the previous code:
We create the function physics_process that is called every frame
In this function, we detect the player’s keyboard inputs.
If the player presses the action mapped to the key “move_right” the
horizontal velocity is set.
We then check whether the player is on the ground; this is because the
player can press the left and right keys even when the character is in
the air; when the player character is on the ground, the animation
should be the walking animation. Note that we use the keyword
$Sprite, which means that we select a child node of type Sprite.
We then flip the animated image; this is because the walking animation
as we have defined it earlier, shows the character going to the right; so
to be able to re-use this animation for the left movement, we flip it
horizontally when the character is walking to the left, and leave it
unchanged (i.e., no flip) when the character is moving to the right.
Note that if the player character is in the air and that the jumping
animation is played (as we will see later), this animation will still be
flipped.
We then do the exact same but this time for the action “move_left”.
Finally, we set the animation to idle if none of these actions are
processed (i.e., move_right or move_left).
We can now process the jumping movement:
Please add the following code, after the one you just created (new code
in bold):
else:
$AnimatedSprite.play("idle")
if(Input.is_action_just_pressed("jump") ):
velocity.y = -JUMP_FORCE
$AnimatedSprite.play("jumping")

In the previous code:

We check whether the player has pressed the key linked to the action
“jump”.
We set the vertical velocity using the constant JUMP_FORCE.
We set the corresponding animation (or the image in that case).
Finally, we just need to determine the overall velocity for the player
character and move it accordingly.
Please add the following code, just after the previous code (new code
in bold):
$AnimatedSprite.play("jumping")
velocity.y += GRAVITY
velocity = move_and_slide(velocity, Vector2.UP)
if (is_on_floor()): move_and_slide_with_snap(velocity, Vector2.DOWN*50, Vector2.UP)
velocity.x = lerp(velocity.x,0,0.2)

In the previous code:
We account for the gravity and modify the vertical velocity
accordingly.
We set the velocity.
We move the character left or right if it is on the ground
Finally, we make sure that the character eventually stops (horizontal
velocity) over time using the keyword lerp; this will interpolate
between the current horizontal velocity and a velocity of 0 over time;
lerp (velocity.x, 0, 0.2) means that the horizontal speed will be
decreased by 20% every frame until it reaches 0.
Please save your code and the scene.
It is now time to test the movement of our character. For this purpose,
we will create a new scene and add a simple platform to it.
Please save the current scene (Scene | Save Scene).
Create a new scene (Scene | New Scene).
In the new window, select the option “2D Scene”.

This will create a new scene with a default node of type Node2D.
This will be our main scene for the platformer.
Please save this scene as platformer.tscn (Scene | Save As).
At this stage, we just need to create a template for a platform as a
separate scene and to then add it to the main scene.
Please create a new scene (Scene | New Scene).
In the new window, select the option Other Node.

In the new window, please select the type StaticBody2D and click on
the button labeled “Create”.

This will create a new scene with a default node of type
StaticBody2D.
Please rename this node platform.
Add a child of type CollisionShape2D to the platform node.
Add a child of type Sprite to the platform node.
Please select the node ColisionShape2D.
Using the Inspector, scroll down to the section called
CollisionShape2D. Click on the downward-facing arrow to the right
of the label Shape, and select the option New RectangleShape2D.
Once this is done, click on the label RectangleShape2D.

Please select the node called Sprite.
Using the Inspector, scroll down to the section called Texture and
drag and drop the texture red.jpg (or any other texture of your choice)
from the File System tab to the empty field to the right of the label
Texture.

Change this node’s scale properties to (2, 2).
Select the node platform an change its scale to (10, 1).
Please save the current scene as platform.tscn (Scene | Save Scene).
So at this stage, we have all the components to create our first scene,
and it is time to combine them:
Please re-open (or switch to) the main scene platformer.tscn.
Right-click on the node Node2D.
Select the option Instance Child Scene.
In the new window, select the scene platform.tscn, and press the
button labeled “Open.”
This will add a new node called “platform” to the current scene.
Please right-click on the node Node2D.
Select the option Instance Child Scene.
In the new window, select the scene player_character.tscn, and press
the button labeled “Open.”
At this stage, you should have three nodes in your scene: Node2D,
platform, and player.

Using the viewport, please move the player character just above the
platform, as per the next figure.

Before we can play our scene, we just need to map the space key to the
action “jump”,
Please open the Project’s input preferences (Project | Project Settings
| Input Map).
In the new window, add the action called “jump”.
Map this action to the space bar.

Last but not least, switch to the scene player_character.tscn, select the
Camera node and, using the Inspector, set its attribute Current to On so

that this camera is active.

Once this is done, it is time to test our game. Please play the scene and
check that the character can move right and left, and that it can also jump.

Making it possible for the player to collect items
In this section, we will write code that will make it possible for the
player to collect items.
So we will do the following:
Create a template scene for diamonds to be collected. These will
consist of an Area2D node coupled to a CollisionShape2D node and a
Sprite node.
An event will be generated whenever the player enters the area defined
for this node.
When this event is triggered (i.e., when the player gets close to the
diamond), a specific function will be called on a script attached to the
diamond, that will destroy the diamond, and also, later on, increase the
player’s score, and play a sound effect
So let’s start:
Please create a new scene (Scene | New Scene).
In the new window, select the option “Other”.
In the new window, select the node type Area2D and press the button
“Create”.
This will create a new scene with a default node of type Area2D.
Please rename this node diamond.
Add a child of type CollsionShape2D to the node diamond.
Add a child of type Sprite to the node diamond.
Select the node Sprite.
Using the Inspector, scroll down to the section called Texture.
Drag and drop the texture called blue_crystal from the File System
window in the project to the empty field to the right of the label
Texture (in the Inspector).

Select the node called CollisionShape2D.
In the Inspector, scroll down to the section called CollisionShape2D.
Click on the downwards-facing arrow to the right of the label Shape
and select the option New CircleShape2D.
This should create a blue disc around the diamond image in the
viewport.
Please resize this shape by dragging the red handle, so that the disc
fully covers the diamond, as illustrated in the next figure.

At this stage the collision shape is all set up; we just need to detect
when the disc is entered by the player and to create a function that will be
called in that case.
Please select the node diamond, add a new script to it and rename it
diamond.
Open the script.
Add the following code to it (new code in bold).
extends Area2D
onready var player = get_node(“../player”)
In the previous code, we create a variable called player that will be
linked to the player node.
Please add the following function to this script:

func entered_diamond(body):
player.increase_score(5)
queue_free()
In the previous code:
We create a new function called entered_diamond.
This function calls the function called increase_score (that we yet
have to create), and passes 5 as a parameter so that the score is
increased by 5.
We then destroy the current node (i.e., the diamond).
We now need to connect the event called enter to the function that we
have just created:
Please select the node diamond.
Open the tab Node | Signals.
Double click on the event body_entered.

Select the node diamond from the list.

Enter the text entered_diamond in the field Receiver Method, and
press Connect.

You can now save the current scene as diamond.tscn (CTRL + S).
It is now time to modify the script linked to the player to create the
function increase_score:
Please open the script called character.gd.
Add the following code before the _ready function.
var score = 0
Please add the following function at the end of the script:
func increase_score(increment):
score += increment
In the previous code, we create a new function called increase_score
that increases the current score by the amount passed as a parameter.
We can now add a few diamonds to the scene and check that the player
can collect them.
Please open (or switch to) the scene called platformer.tscn.
Right-click on the node Node2D.

Select the option Instance Child Scene and select the scene
diamond.tscn.
This will create a new node called diamond.
You can duplicate this node several times and move the duplicates to
different locations in the scene, as illustrated in the next figure.

You can now play the scene, move the player character and try to
collect diamonds.

Adding sound effects
At this stage, the player character is able to collect items in the level,
and, to provide additional feedback to the player, we could add a sound
effect whenever a diamond has been collected or when the player character
is jumping. For this purpose, we will do the following:
Create a node of type AudioStreamPlayer.
Detect when the player has collected a diamond or jumped.
In that case, we will load and play the corresponding sound effect.
So let’s proceed:
Please open (or switch to) the scene called player_character.tscn.
Add a child node of type AudioStreamPlayer to the node player.
Rename this node audio_stream_player.
Open the script character.gd.
Add the following code to it (new code in bold):
extends KinematicBody2D
export (AudioStream) var collect_sound
export (AudioStream) var jump_sound
onready
var
audio_stream_player
get_node("audio_stream_player")
In the new previous code:

=

We create three variables.
The first variable is called collect_sound and its type is AudioStream;
the keyword export means that this variable will be accessible through
the Inspector, allowing us to drag and drop a file (in our case an audio
file) to the corresponding empty slot in the Inspector. This sound will
be used when the player collects an item (i.e., a diamond).
The second variable is called jump_sound and its type is
AudioStream; the keyword export means that this variable will be
accessible through the Inspector, allowing us to drag and drop a file
(in our case an audio file) to the corresponding empty slot in the
Inspector. This sound will be used when the player jumps (i.e., a
diamond).

The last variable called audio_stream_player is linked to the node
audio_stream_player that we have just added to the player node.
Next, we just need to play these sounds when the player jumps or
collects items:
Please add the following function to the script character.gd.
func play_collect_sound():
audio_stream_player.stream = collect_sound
audio_stream_player.play()
Please add the following code to the script diamond.gd (new code in
bold).
func entered_diamond(body):
player.increase_score(5)
player.play_collect_sound()
queue_free()
Please add the following code to the script character.gd.
if(Input.is_action_just_pressed("jump") ):
velocity.y = -JUMP_FORCE
$AnimatedSprite.play("jumping")
audio_stream_player.stream = jump_sound
audio_stream_player.play()
Last but not least, we need to initialize the variables jump_sound and
collect_sound:
Please switch to the scene player_character.tscn.
Select the node player, and you should now see two empty slots
named Jump Sound and Collect Sound.

Drag and drop the file collect_sound.wav from the File System tab
(from the folder audio) to the empty slot to the right of the label
Collect Sound.
Drag and drop the file jump_sound.wav from the File System tab
(from the folder audio) to the empty slot to the right of the label
Collect Sound.
Once this is done, you can switch back to the main scene (i.e.,
platformer.tscn), play the scene and check that a sound effect is
played whenever the player character collects an item or jumps.

Adding a dead zone to detect when the player has fallen
So at this stage, our character can move on the platform and collect
items with corresponding sound effects. However, from time to time, your
player character may fall indefinitely off the edges of the current platform.
So it would be great to be able to detect when the player character has
fallen, and to put it back to its original position accordingly when that
happens. For this purpose we will proceed as follows:
Save the starting position of the player character at the beginning of
the game.
Create an invisible rectangular located below the platform.
Detect when the player collides with this rectangle
Move the player back to its original position.
So let’s proceed:
Please create a new scene (Scene | New Scene).
In the new window, select the option “Other”.
In the next window select the node type StaticBody2D and press the
button labeled “Create”.
This will create a new scene with a default node named
StaticBody2D; please rename this node dead_zone.
Add a child node of type CollisionShape2D to the node dead_zone.
Select the node dead_zone.
Using the Inspector, click on the downward-facing arrow to the right
of the label Shape in the section CollisionShape2D, and select the
option New RectangleShape2D.

You can now click on the label RectangleShape2D to the left of the
arrow.

This will show the attribute Extents; please change its value to (380,
20).

You can now save this scene as dead_zone.tscn (Scene | Save Scene
As).
Please switch to the main scene (i.e., platformer.tscn).
Add the dead zone: right-click on the node Node2D and select the
option Instance Child Scene.
In the new window, select the scene dead-zone.tscn that you have just
created, and press the button labeled “Open”.
This will add a new node called dead_zone to the scene.
Using the Inspector, rescale this node along the x-axis by changing
the scale attribute to (10, 1) and change its position so that it is below
the player and the platform, for example, move it to (0, 600), as
illustrated in the next figure.

At this stage the dead zone has been created and added to the main
scene; so we just need to save the original position of the player, and detect
whenever it has collided with this zone.
Please open the script character.gd.
Add the following code to the script (new code in bold):
const CLIMBING_SPEED = 100
const GRAVITY = 4
const JUMP_FORCE = 180
var initial_position:Vector2
In the previous code, we just declare a vector named initial_position
that will be used to store the player character’s initial position.
Add the following code to the function _ready (new code in bold)
func _ready():
initial_position = global_transform.origin
In the previous code, we set the value of the vector initial_position to
be the current position for the player character which is stored in
global_transform.origin.
Add the following code to the function _physics_process (new code in
bold):
velocity.x = lerp(velocity.x,0,0.2)
for i in get_slide_count():

var collision = get_slide_collision(i)
if(collision.collider.name == "dead_zone"):
global_transform.origin = initial_position
In the previous code:
We create a loop that will be used to go through all the nodes currently
colliding with the player.
We create a variable called collision that will store one of the nodes
currently colliding with the player.
If this node’s name is dead_zone, we then move the player to its
original position by changing the value of the variable
global_transform.origin to the value of the variable initial_position
stored earlier.
You can now save your script and play the scene; move the player
character so that it jumps from the platform, you see should, after a few
seconds, that it has been repositioned to its original location.
Now that the dead zone is working, you can extend the platform game
by duplicating and scaling the platform to achieve the layout of your choice
or a layout similar to the one illustrated in the next figure.

Allowing the player character to climb a ladder
One of the platformers’ key features is the ability for the character
player to climb ladders; so in this section, we will add this feature and do
the following:
Create a ladder from a sprite.
Create an area around this ladder.
Detect when the player has entered or exited this area.
Ensure that when the player enters the ladder area, that it can only
move up or down, and that the corresponding animation is played.
Ensure that when the player character exits the ladder, that it will be
able to use any of the previous controls to either move left and right or
jump.
So first, let’s create and configure a ladder:
Please create a new scene (Scene | New Scene).
In the new window, select the option “Other”.
In the next window, select the node type Area2D.
This will create a new scene with a default node named Area2D.
Rename that node ladder.
Add a child node of type CollisionShape2D to the node ladder.
Add a child node of type Sprite to the node CollisionShape2D.
Select the node Sprite.
Using the Inspector, locate the section called Sprite | Texture.
Drag and drop the texture ladder.png from the File System tab to the
empty slot in the section Texture from the Inspector.

Select the node ladder and change its scale to (0.04, 0.04).
Select the node CollisionShape2D.

Using the Inspector, click on the downward-facing arrow to the right
of the label Shape, in the section CollisionShape2D, and select the
option New RectangleShape2D.
This will create a new blue area that delimitates the collision area.

Please drag the red handles so that the blue area covers the ladder, as
per the next figure.

Next, we will detect and process the event that is triggered when the
player is entering or exiting the area defined for the ladder.
Please save the current scene as ladder.tscn, add a new script to the
node ladder, and name this script ladder.gd.

Add the following code to the script (new code in bold).
extends Area2D
onready var player_node = get_node("../player")
Please add this function to the script:
func entered_ladder(body):
player_node.is_near_ladder = true
player_node.snap_ladder_x_pos = global_transform.origin.x
In the previous code:
We create a function called entered_ladder; we will, in the next
section link this function to the event that is triggered when the player
enters the area defined for the ladder.
We then set the variable player_is_near_ladder, which is declared in
the script linked to the player, to true.
Finally, we set the variable player_node_snap_ladder_x_pos, which
is declared in the script linked to the player, to the x coordinate of the
ladder. This is so that the layer stays aligned with the ladder as it’s
going up and down the ladder.
We can now define a function that will handle the exit event.
Please add this function to the script:
func exited_ladder(body):
player_node.is_near_ladder = false
player_node.player_is_on_ladder = false
In the previous code:
We create a function called exited_ladder; we will, in the next section
link this function to the event that is triggered when the player exits the
area defined for the ladder.
We set the variable player_is_near_ladder, that is declared in the
script linked to the player, to false.
We set the variable player_is_on_ladder, that is declared in the script
linked to the player, to false.

We just need to link the exit and enter events for the ladder to these
functions:
Please select the node ladder.
Select the tab Node | Signals.
Double click on the event body_entered.
In the new window, select the node ladder and enter the text
entered_ladder in the text field labeled “Receiver Method”, and
press the button labeled “Connect”.

Select the tab Node | Signals.
Double click on the event body_exited.
In the new window, select the node ladder and enter the text
exited_ladder in the text field labeled “Receiver Method”, and press
the button labeled “Connect”.

You should now be able to see in the tab Node | Signals that both the
signals body_entered and body_exited have been connected to the
functions entered_ladder and exited_ladder respectively, as
illustrated in the next figure.

Once this is done, we just need to add some code to the script linked to
the player node, so that it can move up and down the ladder.
Please open the script character.gd.
Add the following code before the function _ready.
var player_is_on_ladder = false
var is_near_ladder = false
var snap_ladder_x_pos
Please indent all the code present in the function _physics_process to
the right: select that code, right-click on it and select the option Indent
Right from the contextual menu.
Add the following code at the start of the function _physics_process
(new code in bold).
func _physics_process(delta):
if (!player_is_on_ladder):
if (Input.is_action_pressed("move_right")):
velocity.x = SPEED
Select all the code below the one you just entered (that belongs to the
same function) and indent it to the right: select the code, right click on
the code selected, and select the option Indent Right.
Change the following code (new code in bold).
$AnimatedSprite.play("idle")
if(Input.is_action_just_pressed("jump") && is_on_floor()):
if (!is_near_ladder):
velocity.y = -JUMP_FORCE
$AnimatedSprite.play("jumping")
audio_stream_player.stream = jump_sound

audio_stream_player.play()
else:
player_is_on_ladder = true
global_transform.origin.x = snap_ladder_x_pos
In the previous code we check that by pressing the jump button, and
when on the floor but away from a ladder, the non-player character will
jump.
Add the following code at the end of the function _physics_process
(new code in bold)
for i in get_slide_count():
var collision = get_slide_collision(i)
if(collision.collider.name == "dead_zone"):
global_transform.origin = initial_position
nb_lives -= 1
if (nb_lives <0): print("Game Over")
else:
velocity.x = 0
velocity.y = 0
global_transform.origin.x = snap_ladder_x_pos
In the previous code:
We add an else statement that corresponds to when the variable
player_is_on_ladder is true.
In that case, we initialize the vector velocity.
We ensure that the player is always aligned with the ladder.
It is now time to make it possible for the player character to climb up
and down the ladder:
Please add the following code after the one you have just typed (new
code in bold):
global_transform.origin.x = snap_ladder_x_pos
if (Input.is_action_pressed("move_up")):
velocity.y = 1
global_transform.origin.y -= 1

$AnimatedSprite.play("climbing_ladder")
elif (Input.is_action_pressed("move_down")):
if (!is_on_floor()):
global_transform.origin.y += 1
$AnimatedSprite.play("climbing_ladder")
else:
player_is_on_ladder = false
else:
$AnimatedSprite.play("idle_ladder")
In the previous code:
If the key mapped to the action “move_up” is pressed, we move the
player up and we also make sure that the corresponding animation is
played (note that we yet have to create this animation).
If the key mapped to the action “move_down” is pressed and the
player has not reached the floor yet, we move the player down and we
also make sure that the corresponding animation is played. Otherwise,
if the player has reached the floor, we then set the variable
player_is_on_ladder to false.
We set the vertical velocity to -1 to indicate that the player character is
going up.
Otherwise, we play the animation corresponding to the player
character being idle on the ladder.
The last thing we need to do is to create the animations that will be used
for when the player character is either idle on the ladder or climbing the
ladder.
Please open the scene player_character.tscn.
Click on the node called AnimatedSprite.
Open the SpriteFrames window, if it is not already open, by clicking
on the corresponding tab as per the next figure.

Create a new animation by clicking on the corresponding button and
rename the new animation climbing_ladder, as illustrated in the next
figure.

Click on the button labeled “Add a Texture from File”, as illustrated
in the next figure.

In
the
new
window,
select
both
the
files
character_maleAdventurer_climb0.png
and
character_maleAdventurer_climb1.png, and press the button labeled
“Open”.
This should create two images that are now part of the animation
climbing_ladder,

We will now create the animation for when the player character is idle
on the ladder.
Please create a new animation by clicking on the corresponding button
and rename the new animation idle_ladder.
Click on the button labeled “Add a Texture from File”.
In
the
new
window,
select
the
file
character_maleAdventurer_climb0.png, and press the button
labeled “Open”.
This should create one image that is now part of the animation
idle_ladder,
That’s it, we have now all the elements set up for the player character to
be able to climb a ladder; we just need to add a ladder to the main scene.
Please switch to the main scene (platformer.tscn).
Duplicate one of the platforms and place the duplicate slightly above,
as illustrated in the next figure.

Right-click on the node Node2D.
Select the option Instance Child Scene.
In the new window, select the scene ladder.tscn and then press the
button labeled “Open”.
This will add a new node named ladder to the scene.
Please move this ladder above the platform that you have just
duplicated so that it is effectively between the two platforms.

Before we can play the scene and to ensure that the player steps off the
ladder properly, you could open the scene ladder.tscn, select the node
CollisionShape2D and move the handles so that the blue area does not
cover the first and last steps, as per the next figure. Please make sure
that you save this scene after adding this change.

Once this is done, you can play the scene and move the player close to
the ladder, jump so that it gets on the ladder, and then climb up or
down using the up and down arrow keys.

So hopefully that worked for you and this is great. In the next section,
we will be adding more features that will make this game more challenging
and also more aesthetically appealing.

Creating magic doors
Magic doors are found in many platform games; the idea is that the
player character will be able to literally teleport itself to a different part of
the maze by entering what is often referred as a magic door. So, in this
section we will implement this feature; to do so we will:
Create a sprite that represents the magic door and associate it to an
Area2D node so that it is possible to detect when the player enters the
are defined by this door.
Create a node that represents the location (i.e., the exit) where the
player will be teleported to after entering the magic door.
Detect when the player enters the magic door.
Teleport the player character to the second location (i.e., the exit).
So first let’s create the magic door:
Please create a new scene (Scene | New Scene).
In the new window, select the option labeled Other.
In the next window, select the node type Area2D.
This will create a new scene with a default node of type Area2D
named Area2D.
Rename this node magic_door.
Add a child of type CollisionShape2D to the node magic_door.
Add a child of type Sprite to the node CollisionShape2D.
Select the node Sprite, and drag and drop the file blue.jpg from the
File System window to the empty field to the right of the label
Texture, in the Inspector.

Select the node CollisionShape2D, and, using the Inspector, click on
the downward-facing arrow to the right of the label Shape, in the

section CollisionShape2D, and select
RectangleShape2D from the contextual menu.

the

option

New

Change the scale properties of this node to (0.5, 0.5).
Save your scene as magic_door.tscn (Scene | Save Scene As).
Using the File System window, please duplicate the scene
magic_door.tscn (i.e., CTRL + D or CMD + D) and rename the
duplicate magic_exit.tscn.
Open this new scene (i.e., magic_exit.tscn).
Change the name of the node magic_door to magic_exit.
Save this scene (Scene | Save Scene).
Now that we have created both the magic doors and the exit, it is time to
detect when the player enters the magic door and to teleport it accordingly
to the exit.
Please switch to the scene magic_door.tscn.
Add a new script to the node magic_door and rename this script
magic_door.gd.
Open that script.
Add the following code at the start of the script (new code in bold).
extends Area2D
onready var player = get_node("../player")
onready var magic_exit = get_node("../magic_exit")
In the previous code, we declare two variables player and magic_exit,
which are linked to the nodes player and magic_exit, respectively.
We will now create the code that will teleport the player to the exit:
Please add the following function to the script.

func teleport_to_other_magic_door(body):
player.global_transform.origin = magic_exit. global_transform.origin
In the previous code we create a function called
teleport_to_other_magic_door, where we change the position of the
player so that it matches the position of the node magic_exit.
Please save your script.
Click on the node magic_door.
Select the tab Node | Signals.
Double-click on the event body_entered.

In the new window, select the node magic_door.
Type the text teleport_to_other_magic_door in the Receiver Method
field.

Press the button labeled “Connect”.
Switch to the scene magic_exit.

Add a new script to the node magic_exit and rename the script
magic_exit.
Add the following code to the script (new code in bold).
func _ready():
hide()
In the previous code, we just ensure that the magic_exit node is hidden
as soon as the game starts.
That’s it: we have configured the magic door and the exit; we just need
to add them to the main scene.
Please switch to the main scene (i.e., platformer.tscn).
Right-click on the node Node2D.
Select the option Instance Child Scene.
Select the scene magic_door from the list and click on the button
labeled Create.
Repeat the last steps to add a node based on the scene magic_exit.
At this stage, you should have two additional nodes to your scene:
magic_door and magic_exit.
Create a new platform to the right of the scene, and move the magic
door in locations similar to the ones described in the next figure, so
that the right platform is only accessible by using the magic door.
You may need to rescale both doors slightly.

You can now save and play the scene, and check that after entering the
magic door that the player character is teleported to the exit (i.e., the
other platform).

Creating a scene using tilesets
While we have been using basic shapes to create the platforms in our
game, there is a feature available in Godot that makes it easier to create
platforms and other objects that make up a 2D game: tilesets. Using tilesets,
you can create a level just as you would paint an image in a graphics editor,
and this is what we will do in this section. So the steps involved in using a
tileset will involve:
Identifying and selecting an image that includes the tiles that we want
to use for our game.
Selecting part of this image and saving it as a tileset to be used later.
When applicable, generating colliders for this tileset.
Using the tileset that you have created earlier to generate platforms in
the game.
So, first, let’s create tiles and tilesets:
Using the File System window, duplicate the scene platformer.tscn
and rename the duplicate plateformer_with_tiles.tscn.
Open the scene platformer_with_tiles.tscn.
Remove all the nodes except the root node (i.e., keep the node
Node2D).
Add a child of type TileMap to the node Node2D.
Select the new node TileMap.
Using the Inspector, scroll down to the section TileMap, click on the
downward-facing arrow to the right of the label TileSet, and select the
option New TileSet from the contextual menu.
Once this is done, please click on the item labeled TileSet as per the
next figure.

This will open a new TileSet window at the bottom of the screen.

Click on the button labeled Add Texture to TileSet, as per the next
figure.

In the new window, please select the file tilsesheet.png and then press
Open.
This should add a new tile sheet to your scene.

Click on the button labeled “New Single Tile”, as per the next figure.

Click on the button labeled “Enable Snap and Show Grid”, as per the
next figure.

You should now see a grid over the existing tile sheet.

Please drag and drop your mouse over the tile sheet so as to select the
third, fourth, fifth, and seventh tiles from the top row, as illustrated in
the next figure.

Clicking on the Collision tab so that you can apply colliders to this
tileset, as illustrated in the next figure.

Click on the button labeled “New Rectangle” so that we can define a
collision area for this tileset, as illustrated in the next figure.

Click in the top left corner of the area that you have defined earlier and
drag and drop your mouse so as to create a rectangle that covers the

corresponding area. As per the next figure.

At this stage we are ready to add our first tile.
Using the Inspector, click on the node Node2D and then click on the
node TileMap in the Scene Tree, you should see that a grid is now
displayed in the viewport and also that as you move your mouse over
it, a tileset (the one you have defined earlier) appears to the right of
your mouse.

You can now apply this tileset by left-clicking within the viewport
several times.
You can also remove a tile by pressing CTRL and the left mouse button
on that same tile.

Right-click on the node Node2D, select the option “Instance Child
Scene”.
In the new window, select the scene player_character.tscn and press
the button labeled “Open”.
This will add a new node called player.
Please move this node just above the tiles that you have just created
and test the scene to check that the player can walk and jump on these
tiles.
When you add tilesets (i.e., made of one or more tiles), for tilesets with
one or two tiles you can press the SHIFT key as you press the left mouse
button; for longer tilesets (i.e., with three or more tiles), it may be more
useful to click once at a time.

Once this is done we could add more tiles:
In the Scene Tree tab, please select the node TileMap.
In the Inspector, click on the item labeled Tileset to the right of the
label TileSet in the section TileMap.

This will open the TileSet window.
Please click on the tile sheet that we have already opened, as per the
next figure.

This should show your tile sheet along with a grid.

As we have done before, we will select part of this tile sheet to create
new items (i.e., tilesets) to be added to the scene.
Please click on the button labeled “New Single Tile”.
Drag and drop your mouse over the area highlighted in the next
figures.

Once this is done, switch to the Collision tab. Select the “New
Rectangle” button, and drag your mouse over the same area so as to
create a rectangle that covers this area.

Using the Inspector, click on the node Node2D and then click on the
node TileMap, and you should see that a grid is now displayed in the
viewport and also that as you move your mouse over it, a tileset (the
one you have defined earlier) appears to the right of your mouse.
You should now see, to the right of the viewport, two different types of
tiles that can be added to the scene; these represent the two tilesets that
you have created earlier. Please, select (i.e., click on) the second tileset
(the last one that you created).

You can now click to the right of the platforms that you have already
created to create three (or more) standalone platforms based on your
new tileset.

Once this is done, you can save your scene and test it, moving the
player character so that it jumps over the three new platforms that you
have just created.
You can finish the level, by adding platforms to the right, additional
platforms that can be accessed with a ladder, a dead zone, secret doors, or

diamonds to be collected using a layout similar to the one illustrated in the
next figure.

You can now test your scene.

You can of course create other tilesets for your game, and the general
approach to creating tilesets will be similar to what we have done in this
section.

Creating a parallax effect
In this section we will create a parallax effect to add some visual effects
to our game; a parallax effect is based on the idea that objects further away
from the camera will look like they move slower than the ones closer to the
camera. So for example, in a platformer game, if the environment is made
of trees and mountains further away, as your player character progresses,
the trees will look like they move faster than the mountains.
After using a parallax effect for our platformer, the final layout for our
game will look like the following.

This will consist of several layers that will move at different speeds,
hence giving the illusion of depth through a parallax effect.
So let’s start creating this parallax effect:
Please add a node of type ParallaxBackground to the node Node2D
and rename this new node layer1.
Add a child node of type ParallaxLayer to the node layer1.
Add a child node of type Sprite to the node ParallaxLayer.

Click on the Sprite node that you have just created.
Drag and drop the picture layer1.png from the File System (within the
folder parallax) to the Inspector in the empty field to the right of the
label Texture in the section Sprite.

Using the Inspector, change the Scale property of this node to (0.5,
0.5).
Using the viewport, move this Sprite node so that it occupies about
three quarters of the visible area, or just so that the cactuses appear just
below the player and the first set of platforms, as per the next figure.

Click on the node ParallaxLayer, and, using the Inspector, scroll
down to the section called Motion, and change the Motion | Scale
property (in the section ParalllaxLayer | Motion) to (1.5, 1).

Finally, set the attribute mirroring to (950, 0).

You should then see that the sprite is repeated horizontally.

Last but not least, select the node layer1, and using the Inspector set the
attribute Layer to 0.
We have just set up our first layer, the one that is the closest to the
player; as you play and test the scene, you should see that the sprite for this

layer moves as the player progresses to the right or left of the scene. For
this parallax effect to be complete, we just need to set up the other six
layers.
Please duplicate the node layer1 (CTRL + D), this will create a new
layer named layer2.
Click on the node Sprite that is a child of the node layer2, set its sprite
with the image called layer2, and move this Sprite up so that it is
above the previous image, as per the next figure.

Once this is done, click on the node ParallaxLayer that is a child of
the node layer2, scroll down to the section called Motion, and change
its Scale attribute to (1, 1).
Finally, select the node layer2 and, using the Inspector, change its
Layer property to -10.
You can repeat this process to create four additional layers with the
following attributes:
layer3: layer attribute = -20, ParallaxLayer node: Motion | Scale
attribute = (0.5, 1), Sprite node: Sprite = Layer3.png.
layer4: layer attribute = -30, ParallaxLayer node: Motion | Scale
attribute = (0.4, 1), Sprite node: Sprite = Layer4.png.

layer5: layer attribute = -40, ParallaxLayer node: Motion | Scale
attribute = (0.3, 1), Sprite node: Sprite = Mountains.png.
layer6: layer attribute = -50, ParallaxLayer node: Motion | Scale
attribute = (0.1, 1) and Mirroring = (0, 0), Sprite node: Sprite =
Sun.png.
So at this stage, your scene should look like the following figure.

You can now test your scene and check the parallax effect.

Level Roundup
In this chapter, we have learned to create a complete platformer with many
of the features commonly found in this genre, including an animated
character, platforms, items to collect, ladders to climb, magic doors. Along
the way, you have also added sound effects to your game, and improved its
visual appeal by using tilesets and a parallax effect.

Quiz
Now, let’s check your knowledge! Please answer the following
questions (the answers are on the next page) or specify whether they are
TRUE or FALSE.
1. An animated sprite can include one or more images.
2. An AudioStreamPlayer can be used to plays sound effects in your
game.
3. When an Area2D node is defined, it can be associated with events
triggered when another node enters or exits this area.
4. It is possible to duplicate a scene using CTRL + D.
5. It is possible to duplicate a node using CTRL + D.
6. Using a parallax effect, objects closer to the player character will
appear to move slower than those further away.
7. To create tilesets and tiles in a scene, it is necessary to create a node of
type TileMap.
8. A ParralaxLayer node can be used to set the relative speed of the
layer in order to create the visual parallax effect.
9. A ParralaxBackground node can be used to define the depth of the
image used for the parallax.
10. The following code will play the clip associated with an
AudioStreamPlayer node
Audio_stream_player.play()

Answers to the Quiz
Now, let’s check your knowledge! Please answer the following
questions (the answers are on the next page) or specify whether they are
TRUE or FALSE.
1. TRUE.
2. TRUE.
3. TRUE.
4. TRUE.
5. TRUE.
6. TRUE.
7. TRUE.
8. TRUE.
9. TRUE.
10. TRUE.

1.
Challenge 1
For this chapter, you can improve and extend your existing scenes by
adding the following features:
A score displayed on screen.
Checkpoints that add 50 points to the score when the player character
passes them.
Dangerous items that will move the player back to its original position
upon collision.
OceanofPDF.com

Chapter 6: Frequently Asked Questions
This chapter provides answers to the most frequently asked questions about
the features that we have covered in this book.

Networking
What is the difference between a client and a server?
In computer science terms, a server provides services that may be
requested by clients. So usually clients would connect to the server to avail
of a service. In terms of web development, a server will deliver a page or
execute a programme (e.g., script) and provide the output to a client (e.g.,
through a client browser). In a networked game, and for the particular case
of a FPS, the server will host the entire game, and the client will connect to
the server to access the game, and to also avail of any update in the game,
so that all players have a synchronized version of the game world; in other
words, we want all clients to see the same version of the world in which
they play. So the client and the server, once connected, will exchange
information. Because of the amount of information involved and possible
bandwidth challenges, there is a balance to be reached between updating the
server regularly and also keeping running the game smoothly with no or
little delay.
What is the difference between a public and a private address?
Servers that use public address can be accessed directly from the
Internet because there is no firewall between the client and the server. A
firewall would typically restrict access to the devices on its network (e.g.,
clients or servers) and hide the actual IP address of these also. However, a
server can also use a private address; this is usually the case when the
server is installed behind a firewall. By default, in Godot, if the server is
hosted on your own computer, the address of the server will be, in most
cases, 127.0.0.1, which, in computer terms, usually defines your own
computer (i.e., localhost).

Accessing databases
How do I run a PHP script?
A PHP scrip needs to be executed by a server, so it needs to be hosted
on a server and then accessed through its address (i.e., url). These scripts
are usually saved in the public folder of the webserver.
How do I access a database using PHP?
To access a database in PHP you need a server name (or address), a user
name, a password, the name of a database, along with the name of the table
that you need to access. In the next code snippet, you should be able to see
how a connection is initiated in PHP through a function called connect; the
function mysql_connect is employed to establish a connection to a server,
based on settings such as: the name of the server, the name of the database
to be accessed, a user name, and its password.
function connect()
{
$host="localhost" ;
$database="mydatabase";
$user="user1";
$password = "mypassword";
$error = "Cant connect";
$con = mysqli_connect($host,$user,$password);
mysqli_select_db($con, $database) or die("Unableto connect to database");
}

Do I need to host my pages on a website to run PHP scripts or to
create a database?
While an online server is a common solution, you can also download
and install AMP and run the server on your own computer for testing
purposes; AMP packages (MAMP or WAMP for example), include a
webserver, as well as MySQL, so that you can also create and access a
database hosted on your own computer, if need be.
In terms of accessing a database, what does the term localhost
mean?
Localhost, when used within a PHP file, refers to the server where the
PHP script is stored; so if the script is stored on your computer, and you
have a local server, then the localhost will be the webserver on your
computer; however, if these files are hosted on a remote server, then this
remote server will be the localhost in this case.
What is the link between Godot, PHP, and MYSQL?
When accessing a MYSQL database through Godot, the process is
usually as follows: (1) Godot accesses a PHP page, this page contacts the

database and performs actions (e.g., read or write); (2) in case data is read,
this data is stored in the PHP script, and then sent back to Godot from this
script.
What are SQL statements?
SQL statements can be used to perform a query on a database; they are
set of instructions used to perform actions such as: selecting, ranking,
reading or writing to records.
Why is there a need to set privileges for a database?
When you create an online (or local) database, you usually want to
restrict access to it so that only admin users can modify it. This is so that the
database is not changed by mistakes, or to avoid possible malicious and
unauthorized changes to the database.

Reading files
What is JSON?
JSON stands for JavaScript Object Notation. As you will see in the next
code examples, these files use the extension .json and have a common
syntax that makes them easy to read.
What advantage is there to using JSON for my games?
You can create your own JSON files using the attributes of your choice
to best reflect and serve the requirements of your game or application; you
could save information about each scene, about the NPCs (e.g., what paths
they can use), or the weapons. So yes, you could virtually save any type of
information with these files, using an easy-to-read format.
How can I read the content of a text file from Godot?
You can store this file in your project and read its content as follows:
onready var file = 'res://maze.txt'
func read_file():
var f = File.new()
f.open(file, File.READ)
var full_text = ""
while not f.eof_reached():
full_text += f.get_line()

f.close()
How can I read the content of an image (the color of each pixel)?
To read the pixels from an image at the position (x, y), you can use the
method get_pixel, as demonstrated in the next code.
var image = load("res://outline.png")
var data = image.get_data()
data.lock()
for i in range (0,10,1):
for j in range (0,10,1):
var pixel = data.get_pixel(i,j)

OceanofPDF.com

Chapter 7: Thank you

I would like to thank you for completing this book; I trust that you are now
comfortable with database access, procedural generation, networked games,
and 2D games.
So that the book can be constantly improved, I would really appreciate
your feedback. So, please leave me a helpful review on your e-store letting
me know what you thought of the book and also send me an email
(learntocreategames@gmail.com) with any suggestions you may have. I
read and reply to every email.
Thanks so much!
[ ]
OceanofPDF.com

About the Author
Patrick Felicia is a lecturer and researcher at Waterford Institute of
Technology, where he teaches and supervises undergraduate and
postgraduate students. He obtained his MSc in Multimedia Technology in
2003 and PhD in Computer Science in 2009 from University College Cork,
Ireland. He has published several books and articles on the use of video
games for educational purposes, including the Handbook of Research on
Improving Learning and Motivation through Educational Games:
Multidisciplinary Approaches (published by IGI), and Digital Games in
Schools: a Handbook for Teachers, published by European Schoolnet.
Patrick is also the Editor-in-chief of the International Journal of GameBased Learning (IJGBL), and the Conference Director of the Irish
Symposium on Game-Based Learning, a popular conference on games and
learning organized throughout Ireland.
Read more at Patrick Felicia’s site.
OceanofPDF.com

