Godot 4 for Beginners
Develop engaging 2D and 3D games
with Godot 4’s scripting and design
features

Robert Henning

Godot 4 for Beginners
Copyright © 2025 Packt Publishing
All rights reserved . No part of this book may be reproduced, stored in a
retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, without the
prior written permission of the publisher, except in the case of brief
quotations embedded in critical articles or reviews.
Every effort has been made in the preparation of this book to ensure the
accuracy of the information presented. However, the information contained
in this book is sold without warranty, either express or implied. Neither the
author, nor Packt Publishing or its dealers and distributors, will be held
liable for any damages caused or alleged to have been caused directly or
indirectly by this book.
Packt Publishing has endeavored to provide trademark information about all
of the companies and products mentioned in this book by the appropriate
use of capitals. However, Packt Publishing cannot guarantee the accuracy of
this information.
Portfolio Director : Rohit Rajkumar
Relationship Lead : Neha Pande
Program Manager : Sandip Tadge
Content Engineer : Shreya Sarkar
Technical Editor : Tejas Mhasvekar
Copy Editor : Safis Editing

Indexer : Tejal Soni
Proofreader : Shreya Sarkar
Production Designer : Prashant Ghare
Growth Lead : Lee Booth
First published: August 2025
Production reference: 1250725
Published by Packt Publishing Ltd.
Grosvenor House
11 St Paul’s Square
Birmingham
B3 1RB, UK.
ISBN 978-1-83620-309-4
www.packtpub.com
This book is dedicated to my family, who are my biggest supporters. Know
that with love and encouragement, you can achieve anything. And Dad, I
know that you would be proud of me.
– Robert Henning

Foreword
Creating games has never been this accessible, thanks in large part to
powerful yet approachable engines like Godot. However, diving into
engines like Godot—while user-friendly—still involves mastering a diverse
set of skills, from the obvious ones like programming and math to the less
obvious ones like software architecture and game design. Even if you
already know the inner workings of a game engine, transitioning to another
can be tedious.
This book, written by professional game development tutor Robert
Henning, addresses exactly this issue and eases readers into the vast field of
game development. The cultivation of new skills will be much easier
through Robert’s teaching methods. Moreover, you will even enjoy the
process, as the book includes exercises and projects that offer early wins to
boost your motivation.
Although I have never met Robert in person, he helped me become a
professional game developer in a very direct way—by creating tutorials and
Godot Engine-related content on YouTube that both aided and motivated
me. At the time of writing this foreword, his channel has over 50,000
subscribers, which is a testament to the usefulness of his videos and his
prolific will to help people get started with game development in Godot.
Reading through these pages and doing the exercises transports me back to
when I was a beginner—a blank slate—and makes me excited to try out
new things. Because if there is one thing that is most important, it is this:

always keep a beginner’s mindset and experiment. Every time you learn
something or do an exercise, take it to its limits. Change a value here and
there until it breaks, and then take a step back. It’s only when we leave the
path that we see clearly why the path is there in the first place.
So, I will hold you no longer. Go explore the path laid out by Robert in this
excellent book. Look at it as an adventure. Experiment freely, explore the
possibilities, and find your own style. You won’t regret it.
Sander Vanhove ,
Lead Game Developer and Technical Artist, and Author of the bestselling
book Learning GDScript by Developing a Game with Godot 4

Contributors
About the author
Robert Henning has over 20 years of computer science education
experience, specializing in game development. He has taught game
development using Scratch, Java with Greenfoot, Delphi, Construct 3,
Unity, and Godot. A passionate advocate for Godot, Robert has promoted
this platform since the early versions.
Robert also runs a popular YouTube channel (
https://www.youtube.com/@GameDevJourney ) offering
tutorials and showcasing games made with Godot. His hands-on approach
and dedication to accessible learning have earned him a reputation as a
trusted educator. Godot 4 for Beginners is a culmination of his expertise,
designed to guide newcomers through creating their own games with clear,
step-by-step instructions.

About the reviewers
Deepak Jadhav is an experienced professional with extensive experience
in game development and project management, particularly in extended
reality (XR) technologies. He excels in creating immersive augmented
reality (AR) and mixed reality (MR) experiences, delivering innovative
solutions across various industries. His expertise spans game programming,
game engines (Godot, Unity, and Unreal), AI system implementation, and
applying these skills to enterprise applications. Deepak holds a Master’s
degree in Game Development and Project Management and a Bachelor’s
degree in Computer Technology, equipping him with technical and
managerial skills for leading complex XR and game development projects.
Ural , a game developer based in Turkey, holds a PhD in veterinary
medicine. His journey in game development began in high school with
Python, leading him to work on diverse projects using engines such as
Godot, Unity, and Unreal Engine. He started using Godot as his first game
engine in 2018 and has solo-developed various games with it. Since 2021,
he has been a lead developer at Harmonia Games. Ural is passionate about
exploring different workflows and game architectures. He led the
development of the PC game REM the Dreamer , released on Steam, and
engineered his own custom game engine from the ground up using C++.
Henrique “Ludonaut” Campos is an indie game developer and game
designer working in the industry for years. Started as a University teacher in
2015 in the Computer Graphics and Artificial Intelligence chairs and
working in the GDQuest team from 2018 to 2022, Henrique is also an
independent consultant for studios and schools. Under the alias of
Ludonaut , Henrique creates game development content on his YouTube

channel creating games, assets, ebooks, and courses that can be found in his
itch.io profile. Being the author of the Game Development Patterns
with Godot 4 book, Henrique paved the way for Godot users to make
reusable and scalable code libraries for Godot Engine projects.
OceanofPDF.com

Contents
Preface
Part I: Learning How the Godot Engine Works
1. Let’s Get Godot-ing!
Getting the most out of this book – get to know your free benefits
Next-gen reader
Interactive AI assistant (beta)
DRM-free PDF or ePub version
Technical requirements
What is Godot?
What makes Godot so special?
Setting up Godot 4
Creating a new project
Making the scene dynamic
Delta
Continuing the bouncing label project
Summary
2. Exploring the Godot Engine Interface
Technical requirements
Important terms
Editing an existing Godot project
Creating an additional scene
Reacting to player input
Scripting player reactions to input
Hiding the label until the user provides input
Input handling
Summary
3. Introduction to 3D
Technical requirements
Creating 3D objects
Moving around the scene
Creating a material for your object
Creating a material
Applying a material
Challenge yourself

Creating lighting for the scene
Directional light
Omni light
Spotlight
Summary
4. Scripting with GDScript
Technical requirements
Understanding GDScript
Creating scripts
Understanding functions
Understanding the game loop
_ready()
_process(delta)
_physics_process(delta)
Understanding variables
Creating a variable
Data types
Naming conventions
Understanding operators
Order of operations
Practice exercise
Relational and comparison operators
Practice exercise
Using custom functions
Arguments and parameters or function inputs
Functions can return output
Summary
Part II: Working with the Godot Engine
5. Understanding Vectors
Technical requirements
What are vectors?
Coordinates in Godot
Using vectors in Godot
Movement and positioning
Vector addition
Vector subtraction
Vector multiplication

Vector length
Distance
Normalization
Summary
6. Creating a 2D Mini-Game in Godot – Part 1
Technical requirements
Building the level with a TileMap
Creating and controlling the player
Adding the background
Setting up the player animations
Detecting collisions
TileMap collisions
Collision layers and collision masks
Painting the tiles
Adding the CharacterBody2D template for the Player script
Cleaning the code
Summary
7. Creating a 2D Mini-Game in Godot – Part 2
Technical requirements
Controlling player animations with code
Helper variables
Wall-sliding and double-jumping mechanics
Double-jump function
Wall-slide function
Checking conditions
Detecting input
Resetting the wall slide
Limiting downward speed
Animate function
Falling through platforms
Adding collectible items
Strawberry scene (our collectible item)
Implementing the Strawberry script
Adding a patrolling enemy
Mushroom stomping
Implementing level completion
Summary

Part III: Building and Beyond – Your Game Development Journey
8. Creating a 3D Mini-Game in Godot – Part 1
Technical requirements
Working in 3D: a new dimension in Godot
Building a 3D character
Creating a level design
Creating a level component
Example: creating a grass platform
Handling irregular collision shapes
Creating the level layout
Organizing the level scene
Working with a Character Controller script
Using variables
Linking the Player script with the camera
Alternative method for adding reference variables
Exploring functions
Creating an input map
Implementing player controls and actions
Handling game events and feedback
Implementing a camera controller
Running tests
Summary
9. Creating a 3D Mini-Game in Godot – Part 2
Technical requirements
Exploring collectibles
Creating the Gem scene
Adding the Gem script
Introducing obstacles
Creating the Cannon scene
Creating the Ball scene
Writing the Ball script
Writing the Cannon script
Completing our level
Creating the Flag scene
Changing scenes
Polishing our level
Setting the background color

Adding particle effects
Creating the smoke scene
Adding audio to our level
Using the sine function
Summary
10. Adding Game Juice
Technical requirements
Understanding game juice
Foundations of juicing: animation and audio
Visual feedback (animation and particle effects)
Audio feedback (music and sound effects)
Implementing a health bar HUD
Developing a heart-based health system
Updating the HUD in the Level script
Adding a hit animation
Creating a confetti cannon effect
Scripting the confetti cannon
Adding audio and sound effects
Implementing a sound effect
Summary
11. Understanding Game Design
Technical requirements
Understanding the foundations of game design
Introducing the game design document
Why is documentation necessary for your game design?
Understanding the guiding principles for the GDD
Think visually
Keep it brief and clear
Stay organized
Learn by example
Exploring the Game Design Document
Title: what will you call your game?
Team: who will build or develop the game?
Status: what is the status of the project?
Statement of concept: what is your game about in one
sentence?

Expanded concept paragraph and USP: what makes your
game unique, and how can you describe it in more detail?
Genre: what type of game are you making?
Audience: who is this game for?
Experience: what should the player feel or experience while
playing?
Anchor points: what are the core ideas, inspirations, or
reference points?
Platform: which platforms will the game be released on?
Review competition: what similar games exist, and how will
yours stand out?
Assets: what art, sound, and other resources will your game
need?
Monetization: how will the game generate revenue, if at all?
Describing game elements of the GDD in detail
Player progression and objectives
Game world and background
User interface
Audio and visual style
Game systems and features
Software requirements
Game objects
Detailed asset list
Prototypes
Playtesting
Archive
Current concerns and considerations
Implementation details
Summary
12. Where to Next?
Technical requirements
Utilizing educational resources
YouTube
Blogs
Exploring opportunities for practice
Participating in game jams
Community and networking

Why networking matters
Where to build your network
People to follow
Utilizing tools and assets
Tools
Resources
Building your portfolio
Developing game ideas
Design guide for your next project
Further reading
Summary
13. Unlock Your Book’s Exclusive Benefits
How to unlock these benefits in three easy steps
Step 1
Step 2
Step 3
Need help?
Other Books You May Enjoy
Index
OceanofPDF.com

Preface
Hello and welcome to Godot 4 for Beginners ! My name is Robert Henning,
and I was once a Godot beginner myself, so I know how it feels to be
searching for resources to help you learn how to make games with the
Godot Engine. It was specifically because of the lack of good Godot
resources for beginners that I wrote this book.
This book takes a hands-on, step-by-step approach to teaching game
development, beginning with the basics of downloading and installing the
Godot 4 game engine and gradually building your knowledge through a
series of progressively more complex topics. Each chapter is designed to be
practical and interactive, allowing you to immediately apply what you’ve
learned through real-world examples and projects. The book is structured to
ensure that even those with no prior programming or game development
experience can follow along and succeed.
Throughout this book, you will get familiar with the Godot 4 interface and
the tools it provides, while also learning the foundational game
development philosophy behind Godot’s unique system of nodes, scenes,
signals, and scripts. You will use GDScript, Godot’s scripting language, and
explore both 2D and 3D workflows. Along the way, you’ll build character
controllers, design interactive elements such as enemies and hazards,
implement scoring systems and collectibles, and discover how to polish
your projects for a more professional finish. The book also guides you
through the fundamentals of game design, helping you understand not only
how to build a game but also how to craft a fun and engaging experience.

By the end of this book, you will have a solid understanding of the Godot 4
game engine and its interface and be able to create both 2D and 3D games,
manipulate lighting, script with GDScript, and implement key game
elements such as players, enemies, and collectibles. You will also be skilled
in designing and constructing engaging game levels, tracking scores, and
managing game-over states, empowering you to bring your own game ideas
to life.
Now it’s your turn to get started. With curiosity, patience, and practice, you
will be building your very own games before you know it. Let’s begin your
journey into game development!

Who this book is for
This book is ideal for anyone new to game development who wants to
explore the powerful and accessible Godot engine. Whether you’re an
aspiring game developer, an indie creator looking for a free and open source
tool, a student eager to build interactive projects, or an artist curious about
bringing your ideas to life, this book will provide you with a solid
foundation in using Godot 4. With clear explanations and hands-on projects,
it’s designed to help you make the transition from curiosity to creation—no
prior experience required.
Additionally, students wanting to learn game development fundamentals,
educators seeking a comprehensive resource to teach the basics, and
aspiring game developers aiming to bring their game ideas to life using the
open source, beginner-friendly Godot game engine will find this book
invaluable.
Whether you’re starting completely from scratch or already know a few
basics, this book walks you through Godot 4 with clear, step-by-step
guidance. No prior coding experience is required—although a rudimentary
grasp of concepts such as variables, loops, and conditionals can help, every
essential programming idea is explained from the ground up within these
pages.

What this book covers
Chapter 1 , Let’s Get Godot-ing! , explores the history and core features
of Godot 4.0 and aims to provide you with the knowledge to install, launch,
and create your first project in the engine.
Chapter 2 , Exploring the Godot Engine Interface , explores the
fundamental features of the interface and helps you to edit your first project
in Godot 4. You will also understand the node and scene design philosophy
that underscores Godot.
Chapter 3 , Introduction to 3D , explains how to build and illuminate a
simple 3D environment and helps you to gain confidence in navigating
Godot’s 3D workspace.
Chapter 4 , Scripting with GDScript , provides the foundational
knowledge to script essential game mechanics and confidently control the
logic and flow of your game.
Chapter 5 , Understanding Vectors , explains what vectors are and why
they play a vital role in game mechanics. You’ll learn how to use vectors
effectively within the Godot engine.
Chapter 6 , Creating a 2D Mini-Game in Godot – Part 1 , details the
creation of an interactive, fully playable platformer level and explains how
these components work together to form the foundation of many platformer
games. This chapter includes creating the level design with TileMap,
developing the player character, scripting the player character, and learning
about clean code.

Chapter 7 , Creating a 2D Mini-Game in Godot – Part 2 , explores how
to bring your game mechanics to life with code and create a more dynamic
and engaging platformer experience. This chapter includes animating the
player and programming platform game mechanics, collectible items,
patrolling enemies, and level completion.
Chapter 8 , Creating a 3D Mini-Game in Godot – Part 1 , explains how
to create reusable 3D scenes, control your player character, and design
levels that are both visually appealing and functional. This chapter includes
creating a 3D character, designing a level, working with a character
controller script, and implementing a camera controller.
Chapter 9 , Creating a 3D Mini-Game in Godot – Part 2 , continues the
work started in the previous chapter and includes final touches, including
adding a power-up, introducing obstacles, and polishing the level.
Chapter 10 , Adding Game Juice , details how small changes can
dramatically improve the feel of your game. You’ll gain practical
experience in implementing visual and audio feedback that enhances player
immersion, making your game more enjoyable and satisfying to play.
Chapter 11 , Understanding Game Design , expounds on the value of
thoughtful game design in streamlining development, reducing costly
errors, and improving player satisfaction.
Chapter 12 , Where to Next? , provides a curated list of resources to
deepen your knowledge, expand your skills, and connect with other
developers. You’ll also discover how to stay motivated, stay informed about
the latest trends, and build your presence in the game development
community.

To get the most out of this
book
To fully engage with the exercises and examples provided in this book, you
will need to download and install Godot Engine 4.3 . This version of the
engine introduces key features and updates that are essential for
understanding and implementing the techniques we cover. Whether you’re
new to Godot or have experience with earlier versions, it’s important to
work with version 4.3 to ensure compatibility with the projects and concepts
discussed throughout this book.
Software/hardware covered in the
book

Operating system
requirements

Godot Engine 4.3

Windows, macOS, or Linux

You can easily download Godot Engine 4.3 from the official website at
godotengine.org . While version 4.4.1 is now available, using 4.3 is
recommended for full compatibility with the examples in this book. That
said, everything should continue to work as expected in the latest version.
The installation process is straightforward, and the engine is available on
Windows, macOS, and Linux. Be sure to follow the instructions for your
operating system, and once it is installed, familiarize yourself with the
interface using Chapter 1 . By using the same tools and environment
that we explore in this book, you will have the best learning experience and
will be able to follow along with the code examples smoothly.

If you are using the digital version of this book, we advise you to type
the code yourself or access the code from the book’s GitHub repository
(a link is available in the next section). Doing so will help you avoid any
potential errors related to the copying and pasting of code.
Note that the author acknowledges the use of cutting-edge AI, such as
ChatGPT, with the sole aim of enhancing the language and clarity within
the book, thereby ensuring a smooth reading experience for readers. It’s
important to note that the content itself has been crafted by the author and
edited by a professional publishing team.

Download the example code
files
The code bundle for the book is hosted on GitHub at
https://github.com/PacktPublishing/Godot-4-forBeginners .
We also have other code bundles from our rich catalog of books and videos
available at https://github.com/PacktPublishing . Check
them out!

Download the color images
We also provide a PDF file that has color images of the
screenshots/diagrams used in this book. You can download it here:
https://packt.link/gbp/9781836203094

Code in Action

The Code in Action videos for this book can be viewed at
https://packt.link/cFyK6

Logo attribution
Note that the Godot logo is used under the CC BY 4.0 license. Copyright ©
Godot Engine developers. Used with credit, not endorsement.

Conventions used
There are a number of text conventions used throughout this book.
CodeInText

: Indicates code words in text, database table names, folder

names, filenames, file extensions, pathnames, dummy URLs, user input,
and X handles. For example: “Now press Ctrl + S to save the scene as
player.tscn

in our Scenes folder.”

A block of code is set as follows:
extends Node2D
@onready var update_health_hud = $HUD
@onready var player = $Player
@onready var strawberries = $Collectibles
func _ready():
player.level_strawberries = strawberries.get_child_count()
func _process(delta):
update_health_hud.frame = player.get_hearts()

When we wish to draw your attention to a command-line input or output in
a set of steps, the relevant lines or items are set in bold:
extends Node2D
var health : int = 100

var jump_strength : float = 220.5
var is_dashing : bool = true
var player_name : String = “Riptide”
var player_level : int = 23
var player_exp : float = 123.45
var has_key : bool = false
var spike_damage : int = 10

On Linux, run the following command in the terminal:
Unzip Godot_v4.3-stable_linux.x86_64.zip -d Godot

Bold : Indicates a new term, an important word, or words that you see on
the screen. For instance, words in menus or dialog boxes appear in text like
this. For example: “Enable Rotate Y and Disable Z in the Particle Flags
settings.”
Warnings or important notes appear like this.

Tips and tricks appear like this.

Get in touch
Feedback from our readers is always welcome.
General feedback : If you have questions about any aspect of this book or
have any general feedback, please email us at customercare@packt.com and
mention the book’s title in the subject of your message.
Errata : Although we have taken every care to ensure the accuracy of our
content, mistakes do happen. If you have found a mistake in this book, we

would be grateful if you reported this to us. Please visit
http://www.packt.com/submit-errata , click Submit Errata ,
and fill in the form.
Piracy : If you come across any illegal copies of our works in any form on
the internet, we would be grateful if you would provide us with the location
address or website name. Please contact us at copyright@packt.com with a
link to the material.
If you are interested in becoming an author : If there is a topic that you
have expertise in and you are interested in either writing or contributing to a
book, please visit http://authors.packt.com/ .

Share your thoughts
Once you’ve read Godot 4 for Beginners , we’d love to hear your thoughts!
Please click here to go straight to the Amazon review
page for this book and share your feedback.
Your review is important to us and the tech community and will help us
make sure we’re delivering excellent quality content.

Join our community on
Discord
Join our community’s Discord space for discussions with the author and
other readers:
https://packt.link/godot-4-game-dev

OceanofPDF.com

—————————

Part 1

—————————

Learning How the Godot
Engine Works
In this first part of the book, you’ll build a strong foundation in using the
Godot game engine. We’ll begin by exploring Godot’s origins and what
makes it a unique and powerful tool for game development. Then, you’ll get
hands-on with the engine’s interface, learning how scenes, nodes, and the
editor all work together. You’ll also take your first steps into 3D game
development and dive into scripting with GDScript, Godot’s intuitive,
Python-like language. By the end of this part, you’ll be ready to begin
creating interactive games with confidence.
This part of the book includes the following chapters:
Chapter 1 , Let’s Get Godot-ing!
Chapter 2 , Exploring the Godot Engine Interface
Chapter 3 , Introduction to 3D
Chapter 4 , Scripting with GDScript
OceanofPDF.com

1
Let’s Get Godot-ing!
In this chapter, we’ll explore the history and core features of Godot 4.0 , a game development
engine renowned for its versatility and accessibility. Whether you’re an aspiring indie developer
or a seasoned creator looking for a new tool, understanding what makes Godot unique will set
the foundation for your journey into game development.
This chapter serves two main purposes. The first is to introduce you to Godot’s background and
key capabilities, showing why it has become a popular choice in the game development
community. Next is to guide you through setting up Godot 4.0 and creating your first project,
ensuring you have the tools and confidence to begin crafting your own games.
In this chapter, we’re going to cover the following main topics:
What is Godot?
Setting up Godot 4
Creating a new project
By the end of this chapter, you’ll not only have grasped the essential features that make Godot
stand out, but also have the knowledge to install, launch, and create your first project in the
engine. These are fundamental steps that lay the groundwork for everything we’ll accomplish in
later chapters.

Getting the most out of this book –
get to know your free benefits
Unlock exclusive free benefits that come with your purchase, thoughtfully crafted to
supercharge your learning journey and help you learn without limits.
Here’s a quick overview of what you get with this book:

Next-gen reader
Our webbased reader,
designed to
help you learn
effectively,
comes with
the following
features:

Multi-device
progress sync
: Learn from
any device
with seamless
progress sync.

Figure 1.1: Illustration of the next-gen Packt Reader’s features

Highlighting
and
notetaking :
Turn your
reading into

lasting
knowledge.

Bookmarking
: Revisit your
most
important
learnings
anytime.

Dark
mode : Focus
with minimal
eye strain by
switching to
dark or sepia
mode.

Interactive AI assistant (beta)

Our
interactive AI
assistant has
been trained
on the
content of
this book, to
maximize
your learning
experience. It
comes with
the following
features:

Summarize
it :
Summarize
key sections
or an entire
chapter.
Figure 1.2: Illustration of Packt’s AI assistant

AI
code
explainers :
In the nextgen Packt
Reader, click
the Explain
button above
each code
block for AIpowered
code
explanations.

Note: The AI
assistant is
part of nextgen Packt
Reader and
is still in
beta.

DRM-free PDF or ePub version
Learn
without
limits with
the following
perks
included with
your
purchase:
Learn
from
anywhere
with a DRMfree PDF
copy of this
book.
Use
your favorite
Figure 1.3: Free PDF and ePub

e-reader to
learn using a
DRM-free
ePub version
of this book.

Unlock this book’s
exclusive benefits now
Scan this QR code or go to
packtpub.com/unlock , then search for this
book by name. Ensure it’s the correct edition.

Note: Keep your purchase invoice ready before you
start.

Technical requirements
You can find the example project and code for this book in the GitHub repository:
https://github.com/PacktPublishing/Godot-4-for-Beginners
This chapter’s code files are available here:
https://github.com/PacktPublishing/Godot-4-forBeginners/tree/main/ch1/godotintro
Visit this link to check out the video of the code being run: https://packt.link/RjbW3

What is Godot?
The short answer is that Godot is a game engine. It was originally created in 2007 by Juan
Linietsky and Ariel Manzur as an in-house tool for various Argentinian studios. Your next
questions might be, “What exactly is a game engine?” and “What makes Godot so special?”
Well, making a game is hard—really hard! There are countless moving parts that all need to
work together perfectly. While it’s possible to build everything from scratch, most developers
rely on a game engine to handle the heavy lifting.
So, a game engine is a software framework that simplifies game development. It provides the
core tools and systems for building a game—such as rendering, physics, input handling, and

asset management—so that developers can focus more on gameplay, story, and design, rather
than low-level technical code.

What makes Godot so special?
There are many reasons why Godot has become a popular choice for both beginner and
experienced game developers. Here are some of the core features that make this engine stand out
from the rest:
Open source and free : In 2014, Godot was released as open source under the MIT license.
That means it’s completely free to use—even for commercial projects—and developers
have full access to the source code. This makes Godot highly customizable and communitydriven.
Versatile scene system : One of Godot’s most defining features is its scene system.
Everything in Godot is a scene—and scenes are made up of nodes. Scenes can also be
nested inside other scenes, making it easy to build complex, reusable, and modular
components. This structure makes organizing and scaling a game project incredibly
intuitive.
Powerful 2D and 3D support : Godot includes dedicated tools for both 2D and 3D
development. Whether you’re making a pixel-art platformer or a fully-fledged 3D
experience, Godot provides specialized workflows for both dimensions. While other
engines also support both, Godot’s 2D system in particular is often praised for its precision
and flexibility.
Resources—the other side of the coin : Alongside scenes and nodes, Godot uses
something called resources —and they’re everywhere. A texture on a sprite is a resource.
The audio you play is a resource. Even the path in a Path2D node is a resource. Resources
are data containers that can be reused across your project, edited in the inspector, or saved
and loaded from disk. They promote consistency, reduce duplication, and keep your
projects lightweight and organized.
Lightweight and cross-platform : Godot is lightweight and quick to install and runs
smoothly even on older machines. This low system requirement is a huge win for
accessibility and inclusion—anyone can start making games without needing a high-end
PC. Plus, when your game is finished, you can export it to a wide variety of platforms,
including Windows, macOS, Linux, Android, iOS, and HTML5.
Thriving community and active development : Godot has a friendly, growing community
of developers and educators. Whether you’re just starting out or are an experienced coder,

there’s plenty of support through forums, Discord channels, tutorials, and documentation.
The engine is under continuous development with regular updates and an open roadmap.
Now that you’ve learned about the key features that make Godot such a powerful and beginnerfriendly game engine—from its flexible node and scene system to its vibrant open-source
community—you have a strong understanding of why it is a great choice for your game
development journey.
It’s time to move from theory to practice!
In the next section, we’ll guide you through downloading and installing Godot, and help you run
the engine for the very first time. Soon, you’ll be setting up your own projects and building your
first games step by step. Let’s get started!

Setting up Godot 4
To download the latest version of Godot 4, follow these steps:
1. Go to Godot’s website ( https://www.godotengine.org ) and click on the
Download Latest button, shown in Figure 1. 4 . Note that version 4.3 was the version in
use at the time of writing (see Preface for details).

Figure 1.4 – The download page for Godot Engine 4 for Windows

2. The website should detect your operating system platform and take you to the correct
download. Click on the Godot Engine button rather than the .NET one:

Figure 1.5 – The browser has detected the Windows operating system

3. If your platform cannot be detected, you can choose from one of the supported platforms by
scrolling further down the page:

Figure 1.6 – Choose your own platform from the available options

4. Once the download is complete, it’s time to create our folder structure.
5. On Windows, open the ZIP file. The main executable will be named something such as
Godot_v4.3-stable_win64.exe .
On macOS, double-click the ZIP file
On Linux, run the following command in the terminal:
Unzip Godot_v4.3-stable_linux.x86_64.zip -d Godot

6. Extract this file to a folder on your PC. I recommend naming the folder Godot4 .
7. Within this folder, create another folder called Godot 4 Projects . This is the folder where
you will store all your projects made with Godot 4:

Figure 1.7 – Godot folder structure

8. Time to launch Godot! Right-click on the .exe file and choose Pin to Start to have Godot
available in the Start menu:

Figure 1.8 – How to pin to Start

9. You can also click on Show more options and then choose Pin to taskbar so that Godot is
always ready and waiting at the bottom of your screen:

Figure 1.9 – Show more options and Pin to taskbar

10. Double-click on the extracted .exe file within the Godot 4 folder to launch Godot 4!
Godot is up and running. Our next step is to create our first project—our wonderful adventure in
game development starts now!

Creating a new project
Having followed the steps in the previous section, you are now presented with the Godot Project
Manager :

Figure 1.10 – The Godot Project Manager

This is always the first window you see when you launch Godot. Here, you can create, remove,
import, edit, and play game projects.
Because of all the black ink needed to print images in dark mode, we will do our bit to save the
planet by switching to light mode. There is no difference other than appearance. To do that,
follow these steps:
1. Click on the Settings button in the top-right corner:

Figure 1.11 – The Project Manager Settings button

2. Now, change the Interface Theme dropdown to Light :

Figure 1.12 – Changing to the Light theme in the Quick Settings menu

Now, let’s now walk through the steps to set up a new project in Godot 4:
1. Click on the + Create button in the top-left corner to create a new project:

Figure 1.13 – How to create a new project in the Godot Project Manager

2. We are now presented with a new window in which we can adjust the details of the project:

Figure 1.14 – The Create New Project sub-menu

3. The next step is to give our project a name. Let’s call it GodotIntro .
Also, ensure that Project Path points to the Godot 4 Projects folder we created earlier
and that the Create Folder button is toggled on:

Figure 1.15 – Initial settings for our new Godot project

4. This will create a new folder within Godot 4 Projects named GodotIntro . Creating a
new folder for each new project in Godot will help us keep everything organized.
You can leave Renderer in Compatibility mode. Each renderer option is explained here:
Forward+ is a renderer that is aimed at improving the rendering of lights on desktop
platforms. This is not recommended for mobile development as it is not efficient.
Mobile uses a more efficient approach for lighting that is intended for mobile
platforms, but can also run on a desktop. However, this renderer does not provide
high-end graphical features.
Compatibility has even fewer high-end graphical features than Mobile , but it will
run on most hardware.
5. Click on Create & Edit , and you will be presented with the following window:

Figure 1.16 – The main Godot engine editor interface

6. By default, Godot opens in 3D view. We can change this using the view menu at the top;
however, Godot will change the view automatically once we add our first node.

Figure 1.17 – The context menu to switch views

From here, we will create our first little project and then take a closer look at the interface in the
next chapter:
1. Click on 2D Scene in the top left of the screen:

Figure 1.18 – The Scene window

2. Clicking this button creates Node2D as the root node of our scene. You can see it in the
Scene window on the left-hand side. We will rename it by selecting it and pressing F2 .
Name it Main as it will be our main node for now:

Figure 1.19 – Renaming Node2D to Main

3. It’s important to get into the habit of being organized from the beginning. In the FileSystem
window at the bottom left of the editor, create a new folder and call it Scenes . Do this by
right-clicking anywhere in the FileSystem window and selecting New Folder… :

Figure 1.20 – Creating a new folder in the FileSystem window

4. Now, save the scene as main.tscn by pressing Ctrl + S and choosing the Scenes folder
that you just created:

Figure 1.21 – Saving the main scene in the Scenes folder

5. Add a Label node as a child of Main (which is the Node2D we created earlier):

Figure 1.22 – Click the + button to add a new node

6. Now, search for the Label node:

Figure 1.23 – Searching for the Label node

7. Select it once found, and you will see it added to your scene tree:

Figure 1.24 – The Label node in the editor

8. Now, rename the Label node to GreetingsLabel :

Figure 1.25 – Renaming the Label node

9. With GreetingsLabel selected, on the right-hand side of the inspector, we can see the
properties of the Label node. Enter your greeting in the Text property:

Figure 1.26 – Editing the Text property of the Label node in the inspector

We can now run our scene to see the output by pressing F6 as this will run the current
scene. Another way to launch the project is to press F5 . A window will appear asking us
to choose the main scene. Since we only have one scene, we will press the Select Current
button. However, if we have multiple scenes, we could choose which one we want as the
first scene that runs:

Figure 1.27 – Selecting the main scene of the project

10. When the project launches, you will see your greeting in the top-left corner of the screen:

Figure 1.28 – The output of our project

11. We can change the value of the Text property of the Label node in the inspector or using
code.
A script allows us to program custom behavior for our nodes. We use it to add logic to our
node, such as playing sound effects, moving a character, or changing text.
12. Before we add a script to our Label node, let’s create a folder for scripts in FileSystem .
Right-click in FileSystem , select New Folder , and call it Scripts :

Figure 1.29 – Adding a Scripts folder to our project

13. Right-click GreetingsLabel and select Attach Script… :

Figure 1.30 – Attaching a script to a node

14. A window pops up. Don’t change anything for the moment or worry too much about all the
options. Just take note that the language is GDScript and the script name is created for us.
Check the path and, if necessary, change it to your Scripts folder:

Figure 1.31 – The Attach Node Script menu

15. Edit the script so that it matches the following code and launch the project again by hitting
the play button:
extends Label
# Called when the node enters the scene tree for the first time.
func _ready():
text = "Go Go Godot!"
# Called every frame. 'delta' is the elapsed time since the previous frame.
func _process(delta):
pass

Note that now, the output of the project has changed from Hello World! to: Go Go
Godot! .

Quick tip : Enhance your coding experience with the AI Code Explainer
and Quick Copy features. Open this book in the next-gen Packt Reader. Click
the Copy button ( 1 ) to quickly copy code into your coding environment, or
click the Explain button ( 2 ) to get the AI assistant to explain a block of code to
you.

The next-gen Packt Reader is included for free with the purchase of this
book. Scan the QR code OR go to packtpub.com/unlock , then use the
search bar to find this book by name. Double-check the edition shown to make
sure you get the right one.

Finally, we can make the scene more dynamic by making the label bounce around the screen like
the famous DVD screensaver!

Making the scene dynamic
To do this, we need to break the problem into smaller parts:
1. Give the label an initial velocity (speed and direction).
2. Find out the dimensions of the screen.
3. Find out the size of the label.
4. Test whether the label has reached the left or right edge and reverse direction.
5. Test whether the label has reached the top or bottom edge and reverse the direction.
6. Repeatedly update the label’s position so that it moves.
The velocity variable controls both the speed and direction of movement. Because it is a
Vector2 , we can pass through both the x and y values in one container.
In this example, we’re setting the initial speed to 150 pixels per second along the x axis (to the
right, because it’s positive) and 120 pixels per second along the y axis (downward, since
Godot’s coordinate system starts from the top-left corner).
Add these lines starting from the second line in the program:
var xVelocity = 150 #150 pixels per second to the right
var yVelocity = 120 #120 pixels per second downwards
var velocity = Vector2(xVelocity, yVelocity) #Initial speed and direction

To make the label move, we need to continuously update its position at each frame. The
_process(delta) function runs every frame, making it the perfect place to handle updates like
this. By adding a line of code that adjusts the label’s position inside _process() , we can create
smooth, ongoing movement.
Add the following code as the first line inside the _process() function and run the game. You
will see the label move diagonally down and to the right!
position = position + velocity * delta

In the preceding line, we repeatedly add the current position to the value of the velocity
multiplied by delta . Here, delta is the amount of time that has passed since the previous
frame and is a way to make sure that movement is smooth and consistent on all hardware.
You’ve now taken the first steps toward making your text move—just like the classic DVD logo!
Before we go any further and make the motion smooth and consistent, it’s important to
understand a key concept that controls how things behave over time in Godot: delta.
Let’s take a moment to explore what delta is and why it’s so important.

Delta
When we make something move in a game, we usually want it to move at a consistent speed—
such as 150 pixels per second. But here’s the tricky part: not all computers run games at the
same speed. Some may run at 60 frames per second, while others might run slower or faster,
depending on their hardware.
This is where delta comes in.
delta

is a small number that tells us how much time has passed since the last frame was drawn.

If your game is running fast, delta might be something such as 0.016 (about 1/60th of a
second). If it’s running slower, delta will be a bit bigger, such as 0.03 .
By multiplying the movement speed by delta , we’re saying the following:
“Move this object based on how much time has actually passed, not how many frames have gone
by.”
This means the object will move at the correct speed per second, no matter how many frames
your computer is managing to draw.

So, instead of moving 150 pixels every frame (which would be way too fast!), we move 150 ×
delta pixels per frame, which adjusts automatically based on performance.

Continuing the bouncing label project
Bringing this back to our bouncing label project, the next step is to set up some important
information about the screen and the label itself. This will let us detect when the label hits the
edges and needs to bounce.
Now, we should add variables to store the screen size and the size of the label. It’s important to
understand that we cannot determine these values until the scene has loaded.
The first function to run once the scene is ready is the _ready() function. So, we should
initialize (assign values to) our variables there. First, add the variables to our collection at the top
and then assign them as the first lines in the _ready() function after setting the text:
var xVelocity = 150 #150 pixels per second to the right
var yVelocity = 120 #120 pixels per second downwards
var velocity = Vector2(xVelocity, yVelocity) # Initial speed and direction
var screen_size_x #screen horizontal dimension
var screen_size_y #screen vertical dimension
var label_size_x #label width
var label_size_y #label height

Now, assign values to these variables in the _ready() function as follows:
func _ready():
text = "Go Go Godot!"
# Get the screen size (viewport size)
screen_size_x = get_viewport_rect().size.x
screen_size_y = get_viewport_rect().size.y
label_size_x = size.x
label_size_y = size.y

All that is left to do now is test to see whether the label has reached the left, right, top, or bottom
edge of the screen, and if it has, turn it around.
We do this in the _process() function after setting the direction. Begin with a test for the left
and right screen edges, as follows:
# Bounce off left/right edges
if position.x < 0 or position.x + label_size_x > screen_size_x:

velocity.x *= -1

This line checks whether the label has hit the left or right edge of the screen, and if so, it makes
the label bounce by reversing its horizontal direction.
Technically, our bouncing works and we could leave it there, but there are rare edge cases in
which the label could move past the edge of the screen in one frame and the direction reverses,
but we are already beyond the edge, so the label could get stuck or jitter. To prevent this, we can
use a built-in method that clamps a value between a minimum and maximum value:
# Bounce off left/right edges
if position.x < 0 or position.x + label_size_x > screen_size_x:
velocity.x *= -1
position.x = clamp(position.x, 0, screen_size_x - label_size_x)

The check is similar for the top and bottom edges:
# Bounce off top/bottom edges
if position.y < 0 or position.y + label_size_y > screen_size_y:
velocity.y *= -1
position.y = clamp(position.y, 0, screen_size_y - label_size_y)

The full code for the bouncing label is presented here:
extends Label
var xVelocity = 150 #150 pixels per second to the right
var yVelocity = 120 #120 pixels per second downwards
var velocity = Vector2(xVelocity, yVelocity) # Initial speed and direction
var screen_size_x #screen horizontal dimension var screen_size_y
#screen vertical dimension
var label_size_x #label width
var label_size_y #label height
func _ready():
text = "Go Go Godot!"
# Get the screen size (viewport size)
screen_size_x = get_viewport_rect().size.x
screen_size_y = get_viewport_rect().size.y
label_size_x = size.x
label_size_y = size.y
func _process(delta):
position = position + velocity * delta
# Bounce off left/right edges
if position.x < 0 or position.x + label_size_x > screen_size_x:
velocity.x *= -1
position.x = clamp(position.x, 0, screen_size_x - label_size_x)
# Bounce off top/bottom edges

if position.y < 0 or position.y + label_size_y > screen_size_y:
velocity.y *= -1
position.y = clamp(position.y, 0, screen_size_y - label_size_y)

And there you have it — your own version of the classic bouncing DVD logo! Now that you’ve
built your first simple animation in Godot, you’re ready to dive even deeper into creating
interactive and dynamic games.

Summary
In this chapter, we learned about the history of Godot and its node and scene design philosophy.
We downloaded Godot and ran it. We created our first project and produced our first output to
the game window. We also made the scene dynamic by working with the position and velocity of
the label. We also learned about screen dimensions and how to clamp them between a range, as
well as the important role played by the delta variable.
In the next chapter, we will take a closer look at the Godot editor interface and how to use the
tools provided by it.

Unlock this book’s
exclusive benefits now
Scan this QR code or go to
packtpub.com/unlock , then search this book
by name.

Note: Keep your purchase invoice ready before you
start.

OceanofPDF.com

2
Exploring the Godot
Engine Interface
In this chapter, you will edit your first project in Godot 4 and explore the
fundamental features of the interface. You will also gain a deeper
understanding of the node and scene design philosophy that underscores
Godot. It is fundamental to using Godot day in and day out to understand
how it is intended to be used.
In this chapter, we’re going to cover the following main topics:
Important terms
Editing an existing Godot project
Creating an additional scene
Reacting to player input
By the end of the chapter, you’ll be able to create new projects, build scenes,
and navigate the interface with ease—essential skills for any game
developer.

Technical requirements
This chapter’s code files are available here in the book’s GitHub repository:
https://github.com/PacktPublishing/Godot-4-for-

Beginners/tree/main/ch2/godotintro
Visit this link to check out the video of the code being run:
https://packt.link/2R1xc

Important terms
This is an important section. Before we dive into the chapter and come
across terms that are unknown to us, let’s take a quick look at them:
Nodes : Nodes are the basic building blocks of Godot 4 scenes. Each
node represents a single object in your game world, such as a sprite, a
sound effect, a UI element, and so on. Multiple nodes usually form a
hierarchy, often with parent nodes controlling the behavior of their
child nodes.
When working with nodes, we can press Q , W , E , and S to use the
different tools:
Q – Select tool : Allows us to select a node and position it in the
Viewport
W – Move tool : Allows us to move the node along the various
axes
E – Rotate tool : Allows us to rotate an object on the various
axes
S – Scale tool : Allows us to resize an object on the various axes
Each node has properties that determine its behavior and appearance.
For example, a sprite node has properties such as Texture , Position ,
and Scale , as shown in Figure 2.1 :

Figure 2.1 – Some of the properties of a Sprite2D node

Scenes : Scenes are collections of nodes. They could make up a level,
menu, character, enemy, or any other part of a game. A scene can be
saved as a separate file and loaded into your game as needed using
instancing.
Scripts : Scripts are an essential part of game development. They allow
you to create custom actions and interactions that make your game
unique.

To visualize how nodes are combined to form scenes, look at Figure
2.2 , which shows Strawberry , which is a collectible item. It is made
up of an Area2D node, a CollisionShape2D node, and an
AnimatedSprite2D node. Together, they make the Strawberry scene.

Figure 2.2 – A combination of nodes forming a scene

Let’s get into the chapter!

Editing an existing Godot
project
We created a Godot project in the previous chapter, and when we launch
Godot, we can see it in the Project Manager window, and we can reopen it
by selecting Edit or pressing Ctrl + E and then double-clicking on the name
of our project: GodotIntro :

Figure 2.3 – Our existing Godot project from Chapter 1

The Godot editor will open and display the last thing you were working on.
In my case, it is the Script view. Change the view to 2D by clicking on 2D
at the top of the screen:

Figure 2.4 – Change to the 2D view by clicking on 2D at the top of the screen

Now we can take a closer look at the main features of the Godot editor. Your
screen should now look as it does in Figure 2.5 :

Figure 2.5 – An overview of the Godot Interface

Quick tip : Need to see a high-resolution version of
this image? Open this book in the next-gen Packt Reader or
view it in the PDF/ePub copy.
The next-gen Packt Reader and a free PDF/ePub
copy of this book are included with your purchase. Scan the
QR code OR visit packtpub.com/unlock , then use
the search bar to find this book by name. Double-check the
edition shown to make sure you get the right one.

The most used parts of the editor are labelled 1 to 4 :
1. The s cene tree area shows all the nodes that make up the current
scene. We can see our Main node ( Node2D ) and our GreetingsLabel
( Label node).
2. The FileSystem area shows all the files that are part of our project. We
can see the Scenes and Scripts folders that we made.
3. Here, we see the Viewport . Think of it as what is within the imaginary
camera frame. Here, we will place our nodes within the 2D space in the
scene.
4. On the far right is the Inspector area. With it, you can view the
properties of the currently selected node. You can also find many
settings within sub-menus. As an example, you could click on the
Transform property to unfold settings for Position , Rotation , and
Scale .

LEGO – a useful metaphor to understand how Godot works

Building a game in Godot is like constructing a LEGO
model. In this analogy, nodes are like individual LEGO
bricks. Each brick has a specific function—some are basic,
like simple blocks, while others might have specialized
purposes, like wheels, windows, or gears.
The real power of Godot’s system comes from how flexible
it is. Just as you can disassemble and recombine LEGO
modules to build something entirely new, you can mix and
match scenes in Godot to quickly assemble different parts of
your game. This modularity allows you to create complex
games in a more manageable, efficient, and creative way.
In Godot, you use nodes to represent different elements of
your game, such as characters, environments, and behaviors.
Just like how you can connect LEGO bricks in various ways
to create different structures, you can combine nodes in
Godot to build complex game objects and systems.
Now, think of a scene as a pre-built section or module made
from those LEGO bricks. A scene could be a small part, like
a car or a tree, or something larger, like an entire building. In
Godot, a scene is a collection of nodes arranged in a specific
way to create a meaningful part of your game. You can reuse
scenes just like you can attach a pre-built LEGO module to a
larger structure.
But there’s one more piece to the puzzle: resources . If nodes
are LEGO bricks and scenes are LEGO modules, then
resources are like the stickers, blueprints, and instruction
manuals that come with your LEGO sets. Stickers represent

visuals such as textures and materials. Blueprints or manuals
describe how something behaves or animates—like
animation resources, scripts, and audio streams in Godot.
And just like you can apply the same sticker to multiple
bricks or use the same manual for several builds, resources in
Godot are reusable, customizable, and sharable across your
entire game.
They don’t build the structure themselves, but they add style,
data, and behavior to the pieces you’ve already put together.
This layered approach— Nodes (bricks), Scenes (modules),
and Resources (custom details and instructions)—makes
Godot a powerful and intuitive tool for building games, the
same way LEGO makes building imaginative creations fun
and accessible.

Creating an additional scene
Suppose we want to disconnect one of our LEGO bricks (see the preceding
feature on LEGO – a useful metaphor to understand how Godot works ).
Let’s remove our Label node from our Main scene and put it in a scene of
its own:
1. We can do this by right-clicking on the GreetingsLabel node and
choosing Save Branch as Scene… . This is shown in Figure 2.6 :

Figure 2.6 – Save Branch as Scene…

2. Save the scene as greetings_label.tscn in our Scenes folder:

Figure 2.7 – Saving the greetings_label as its own Scene

You will notice that GreetingsLabel does not disappear from the
scene. However, now that we have a copy of the label as its own
scene, we can delete it from our Main scene and easily add it back or
add multiple labels to the scene.
3. If you double-click greetings_label.tscn in the FileSystem area, it
will open in a new scene window:

Figure 2.8 – Double-click greetings_label.tscn to open it in its own scene tab

4. Now, delete GreetingsLabel from the Main scene.
5. Then add it back by dragging and dropping greetings_label.tscn
from the FileSystem area into the Viewport:

Figure 2.9 – Drag and drop the greetings_label.tscn back into the Viewport

Now we can see how things look with the label returned to the scene:

Figure 2.10 – Main Scene with the GreetingsLabel node returned

We can now drag and drop several instances of the greetings_label scene
into the Main scene, and we can change the text property of each one in the
Text property of the Inspector . However, when we run the Main scene,
each label reverts to Go Go Godot! . This is because each instance has the
same script attached to it, and we previously changed the text property to
read Go Go Godot! .

Figure 2.11 – Multiple instances of greetings_label in the Main scene

What is an instance?
Instancing is the process of producing a game object from a
blueprint or primary design. Instancing works well with
scenes. It gives you the ability to divide your game into
reusable components, a tool to structure complex systems,
and a language to think about your game structure in a
natural way.
We can demonstrate instancing by allowing our game to react to input from
the user.

Reacting to player input
Now, we can do an experiment in which we display a different label
depending on the input received from the user. In this case, we will add a
sprite and place the label above its head. A sprite is a 2D image or animation
used in a game to represent characters, objects, or other visual elements. In
simpler terms, it’s the picture or graphic you see in the game that moves or
interacts with the environment.
If the player left-clicks on the sprite, we will say Hello Folks! If they rightclick on the sprite, we will say Godot is Great! , and if they press Enter /
Return on the keyboard, we will display Hello World!
Firstly, we need a sprite. A great place to get free game assets is from
Kenney . You can find the website here: https://kenney.nl/ . The

assets I am using for this experiment can be found here:
https://kenney.nl/assets/toon-characters-1 .
The sprite I have chosen can be found once you have extracted the folder
here: \kenney_toon-characters-1\Robot\PNG\Poses HD
\character_robot_interact

.

This is what our sprite looks like:

Figure 2.12 – The robot sprite character for our experiment

However, you can use any character you prefer for this experiment. We will
now add the sprite to our scene:
1. Create a new folder in FileSystem and name it Sprites :

Figure 2.13 – Create the Sprites folder

2. Now drag the character you chose into this Sprites folder:

Figure 2.14 – Your chosen image within the Sprites folder in FileSystem

3. Now we will create a new scene for our character. Click on the Scene
menu and select New Scene (press Ctrl + N ), or click on the + symbol
near the Scene tabs:

Figure 2.15 – Multiple ways of creating a new scene

4. Now add the parent or primary node for our scene by pressing Ctrl + A ,
clicking on the + icon in the Scene view, or clicking on the Other Node
button:

Figure 2.16 – Multiple ways to add a node to a scene

5. Search for a Sprite2D node and add it:

Figure 2.17 – Add a Sprite2D node to the scene

6. Rename the node to Player :

Figure 2.18 – Sprite2D renamed as Player

7. Now press Ctrl + S to save the scene as player.tscn in our Scenes
folder:

Figure 2.19 – The saved player.tscn scene

8. Make sure that you are in the 2D view. Switch to it if you need to, by
clicking on 2D at the top of the screen.

9. Now drag and drop the character image you selected onto the <Empty>
Texture property of the Player node:

Figure 2.20 - Place your character image in the Texture property of the Player node

10. Now your character is in the Player scene:

Figure 2.21 – The Player sprite in the Viewport

11. Now we will attach a script to the Player . Right-click on the Player
node and select Attach Script… or click on the Scroll+ icon:

Figure 2.22 – Attach a new script to the Player node

12. Press Ctrl + S to save the script and save it in the Scripts folder. You
will now have a new player.gd script in the Scripts folder:

Figure 2.23 – The player.gd scripts in the Scripts folder

Before we write some code to allow our player to react to different user
input, remember that we want a different greeting for left-click , right-click ,
and E nter / R eturn being pressed.
If you remember our LEGO analogy, we need to attach a GreetingsLabel
brick (Node) to our Player brick (Node). We do this by dragging
greetings_label.tscn from FileSystem to the Player node in the Player
scene:

Figure 2.24 – Drag the greetings_label.tscn onto the Player node to make it a child

In Godot, the origin or starting position is measured from the top-left corner
of the screen or position 0, 0. Almost always, you will want to leave the
origin unchanged, but just for this example, we will move it.
Position Player and GreetingsLabel in the Viewport using the Select tool
(which looks like the cursor) or by pressing Q on the keyboard:

Figure 2.25 – The SELECT tool

Your Player scene should look something like this:

Figure 2.26 – The Player scene

Now that our sprite is somewhere near the center of the scene, we need to
write a script to make it respond to user input.

Scripting player reactions to
input
Our aim in writing the code for this section is to allow the user to receive a
different response from the sprite depending on which mouse button the user
is pressing. We’ll handle three types of interaction:

Left click : Shows the greeting Hi Folks!
Right click : Shows Godot is Great!
Pressing E nter : Shows Hello World!
Let’s begin by making sure the greeting label is hidden at first.

Hiding the label until the user
provides input
We don’t want the greeting to be visible when the scene first runs. We want
to hide the label by calling its hide() function.
Since the _ready() function is the first to run once the node and all its
children are loaded into the scene tree, we can access the GreetingsLabel
node using the Godot shortcut operator $ .
Once we have access to the node, we simply call the hide() function:
#Called when the node enters the scene tree for the first time.
func _ready() -> void:
$GreetingsLabel.hide()

Important note
Note that GDScript is an indented language. This means that
the first line after a function, as in the preceding code, is
tabbed in once. The game engine requires this for the code to
work correctly. I advise all those working from the digital
version of the book to re-type the code manually or copy
the code files from the book’s GitHub repository to avoid
errors caused by copying and pasting the code .

With this code, GreetingsLabel is no longer visible when you run the game.
You can test this scene by pressing F6 or clicking on the Run Current
Scene button as shown in Figure 2.27 :

Figure 2.27 – The Run Current Scene button

You will notice that you can no longer see the greeting.

Input handling
Now, to keep things simple for our experiment, we will be using a built-in
method for handling input. A built-in method is simply one that has already
been created and comes as part of Godot Engine. You can tell that a method
is built in because it begins with an underscore. You have seen two so far:
_ready() and _process() .
For input, we will make use of _unhandled_input() . Don’t worry too much
about it now, just know that if no other function/method is there to capture
user input and handle it, then this method will run.
We declare the _unhandled_input function header and then handle the
different types of input inside the function. For our experiment, we are
listening out for two types of input: mouse and keyboard . For the keyboard,
we are only listening for one key – E nter . For the mouse, we are listening
out for left-click and right-click . Let’s look at this in greater detail:
When we detect input from the mouse, we need to show the label again,
so we call the show() function of the label.
If we hear a left click , we change the text of the GreetingsLabel
to Hi Folks!

If it is a right click , we set it to Godot is Great!
When we detect input from the keyboard, we need to show the label
again, so we call the show() function of the label.
If we hear E nter pressed, we set the text to Hello World!
Now, let’s look at the code implementation:
extends Sprite2D
# This script is attached to a Sprite2D node.
# It listens for mouse and keyboard input and displays
# different messages on a label depending on what was pressed.
# Called when the node enters the scene tree for the first time
func _ready():
# Hide the label at the beginning so it's not visible until
$GreetingsLabel.hide()
# Called every frame. 'delta' is the time in seconds since the l
func _process(delta):
# We're not doing anything every frame in this example, but
pass
# Called when the player performs an input action that hasn't al
func _unhandled_input(event):
# Check if the event was a mouse button press.
if event is InputEventMouseButton:
# Show the label whenever a mouse button is pressed.
$GreetingsLabel.show()
# Check which mouse button was pressed.
if event.button_index == MOUSE_BUTTON_LEFT:
# If the left mouse button was clicked, set the labe
$GreetingsLabel.text = "Hi Folks!"
elif event.button_index == MOUSE_BUTTON_RIGHT:
# If the right mouse button was clicked, set the lab
$GreetingsLabel.text = "Godot is Great!"
# Check if the event was a key press.
elif event is InputEventKey:
# Only show the label and set the text if the Enter key
if event.keycode == KEY_ENTER:
$GreetingsLabel.show()
$GreetingsLabel.text = "Hello World!"

Now we have tested our Player scene, and we know that it works as
expected. We can return to our Main scene and remove the GreetingsLabel
node and instead drag player.tscn onto the Main node. Then, run the game
again and check that it all works correctly:

Figure 2.28 – Our new Main scene

This is an important chapter, introducing you to the basic building blocks of
Godot. I recommend that you revisit it often or even return to the endchapter summary to remind yourself of the point and purpose of scenes,
nodes, and scripts.

Summary
In this chapter, we explored the foundational features of Godot 4, beginning
with editing an existing project and creating an additional scene. You learned

how to navigate the interface, save scenes effectively, and grasp the node
and scene design philosophy central to Godot. We also covered how to make
your projects interactive by reacting to player input. By mastering these core
concepts and tools, you’ve taken the first essential steps toward confidently
using Godot to develop games.
In the next chapter, we will get an introduction to 3D and look at how to
work with materials and lighting.

Join our community on
Discord
Join our community’s Discord space for discussions with the author and
other readers:
https://packt.link/godot-4-game-dev

OceanofPDF.com

3
Introduction to 3D
Working with 3D in Godot can feel like stepping into an entirely new
dimension of game development—quite literally! This chapter serves as
your gateway to understanding the fundamentals of 3D in Godot, guiding
you through the essential tools and concepts. Whether you’re designing a
vast open world or a compact 3D puzzle, these foundational skills will set
you up for success.
We’ll start by learning how to create 3D objects, the building blocks of any
3D scene. Next, we’ll explore how to make these objects visually engaging
by applying materials, which give them color, texture, and detail. Finally,
we’ll introduce you to lighting, a crucial component that brings your 3D
environment to life by adding depth, mood, and realism.
In this chapter, we’re going to cover the following main topics:
Creating 3D objects
Creating a material for your object
Creating lighting for the scene
By the end of this chapter, you’ll not only understand how to build and
illuminate a simple 3D environment but also gain confidence in navigating
Godot’s 3D workspace. These skills are essential for any aspiring game
developer and provide a solid foundation for creating immersive 3D
experiences.

Technical requirements
This chapter’s code files are available here in the book’s GitHub repository:
https://github.com/PacktPublishing/Godot-4-forBeginners/tree/main/ch3/introto3d
Visit this link to check out the video of the code being run:
https://packt.link/6Se0U

Creating 3D objects
Up until now, we have concentrated on 2D scenes and 2D nodes, along with
some scripting using GDScript . It’s important to know that you are not
restricted to 2D though, since Godot is an extremely capable 3D game
engine.
We will begin our exploration of 3D by creating a new Godot project in the
Project Manager window by clicking on the +Create button. Remember to
create a folder for your project and name it. I have called my project
IntroTo3D , as shown in Figure 3.1 :

Figure 3.1 – Creating a new Godot project

By default, new Godot projects open in 3D view – that’s handy! Now we can
create our first 3D scene. Because Godot uses a scene tree structure, we need
to choose a root node for the tree. The easiest way to do this is to click on
the 3D Scene button:

Figure 3.2 – Creating a new 3D scene with Node3D as the root

Your Godot interface should now look like Figure 3.3 . Take note that we
now have an extra dimension – Z – representing depth, and we have
Node3D as the root of our scene tree.

Figure 3.3 – An overview of our first 3D scene

Quick tip : Need to see a high-resolution version of
this image? Open this book in the next-gen Packt Reader or
view it in the PDF/ePub copy.
The next-gen Packt Reader and a free PDF/ePub
copy of this book are included with your purchase. Scan the
QR code OR visit packtpub.com/unlock , then use
the search bar to find this book by name. Double-check the
edition shown to make sure you get the right one.

Save your new scene now by pressing Ctrl + S or clicking on the Scene
menu and choosing Save Scene . Name your scene main.tscn , as shown in
Figure 3.4 :

Figure 3.4 – Saving our scene as main

The stage is set for us to explore the scene. We can make use of shortcuts to
easily do this.

Moving around the scene
You can move around the 3D scene much like you do in most 3D games:
Hold down the right mouse button to look around
Use WASD to fly around the scene (while holding right-click )
Use E to fly up
Use Q to fly down
Use the middle mouse button to fly around the center of whatever is on
the screen
In 2D, we made use of Sprite2D to visualize things. In 3D, we will use
MeshInstance3D .

In 3D graphics, a mesh is a digital model of a 3D object or shape, created by
connecting points (called vertices ) with lines ( edges ) and flat surfaces (
faces ).
To create a mesh instance in our scene, we can either drag a pre-created 3D
model into the scene, or we can use primitive shapes with the
MeshInstance3D . To do this, add a new MeshInstance3D node to the
scene tree:

Figure 3.5 – Adding a MeshInstance3D node to our scene

Although we now have a mesh, there is still nothing visible. You could think
of it as a sprite with no texture. We need to choose a basic shape. Using the
Inspector window on the right-hand side, click on the Mesh property
dropdown and select New BoxMesh .
This will create a new cube that you can manipulate with the same Select ,
Move , Rotate , and Scale tools.

Figure 3.6 – Adding a BoxMesh to our MeshInstance3D

Now that MeshInstance3D has a mesh shape, we can see the cube or box in
the Viewport:

Figure 3.7 – MeshInstance3D is now visible in the Viewport as a 3D cube

Note
In 2D, the positions and sizes of objects are measured in
pixels , whereas in 3D, Godot uses the metric system , so
each unit is 1 meter and represents an area of 1 meter by 1
meter.

We could make a 3D stick man using multiple of the simple shapes in
MeshInstance3D . Have a look at the following result and try to recreate it
yourself using the Selection , Move , Rotate , and Scale tools. You do not
have to use the same shapes as I have, so your stick man can look very
different from mine, and that is okay.

Figure 3.8 – Making a stick man with simple mesh shapes

As you can see in Figure 3.8 , I have combined different basic shapes to
create a stick figure.

Note that if you select the parent StickMan node, which is the original
Node3D , whatever you do to it – such as using Scale or Rotate – it will do
to all of the child nodes.

Creating a material for your
object
When working in 2D, we give Sprite2D a texture so that we can see it on
the screen. In 3D, we use materials.
Materials describe how the game engine should display an object. Once a
mesh has material, it can be assigned things such as colors and shadows. It
can also interact with the lighting in the scene. Our stick man already has a
default material with a gray color, otherwise we wouldn’t be able to see it!

Creating a material
Godot saves materials as resources. This means that once we have created
one material, we can use it again and again on different objects. Let’s create
a new folder in FileSystem called Materials :

Figure 3.9 – The Materials folder

Now right-click on the Materials folder, select Create New , and then
Resource… :

Figure 3.10 – Creating a new resource

On the Resource menu, which is shown next, search for material , choose
StandardMaterial3D , and give it a name. I have named mine
stick_material.tres :

Figure 3.11 – Adding StandardMaterial3D

Once the material has been created, it can be modified in the Inspector
window. Materials have a lot of changeable properties, such as texture,
roughness, shininess, color, and transparency. We can change the color of
our material by clicking on the Albedo dropdown and selecting the one we
like:

Figure 3.12 – Changing the color of the material in the Albedo dropdown

The word albedo comes from the Latin word albus , which simply means
white . Albedo has traditionally been used to change the color and

transparency of a material.
I have chosen a brown color to make the material look more like wood. Now
play with the Roughness value to improve the look further:

Figure 3.13 – Roughness has a value from 0 to 1

There are so many options to experiment with for materials. However, if you
really want to create materials that look like the object you are trying to
replicate, I suggest using a tool such as Material Maker , which is free and
made using the Godot Engine:
https://rodzilla.itch.io/material-maker

Applying a material
Actually, putting the material onto the mesh is as simple as dragging the
material resource file onto the mesh in Viewport!
You can see the effect of this in Figure 3.14 :

Figure 3.14 – Drag and drop your material onto your mesh

As you see in Figure 3.14 , when you place your material on one of the mesh
shapes, the mesh immediately adopts the color and texture of the material.
If you change any of the properties of the material, any of the meshes to
which the material has been applied will update in real time too. I suggest
that you try this right now to see the effect.
You can see this effect in Figure 3.15 – all the meshes have been updated
with the new material:

Figure 3.15 – Changing the roughness updated the material on all meshes

Did you notice how the roughness of the material changed the way the stick
man looks?

Challenge yourself

In this subsection, we will challenge ourselves to practice using the skills
that we have just learned.
Try to replicate the three materials shown in Figure 3.16 . The first simply
uses Albedo with low roughness and a high Metallic value. The second uses
Transparency , and the third one has a Texture value.

Figure 3.16 – Metallic (left), transparent (center), and textured (right) materials

To walk through the challenge, first, add three MeshInstance3D nodes to
the scene. In the Inspector window, choose a basic CapsuleMesh and
duplicate it by pressing Ctrl + D .
The expected outcome of these steps is shown in Figure 3.17 :

Figure 3.17 – Three MeshInstance3D meshes with CapsuleMesh shapes

The next step of the challenge is to create the first material.

First material
Now we need to create three new resources in the Materials folder. We will
use the StandardMaterial3D resource for each material. To identify them
easily, name the materials metal_material.tres ,
transparent_material.tres , and textured_material.tres :

Figure 3.18 – Our new materials

You can click and drag each material onto each capsule so that if we begin
changing the material properties, we will see our meshes update in real time:

Figure 3.19 – Drag and drop your materials onto the capsules

On your metal material, open the Albedo property and change the color to
be like that of the challenge ( sky blue ). Also, adjust the roughness and the
Metallic property till you are satisfied that it looks shiny and reflective, like
metal.

Figure 3.20 – Creating a shiny metal material

Notice the properties you should adjust in Figure 3.20 to create the metallic
effect you want.

Second material
Begin again by changing the Albedo property of the material to a bright pink
to match the challenge. Take the Alpha channel down to around halfway as
well. You will notice this has no effect now. This is because we need to
adjust the Transparency property to use Alpha .

Figure 3.21 – Creating a transparent pink capsule

Note the properties of the material in Figure 3.21 , which you need to adjust
to create the transparent effect you are after.

Third material
The final material has a texture instead of color. The texture is simply an
image that is wrapped around the capsule shape. We can simply use the same
robot image that we used for the sprite when we were working in 2D in
Chapter 2 . Expand the Albedo dropdown and drag an image onto the
empty Texture property:

Figure 3.22 – Adding a texture to a material

You can clearly see the flat 2D image of a robot has been applied to the
capsule shape and is being stretched around it.
Another fundamental part of any 3D scene is the lighting. In the next
section, we’ll explore different types of lights and how to use them
effectively in your 3D scenes.

Creating lighting for the
scene
To influence the mood and atmosphere, and visually enhance a game,
lighting is crucial. Good lighting adds depth, highlights details, and can
guide the players’ attention, which all makes the game world more
immersive and engaging.
Godot has several lighting nodes available. We will look at a few of the
primary ones now. We will add these nodes to the current scene and examine
their effects on the three capsules.
Click on the + in the scene tree to add a new node to the scene. Search using
the keyword light . You will see that there are three types of nodes related
to light in Godot, as shown in Figure 3.23 :

Figure 3.23 – Three primary light nodes in Godot

Directional light simulates sunlight by casting parallel rays over your entire
3D scene, providing consistent illumination from a specific direction,
making it ideal for outdoor environments. Now is the time to implement
directional light in Godot.

Directional light
Add a DirectionalLight3D node to the scene. This type of light mimics the
sun and sends out infinite light in a single direction as parallel rays. It is used
for lights with high intensity that are far away from the scene.

In the Viewport, the node is a white arrow pointing in the direction the light
comes from. You can rotate this node to change the direction of the light.
The position of this node will not affect the scene as the light is coming from
everywhere.
Try rotating the light to see the effect it has on the scene. You can also
change the Color and Energy properties of the light in the Inspector
window.
You can see the direction the light is coming from displayed as a large white
arrow in Figure 3.24 :

Figure 3.24 – Note the reflection in the metal capsule is as if the sun were directly overhead

Metallic surfaces will reflect the light, as shown in Figure 3.24 .
In Figure 3.25 , you can see the Color and Energy properties, which can be
adjusted to change the color of the light and its intensity:

Figure 3.25 – The Color and Energy properties of DirectionalLight3D

Before we add a new light to the scene, click on the eye icon to toggle the
visibility of the DirectionalLight3D node to off so that we can see the
effects of the next light:

Figure 3.26 – Toggle the visibility of the DirectionalLight3D node to off

Click on the + in the scene tree to add a new node to the scene. Search using
the keyword light (see Figure 3.23 ).

Omni light
Add an OmniLight3D node to the scene. This node emits light from a single
point in all directions, like a light bulb. Like a light bulb in real life, it is
brighter as you get closer to it. You can adjust the range of the light by
clicking on the orange circle that appears at the edge of its wireframe, as
shown in Figure 3.27 :

Figure 3.27 – The OmniLight3D range handle

You can also change the Color and Energy properties of OmniLight3D .
However, it is hard to see with no surface to reflect off. Follow these steps to
fix this:
1. Use your new skills to add a ground surface to the scene by adding
another MeshInstance3D node. Rename it to Ground .
2. Give it the PlaneMesh shape. Scale and move the plane so that it looks
like a large floor under the capsules.
3. Create a new material and save it as ground_material.tres .
4. Set the Albedo property of the material to white and apply it to
Ground . It should look something like Figure 3.28 :

Figure 3.28 – The Ground plane mesh added with a white material applied

Go ahead and experiment with changing the Color and Energy properties of
OmniLight3D . Notice how it changes the mood of the scene.
Do you see the reddish glow of the light on the floor in Figure 3.29 ?

Figure 3.29 – Changing the color property of OmniLight3D

You can also enable shadows with DirectionalLight3D . However, to see
the shadows, you would need to set the Energy property of
DirectionalLight3D to 0 to turn it off. The shadow will then be cast by
OmniLight3D . Open the Shadow property dropdown and enable it:

Figure 3.30 – Enabling shadows on DirectionalLight3D

Once shadows have been enabled, you can see them cast by objects in the
scene, as shown in Figure 3.31 . Sometimes shadows do not appear due to a
bug in Godot 4. In that case, you should save your work and restart the
engine.

Figure 3.31 – Shadows cast by DirectionalLight3D

Now we just have one more light to experiment with.

Spotlight
Just like at the theatre, SpotLight3D is a node that emits light in a single
direction in the shape of a cone. This works well for lights such as headlights

or streetlights. Disable OmniLight3D and DirectionalLight3D by clicking
on the eye visibility toggle to the right of them in the scene tree.
Now add a Spotlight3D node to the scene. You will see the cone wireframe
of the light, and again we can use the little orange circles to change the range
and the angle of the light.
You can see the cone of light that the spot will cast shown as a white cone in
Figure 3.32 :

Figure 3.32 – Putting the SpotLight3D on our textured capsule mesh

Of course, we can also change the Color and Energy properties of the light,
and we can enable shadows just as we did for DirectionalLight3D :

Figure 3.33 – Changing the color and angle of the spotlight and enabling shadows

Now that you know how to add and manipulate the three types of lights in
Godot, you have the tools to create the right atmosphere for your 3D Made
in Godot game.

Summary
In this chapter, you took your first steps into 3D game development with
Godot. You learned how to create basic 3D objects using meshes, providing
the building blocks for your scenes. We then explored how to enhance these
objects by applying materials, adding color, texture, and depth to bring them
to life. Finally, we introduced lighting, demonstrating how to use different
types of lights to create an atmosphere, highlight important areas, and add
realism to your scenes.
By mastering these skills, you now have the tools to design and illuminate
simple 3D environments, setting the stage for more complex projects as you
continue your journey in game development.
In the next chapter, we will be taking a detailed look at how to work with
GDScript, the built-in programming language that was designed to work
with Godot Engine.

Unlock this
book’s exclusive
benefits now
Scan this QR code or go to
packtpub.com/unlock ,
then search this book by name.
Note: Keep your purchase invoice
ready before you start.
OceanofPDF.com

4
Scripting with GDScript
In this chapter, you’ll begin your journey into GDScript, the scripting language at the heart
of Godot. Scripting is a crucial part of game development, enabling you to control the
behavior and interactions within your game world. By learning GDScript, you’ll gain the
ability to define game mechanics, create dynamic interactions, and build functionality that
goes beyond static assets.
We’ll start by showing you how to create, edit, and save scripts in Godot. Then, we’ll
introduce you to key programming concepts, such as variables and data types, and how
they work together with Godot’s order of execution. You’ll explore mathematical and
logical operators that allow you to perform calculations and comparisons, followed by an
introduction to decision-making with if , else if , and else statements.
Finally, we’ll delve into the use of functions, both built-in and custom, to structure your
code efficiently.
In this chapter, we’re going to cover the following main topics:
Understanding GDScript
Creating scripts
Understanding functions
Understanding variables
Understanding operators
Relational and comparison operators
Using custom functions
By the end of this chapter, you’ll have the foundational knowledge to script essential game
mechanics and confidently control the logic and flow of your game.

Technical requirements
This chapter’s code files are available here in the book’s GitHub repository:
https://github.com/PacktPublishing/Godot-4-forBeginners/tree/main/ch4/introtoscripting
Visit this link to check out the video of the code being run:
https://packt.link/lmzgi

Understanding GDScript
Godot has its own built-in scripting language, GDScript , a high-level, programming
language that is like Python. Unlike Python, GDScript is optimized for Godot’s scenebased design philosophy and can specify strict typing of variables.
Scripts are used to program custom behavior for our nodes. In the next few subheadings,
we will look at how to create scripts, edit them, and save them.

Creating scripts
We’ve already worked with scripts, but repetition is a good teacher. So, let’s remember
scripts are usually attached to nodes.
Start by creating a new Godot project. I have named mine IntroToScripting . Now create
a new 2D scene, which will give us Node2D as the root node in the scene tree.
There are a few different ways to attach our script to this node. Select Node2D and, in
Inspector , locate the Script property and choose New Script… from the <empty>
dropdown.

Figure 4.1 – Adding a new script via Inspector for Node

You could also right-click on the node you wish to attach the script to, and then click on
Attach Script… on the pop-up menu or click on the script icon with the plus sign.

Figure 4.2 – Attaching a script by right-clicking the node

Give your script a name, such as IntroToScripting , and click Create .

Figure 4.3 – Naming and creating the script

We are now presented with the script editor. This is like a built-in Integrated
Development Environment ( IDE ) for the GDScript programming language in Godot.
This is a major benefit of Godot when comparing it to other engines, as you do not need to
rely on a third-party program for your coding.
If you look at Figure 4.3 , you will see we created the script with the checkbox next to
Template checked to use the default node. This means that the script will be pre-populated
with some code.
In Figure 4.4 , we can see the generated code that is pre-populated in the script editor:

Figure 4.4 – The script editor

As Figure 4.4 depicts, our script file has now appeared under FileSystem , with the .gd
extension. Also, we can see two lists: Filter Scripts , which contains our new script, and
Filter Methods , which contains the functions that exist in the script. Note that I also
renamed Node2D to IntroToScripting to match the name of my script.
The script editor comes with code formatting. You can see the formatting because different
parts of the code are different colors. This helps us understand and identify parts of the
code quickly. You will notice that the func keyword is in red , and the function name is in
blue . Auto-complete is also a feature and the editor will try to predict what you are typing
and prompt you with options. This improves efficiency and helps you to find things when
you are not sure what they are called.
Let’s break down the code shown in Figure 4.4 line by line:
1. Line 1 : The extends keyword is in red , so we know it is a keyword and Node2D is
in dark green , which means it is a class reference .
GDScript is an object-oriented programming language, meaning it organizes code
into classes . Think of a class as a blueprint for creating something. Node2D is a
built-in class in Godot, already defined by the developers. By writing extends
Node2D , we are telling Godot that we want to use everything Node2D can do, while
also adding our own new features and behaviors.

2. Line 4 : This line is gray , which means that it is a comment . This line is written by
the programmer to explain what the code that follows it does. It helps make the code
easier to understand. The hash symbol ( # ) tells the computer to ignore this line
when running the program; it’s just for humans to read.
3. Line 5 : The func keyword is in red , which shows it’s a special keyword in
GDScript. _ready() is in light green, meaning it’s a built-in function already created
by the developers for us. The round brackets, () , tell us this is a method, and the
colon, : , means that everything indented after that is part of the method.
4. Line 6 : The pass keyword tells the computer to skip the line. You can’t have an
empty function, so pass stops the program from giving an error. There’s also an
inline comment, which is a note reminding you to replace this line with your own
code to do things in this function.
5. Line 9 : The comment here explains that the _process function runs once every
frame of the game. Think of a frame as a single picture in a fast-moving animation.
The game shows lots of frames per second to create smooth motion. The delta
variable is the time difference between the current frame and the last one, and we use
it to make sure the game’s movement and animations stay smooth and consistent, no
matter how fast or slow the computer running the game is.
6. Line 10 : Once again, we see the func keyword, which tells us we are defining a
function. _process is shown in green, meaning it’s a built-in function provided by
Godot. Inside the brackets, we see the word delta . This is a parameter , which is
like a small piece of information that gets passed into the function to help it perform
its task. In this case, delta is used to represent the time between frames, ensuring the
game runs smoothly.
7. Line 11 : The pass keyword appears again. The pass keyword tells the computer to
skip this line. You can’t have an empty function, so pass stops the program from
giving an error.
Now that you’ve learned the basics of scripting, the next section will explore one of the
most essential tools in GDScript: functions. We’ll dive into how functions work, starting
with built-in functions such as _ready and _process , which help control your game’s
flow and behavior.

Understanding functions
A function is like a set of instructions that tell the computer to do something specific.
Think of it as a mini program inside your code. You give it a name, and when you call that
name, the function runs and does its job. For example, if you had a function called
player_jump() , every time you called it, the computer would follow the steps in that
function to make the player jump. Functions help organize your code, so you don’t have to
write the same instructions repeatedly.
Some functions are built in because the people who made the programming language or
engine (like Godot) have already created them to handle common or essential tasks.
For example, there’s a built-in function that tells the game to update the screen every
frame. You don’t have to write that yourself because it’s something almost every game
needs, and it saves you time.
But we also need to write our own functions because every game or program is different.
You might want to make a function that moves a character in a special way or checks
whether a player has won a level. Since only you know exactly what your game needs to
do, you can create custom functions to handle those specific tasks.
In Godot, built-in functions such as _ready and _process play a vital role in controlling
how your game behaves and updates over time. Here’s what each of these functions does:
_ready

: The _ready function is like the starting point for a node. Think of it as the

moment when everything is set up and ready to go, like when the curtains rise at the
start of a play. The _ready function is the first function that runs once the node is in
the scene tree along with all its children. Nodes are loaded from the bottom to the top
and child nodes are loaded before their parent. You can put any code inside this
function that you want to run right when the object is ready, such as showing a
character on the screen or starting an animation.
_process

: The _process function is like the heartbeat of your game object. It runs

repeatedly, once for every frame (like every snapshot of your game). You use it to
update things continuously, such as moving a character or keeping track of the time.
The delta inside the function is a small value that tells you how much time has passed
since the last frame, so you can make sure everything happens smoothly, no matter
how fast or slow the computer runs the game.

Now that you understand how functions work, you can take on board the concept of the
game loop.

Understanding the game loop
Most games run inside a loop that keeps updating what’s happening in the game—such as
moving characters, checking for collisions, and drawing graphics to the screen. This is
called the game loop . It runs many times per second (often 60 times per second or more),
and every time it runs, it updates and redraws the game.
In Godot, you don’t usually write the loop yourself. Instead, Godot handles it for you and
gives you special functions you can use to plug into the game loop. The three most
common ones are discussed in the subsequent sections.

_ready()
This function is called once when the node and its children are added to the scene tree and
are ready to go. It’s like setting up your LEGO model before the game starts.
Use _ready() to do the following:
Set initial values
Connect signals
Hide or show things at the start
Prepare anything that only needs to happen once

_process(delta)
This function runs every frame. It’s used for things that should happen constantly such as
checking input, changing animations, or moving something smoothly.
Use _process(delta) for the following:
Player input
Animations
UI updates
Non-physics-related updates

Note that delta is the amount of time (in seconds) since the last frame. This helps you
keep movement smooth even if the frame rate changes.

_physics_process(delta)
This is like _process , but it runs at a fixed rate (by default, 60 times per second). This
makes it perfect for anything involving physics, such as moving a character with collision.
Use _physics_process(delta) for the following:
Physics calculations
Movement with move_and_slide() or move_and_collide()
Gravity and jumping
To demonstrate how the physics_process function works, follow these steps:
1. Create a new scene with Sprite2D as the root node, as shown in Figure 4.5 :

Figure 4.5 – A Sprite2D node as the root of the scene

2. Use the Godot icon.svg file as the texture for the sprite.
3. Attach a script to the node by right-clicking on it and choosing Attach Script… or
clicking on the script icon with the + symbol. Add the following code to the script:
extends Sprite2D
var speed = 100
var velocity = Vector2.ZERO
func _ready():
print("Sprite is ready to move!")
func _process(delta):

# Check input and set direction
velocity = Vector2.ZERO
if Input.is_action_pressed("ui_right"):
velocity.x += 1
if Input.is_action_pressed("ui_left"):
velocity.x -= 1
func _physics_process(delta):
# Move the sprite using physics
position += velocity * speed * delta

Quick tip : Enhance your coding experience with the AI Code
Explainer and Quick Copy features. Open this book in the next-gen Packt
Reader. Click the Copy button ( 1 ) to quickly copy code into your coding
environment, or click the Explain button ( 2 ) to get the AI assistant to
explain a block of code to you.

The next-gen Packt Reader is included for free with the purchase of
this book. Scan the QR code OR go to packtpub.com/unlock , then
use the search bar to find this book by name. Double-check the edition
shown to make sure you get the right one.

When you run the scene, you will see the message appear in the Output window once the
scene loads, then you can move the sprite to the left and the right using the arrow keys and
the game loop constantly updates the screen.
In the next section, we’ll explore one of the most fundamental aspects of programming—
variables . You’ll learn what variables are, how they store data, and how they are used to
manage game information such as player stats, scores, and more.

Understanding variables
Think of a variable like a labeled box where you can store information. Just like how you
can put something inside a box and come back to use it later, a variable holds a piece of
information, such as a number or a word, that you can use and change while your program
runs.
For example, if you’re making a game and want to keep track of the player’s health, you
would create a variable called health . Every time the player finds a heart or gets injured,
you can add to or subtract from the health variable. It helps your program remember and
work with data, just like a box holds your stuff until you need it.
We can store different types of data in our variables, but the most common ones are as
follows:
Integers (whole numbers) such as 1 , 2 , 3
Real numbers (floating point or decimal numbers) such as 0.1 , 0.2 , 0.3
Strings of text (collections of characters) such as Hello World , ABC , "@:!3"
Boolean values (true and false values) such as True , False , 0 , 1
In the next section, we’ll explore variables, a fundamental concept in programming. You’ll
learn how to define variables in Godot and follow best practices for organizing them in
your scripts.

Creating a variable
It is good practice in programming to put our variables at the top of our script under the
class definition or extension of that class. We will put ours under the extends Node2D line.

Variables need to be defined by giving them a name and a value to store. We write the var
keyword to tell the compiler that this is a variable. Now we identify our variable by giving
it a name (we will use the name health ). To assign it a value, we use the equals sign. This
is called the assignment operator in programming, and it is not the same as equality in
mathematics. Its role is to assign the value on its right to the variable on its left.
Finally, we must assign a starting or default value – in this case, we will set health to 100
:
extends Node2D
var health = 100

Creating the variable and assigning a value only serves to store the value in the computer’s
memory. We can access this value by using the name of the variable. We can then do
something with the value such as outputting it to the screen.
To do that, we need to call the built-in print function and give it the name of our variable
to print. We can only display this value once the node is ready. The best place to call the
print function is from the _ready function:
extends Node2D
var health = 100
#Called when the node enters the scene tree for the first time.
func _ready():
print(health)

Next, run the program. Choose to use the current scene as the main scene if prompted.
Note that you will not see any output in the game window. Instead, the value will be
displayed in the console of the Output window.

Figure 4.6 – The value of the health variable is displayed in the Output console

With variables established, it’s important to understand the different types of data they can
hold. In the next section, we’ll explore data types, which define the kind of information
your variables store, from numbers to text and beyond.

Data types
I touched on the different types of data that we can store in variables at the start of the
chapter. It might help to think of data types like different kinds of containers for holding
specific kinds of information. Just like you wouldn’t store water in a paper box or keep
food in a bottle, in programming, you use different types of variables depending on the
kind of data you’re working with.
Here are some examples:
Numbers go in a container called int (for whole numbers) or float (for numbers
with decimals)
Text goes into a container called string , representing characters grouped together
like individual beads on a string (letters, numbers, or symbols)
Boolean holds only true or false—like a simple yes or no answer
Using the right type helps the program know what to expect and how to handle the
information.
Since GDScript, like Python, is a dynamic programming language, we do not have to
specify the type of variable we want to store. This makes programming much faster.

However, as a program gets larger, and more team members are working on the project, it
is easier to find errors and bugs by specifying the data type of the variable.
This will prevent people from trying to store the wrong type of data in the wrong variable.
We could change our health variable as follows:
extends Node2D
var health : int = 100

This will not affect the program output.
When we want to make fine adjustments to a value, for example, to have more granular
control over the player’s jump height, we can use float . This is a decimal number, and it
can be created as follows:
extends Node2D
var health : int = 100
var jump_strength : float = 220.5

In this code, we’re declaring a variable called jump_strength and specifying that its data
type is float , which allows it to store decimal numbers. By setting it to 220.5 , we’re
giving more precise control over how high a character can jump, as decimal values offer
finer adjustments than whole numbers. This is especially useful for game mechanics such
as jump height, where small tweaks can have a big impact on gameplay.
In the next section, we’ll explore naming conventions in programming, which are
important guidelines for how to name your variables, functions, and other elements.
Following these conventions not only makes your code easier to read and understand but
also helps avoid errors and confusion as your project grows.

Naming conventions
The way that we name our nodes, scenes, variables, and functions is important too.
Naming conventions are like guidelines for how we name things in programming, such as
variables, functions, or classes. They help make your code easier to read and understand,
not only for you but also for others who might work on your project.

Good naming conventions make it clear what something does. Imagine if you named
everything randomly, such as calling your player’s score x and your enemy’s health y . It
would be confusing and hard to follow, especially in big projects.
By following naming conventions, you keep your code organized and readable, making it
easier to maintain and share with others.
The naming conventions used by GDScript and Godot developers are as follows:
snake_case : This is used for scenes, variables, and functions. It is called snake_case
because each new word is connected with an underscore, making the combination
look like a little snake.
SCREAMING_SNAKE_CASE : This is used for constants. All alphabetic
characters are uppercase.
PascalCase : This is used for classes and nodes in the scene. Each new word begins
with a capital letter.
The most important element when naming things is that the name should be meaningful
and descriptive so that the program becomes self-documenting.
Often, for cooldowns and testing the state of things in play, we will use a Boolean value.
An example could be to check if the player is currently dashing:
extends Node2D
var health : int = 100
var jump_strength : float = 220.5
var is_dashing : bool = true

In the preceding code, a Boolean variable called is_dashing is being declared and
initialized with the value true. This means that the player is currently in a dashing state.
Boolean variables like this one are often used to track whether a certain condition is true or
false in the game.
The last variable we will look at here is String . A String is used to store combinations of
characters and, most often, we use this for storing text. Note that when we define String ,
we write it with a capital letter. This is because String is a class and is different from the
other data types as it is not primitive. Additionally, String has many methods associated
with it. We could use String to store the name of the player.

In the next example, we declare and initialize a String variable. Strings are used to store
text, such as a player’s name. The following line of code creates a variable called
and assigns it a default value of "Unknown Player" . This allows us to store
and display a player’s name in the game.
player_name

If you look at the following code, you will notice that strings are assigned their own unique
golden color so that they are easily spotted in your code.
extends Node2D
var health : int = 100
var jump_strength : float = 220.5
var is_dashing : bool = true
var player_name : String = "Unknown Player"

In the upcoming section, we’ll explore the concept of order of operations in programming.
Understanding how operations are executed in a specific sequence is crucial for writing
accurate and efficient code. This ensures that calculations and logic are performed in the
correct order to achieve the desired outcomes.

Understanding operators
Operators are the symbols used to carry out operations in programming.
These operators are essential tools that allow you to perform different operations such as
mathematical calculations, comparisons, and logical evaluations, helping you control how
your code behaves and interacts with data.
First, let’s look at the mathematical operators :
Addition : The + sign is used to increase the value of a variable by an amount
Subtraction : The – sign is used to decrease the value of a variable by an amount
Multiplication : The * sign is used to multiply the value of a variable by another
value
Division : The / sign is used to divide the value of a variable by another value
We can experiment with using these operators with the player_level variable in our
program.

In our code, the player’s level is 23 . If we add 7 , it will be 30 . Look at the _ready
function here to see this in action:
func _ready():
print(player_name)
print(player_level)
print(player_exp)
print(has_key)
player_level = player+level + 7
print(player_level)

You will notice now that the output is first 23 , and then, when it prints again, it changes
to 30 .
It’s important to note that assignment operations work from right to left. In this case, we
are taking the value 7 , adding it to the current value of player_level , and then using the
assignment operator (=) to store the result back into the player_level variable on the left
side. This means the existing value of player_level is updated with the new result.
When programming, we always want to focus on efficiency, and this means avoiding
repetition. As you can see, we repeated the variable name. To avoid this in the future, we
can use a new operator called the shortcut operator , and we can refactor our code more
efficiently as follows:
#player_level = player_level + 7
player_level += 7
print(player_level)

If we wanted to reduce the level to 0 , we could subtract 30 :
player_level -= 30
print(player_level)

We can do the same for multiplication and division:

Figure 4.7 – Multiplication and division

You can also add variables together. If we create a variable called spike_damage , then
every time the player hits some spikes, we can reduce their health by that value:

Figure 4.8 – Using the spike_damage variable

Before we start solving more complex expressions, it’s important to understand the order
in which operations are carried out in maths.

Order of operations
Although the computer runs one line at a time from the top of the program to the bottom,
just like in cooking, where you need to do things in a certain order (like mixing ingredients
before baking), in math and programming, there’s a specific order in which calculations
are done.
The order of operations tells the computer which parts of a calculation to do first. Here’s a
simple way to remember it using PEMDAS :
Parentheses : Do the calculations inside parentheses first
Exponents : Then, calculate powers or roots (such as squaring a number)
Multiplication and Division : Next, do multiplication and division from left to right
Addition and Subtraction : Finally, do addition and subtraction from left to right
For example, in the expression 3 + 5 * 2 , the computer will first do the multiplication ( 5
* 2 = 10 ), and then the addition ( 3 + 10 = 13 ), because multiplication comes before
addition in the order of operations.

Understanding this is important because it ensures that your calculations are done
correctly!

Practice exercise
To practice using variables, try creating four variables that could be used to store
information about a player. Each of these variables should use a different data type.
This exercise also introduces an important concept: variable scope – watch out for it in the
explanation below.
The four variables are as follows:
Player name
Player level
Player experience points
Does the player have the key or not?
The solution to the exercise is as follows:
var player_name : String = "Riptide"
var player_level : int = 23
var player_exp : float = 123.45
var has_key : bool = false

We can print all of them, each on a new line in the _ready function:
func _ready():
print(player_name)
print(player_level)
print(player_exp)
print(has_key)

Executing the preceding code will print the values to the console.
Variable scope
In the preceding solution, a variable was declared and initialized within the
function. This limits the variable’s scope to local, meaning it is
only accessible within the _ready function where it was declared. Unlike
_ready

class variables (which are defined at the top of the program and accessible
throughout the class), local variables can only be used in the specific
function or block of code where they are defined. This is known as
variable scope .
In the next section, we’ll explore relational and comparison operators in Godot. These
operators allow you to compare values, helping your code make decisions by checking
conditions such as whether one value is greater than, less than, or equal to another.

Relational and comparison
operators
Often, we need to compare values to determine whether they meet a specific condition—
true or false. This allows our code to branch and perform different actions based on the
result of the comparison. To evaluate these conditions, we use relational operators, which
help us compare values.
The different operators available for comparison are as follows:
Equality : Two equals signs ( == ) are used to test if two values are the same
Greater than : Using angle brackets ( > ), we can compare if one value is bigger
Greater than or equal to : Using ( >= ), we can test if the value is bigger than or the
same as another value
Less than : Using angle brackets ( < ), we can compare if one value is smaller
Less than or equal to : Using angle brackets ( <= ) with an equals sign, we can test
if the value is smaller or the same as another value
Not equals : Using an exclamation mark and an equals sign ( !- ), we can test if one
value is not the same as another value
We use these operators with if statements, which are fundamental in programming. These
if

statements allow us to check if a condition is true, and only when it is true does the

block of code inside the statement run. This makes our game more flexible, enabling it to
perform different actions depending on the result of the tested conditions.
All of this is demonstrated in the following code:

var player_lives : int = 3
if health == 0:
player_lives -= 1
if player_lives < 1:
print("GAME OVER!")
if player_lives <= 0:
print("GAME OVER!")
if spike_damage > health:
print("GAME OVER!")
if player_exp >= 1000:
player_level += 1
print("LEVEL UP")
if has_key != true:
print("DOOR LOCKED")

In the preceding code, our game produces different output based on the value of the
variables being compared.
To make our game respond differently based on certain conditions, we can use the if ,
elif , and else keywords. The if statement checks if a condition is true and runs the
code inside it. If the condition is false , we can use elif (short for else if ) to check
another condition. Finally, else is used as a default that runs if none of the previous
conditions are true .
For example, let’s say we want to check the number of lives a player has and respond
accordingly, as shown in the following code:
if player_lives > 0:
print("Keep playing!")
elif player_lives == 0:
print("Game Over!")
else:
print("Invalid number of lives!")

The preceding code allows the player to continue playing if they have lives remaining; if
they do not, it prints the game over and, for abnormal values, it shows an error.

Practice exercise
To get some experience with the concept, write a script that checks the player’s health
using the health variable we created. Display different messages based on their health

status.
If health is 80 or more, print "You're in great shape!"
If health is between 50 and 79 , print "You're doing okay, but be careful!"
If health is below 50 , print "Warning! Your health is low!"
If health is 0 or less, print "Game over! You've run out of health."
Use if , elif , and else statements to complete this task.
The solution is given here:
# Check the player's health and print the appropriate message
if health >= 80:
print("You're in great shape!")
elif health >= 50:
print("You're doing okay, but be careful!")
elif health > 0:
print("Warning! Your health is low!")
else:
print("Game over! You've run out of health.")

The preceding code displays the correct message depending on the value of the player’s
health variable.
In the next section, we’ll dive into creating custom functions in Godot. You’ll learn how to
define your own functions to organize your code, make it reusable, and add unique
functionality to your game projects.

Using custom functions
Part of keeping our code clean and organized involves creating our own custom functions.
Custom functions allow us to break down our code into smaller, reusable pieces, making it
easier to understand and maintain. We aren’t limited to only using functions that come with
Godot—we can define our own to perform specific tasks in our game.
To create a custom function, we use the func keyword, followed by the function name
(this is how we will identify the function in the code). After the name, we add two round
brackets () that can hold any information (parameters) we want to pass to the function.
Finally, we end the function header with a colon ( : ), and on the next line, we define
what the function will do (this is called the function body).

We already have a variable that stores how much damage a spike does. What if we wrote a
custom function that could be called every time we are hit by a spike:
# Custom function to handle spike damage and return remaining #health
func take_spike_damage():
health -= damage_amount
if health <= 0:
print("Game Over")
return 0 # Return 0 if health is depleted
else:
print("Player's current health: ", health)

The preceding code can be called (asked to run) whenever the player takes damage from a
spike.
For the preceding code to work, we need to move spike_damage to the top to make it a
class (script) variable. This is demonstrated here:
extends Node2D
var health : int = 100
var jump_strength : float = 220.5
var is_dashing : bool = true
var player_name : String = "Riptide"
var player_level : int = 23
var player_exp : float = 123.45
var has_key : bool = false
var spike_damage : int = 10

In the preceding code, the spike_damage variable has been moved to the top of the
program to change its scope to include the entire script (class).
To run the code in our take_spike_damage function, we need to call it. This will depend on
the context of the game but, for our example, we will call it from the _ready function:
# Called when the node enters the scene tree for the first time.
func _ready():
take_spike_damage()

In the preceding code, we call the take_spike_damage() function (ask it to run), and all
the code inside the function runs, and the game is updated with the result.

In the upcoming section, we’ll explore arguments and parameters in functions. You’ll learn
how to pass information into your custom functions to make them more flexible and
dynamic, allowing you to control their behavior based on the values you provide.

Arguments and parameters or
function inputs
Functions can accept input values and produce output, allowing us to write adaptable,
reusable code. These inputs, referred to as parameters in GDScript, let us pass information
to a function when it’s called. The data we send to the function is known as an argument ,
and the parameter works like a placeholder variable that holds this value within the
function.
For example, in Godot’s built-in _process(delta) function, the delta parameter is
passed in, representing the time elapsed since the previous frame. Parameters make it
possible for functions to behave differently depending on the data they receive, giving us
flexibility in our code.
We can update the take_spike_damage() function to accept a parameter that defines how
much damage a spike causes. This way, the function can handle different damage values
whenever it’s called:
# Custom function to handle spike damage with a parameter
func take_spike_damage(damage_amount):
health -= damage_amount
if health <= 0:
print("Game Over")
else:
print("Player's current health: ", health)

In the preceding code, we have added a parameter to our function so that we can change
the amount of damage each spike does.
Remember, we must change the call to the function too since we must provide a value for
the damage amount:
# Called when the node enters the scene tree for the first time.
func _ready():
#Calling the function with different damage values

take_spike_damage(10) #Spike causes 10 damage
take_spike_damage(5) #Spike causes 5 damage

In the preceding code, we have to remember to provide the amount of damage the spike
does to our function.
In the next section, we’ll look at how functions can return output in Godot by using the
return keyword. This allows a function to send back a result or value after performing its
task, which can then be used elsewhere in your game.

Functions can return output
Functions don’t just accept inputs; they can also produce outputs. In programming, this is
achieved through return values . A return value is the result that a function provides after
performing its task. By using the return keyword, you can send a value back to the place
where the function was called. This allows functions to perform calculations or data
processing and then give back the result for further use.
We can modify our previous example to include a function that calculates and returns the
player’s remaining health after taking damage. This will demonstrate how functions can
provide useful results.
# Custom function to handle spike damage and return remaining health
func take_spike_damage(damage_amount) -> int:
health -= damage_amount
if health <= 0:
print("Game Over")
return 0 # Return 0 if health is depleted
else:
print("Player's current health: ", health)
return health # Return the remaining health

In the preceding code, we have changed our function to return the value of the player’s
health variable.
We also need to modify our call to the function and store and use the result:
# Called when the node enters the scene tree for the first time.
func _ready():
#Example of using the function and storing the returned value

var remaining_health = take_spike_damage(10)
#Assume damage_amount is 10
print("Remaining Health: ", remaining_health)

In the preceding code, we now store the result returned by the function in a new variable,
which we then print out.
It is time to practice what was learned.
Create a function to manage player health based on damage taken. To do that, follow these
steps:
1. Create a function called calculate_health_after_damage .
2. This function should have two parameters: current_health and damage .
3. Inside the function, subtract damage from current_health and return the new health
value.
This is an example of the use of the function when calling it:
#Called when the node enters the scene tree for the first time.
func _ready():
var player_health = 100
var spike_damage = 20
var new_health = calculate_health_after_damage(player_health, spike_damag
print("Player's new health:", new_health)

In the preceding code, we store the result of calculating the player’s health after taking
damage in a new variable and we then print out that result.
The solution to the exercise is shown here:
# Define the function to calculate the player's health after taking damage
func calculate_health_after_damage(current_health: int, damage: int) -> int:
var new_health = current_health - damage
return new_health

In the preceding code, the solution shows that we have to declare a function that accepts
two arguments, subtracts them, and returns the result as an integer.

Summary
In this chapter, we explored essential GDScript concepts, from creating, editing, and
saving scripts to understanding variables, data types, and the order of execution. We also
delved into mathematical and logical operators, control flow using if , elif , and else
statements, and the importance of built-in and custom functions such as ready and
process

. These skills are crucial for scripting fundamental game mechanics, giving you

the tools to start building dynamic, interactive game worlds.
In the next chapter, we’ll take a deep dive into vectors—a vital concept for game
development that underpins movement, direction, and positioning in your game.
Understanding vectors is the next logical step, as they play a key role in controlling the
flow and interaction of objects in 2D or 3D space.

Join our community on Discord
Join our community’s Discord space for discussions with the author and other readers:
https://packt.link/godot-4-game-dev

OceanofPDF.com

—————————

Part 2

—————————

Working with the Godot
Engine
In this part of the book, you’ll deepen your practical knowledge of how to
work effectively with the Godot engine. We’ll begin by demystifying
vectors, one of the most essential tools in any game developer’s toolkit,
through clear explanations and real-world examples. Then, you’ll put your
skills into action by building a complete 2D mini-game over two chapters.
This hands-on project will guide you through the full game creation
process, from scripting player mechanics to designing levels and handling
game logic. By the end of this part, you’ll have the experience and
confidence to start building your own 2D games in Godot.
This part of the book includes the following chapters:
Chapter 5 , Understanding Vectors
Chapter 6 , Creating a 2D Mini-Game in Godot – Part 1
Chapter 7 , Creating a 2D Mini-Game in Godot – Part 2
OceanofPDF.com

5
Understanding Vectors
Vectors are one of the most fundamental concepts in game development,
helping developers represent direction, movement, and positioning in both
2D and 3D space. In this chapter, you’ll dive into the basics of what vectors
are and why they play a vital role in game mechanics. You’ll learn how to
use vectors effectively within the Godot engine—both through the visual
interface and in code—to control and influence your game objects.
In this chapter, we’re going to cover the following main topics:
What are vectors?
Using vectors in Godot
By the end of this chapter, you will have gained a practical understanding of
how to manipulate vectors, apply them to movement, and solve game
development problems that involve direction and position. Whether you’re
developing a platformer, an RPG, or a 3D adventure game, mastering
vectors will provide you with powerful tools to control player movement,
enemy AI, and environmental interactions.

Technical requirements
This chapter’s code files are available here in the book’s GitHub repository:
https://github.com/PacktPublishing/Godot-4-for-

Beginners/tree/main/ch5/vectors
Visit this link to check out the video of the code being run:
https://packt.link/6sNsX

What are vectors?
If you’re familiar with the idea of a point, think of a vector as similar but
with a key difference: a vector not only represents a position in space but
also includes information about direction and magnitude (how far and in
what direction it moves from its starting point, or origin). A point , on the
other hand, is just a location and doesn’t include any information about
direction or movement. This is shown in Figure 5.1 :

Figure 5.1 – Demonstration of a vector versus a point in 2D space

In Figure 5.1 , the vector is shown as an arrow. The arrowhead indicates the
direction in which the vector is pointing, while the length of the arrow (from
the tail to the head) represents its magnitude , or how far it extends from its

starting point. The point at position (8,5) is a static location and has no
direction or magnitude.
If we draw an arrow from the origin to the point that we defined, we have
created a vector. This is shown in Figure 5.2 :

Figure 5.2 – A vector has a direction (angle) and a magnitude

In video games, vectors are used to represent a player’s velocity, control
their aiming direction, and determine their field of view (the direction they
are facing)—all with a single vector. At the same time, we use a point to
track the player’s position continuously. This is shown in Figure 5.3 :

Figure 5.3 – A point representing the current position of the player

In Figure 5.3 , we can see that the player is 2 units east of the origin and 1
unit north.
Velocity is the speed of something in a specific direction. In game
development, it’s used to describe how fast and in what direction an object,
such as a player or enemy, is moving. Velocity is often represented by a
vector, which shows both the speed (magnitude) and direction of movement.
If we wanted our player to move up and to the left, we could use a velocity
vector of (-2,3) to do so. This is represented in Figure 5.4 :

Figure 5.4 – A vector depicting the velocity of the player

In Figure 5.4 , the velocity vector indicates that the player will move 2 units
left and 3 units up. Note that the x coordinate is always given before the y
coordinate.
Vectors can also tell us which direction the player is facing. Figure 5.5
shows how a vector can be used to indicate the direction the player is facing
in the game.

Figure 5.5 – A vector to indicate direction

In Figure 5.5 , the direction vector tells us that the player is pointing to the
right (rotated 90 degrees).
On their own, vectors are just numbers—they don’t have much meaning
without context. For example, the vector (1, 0) could represent direction,
position, or velocity depending on how it’s used. To make these vectors
meaningful, we need to assign units. In Godot, 2D units are measured in
pixels , while 3D units are measured in meters .
For instance, if we have a player character in a 2D game, the vector (1, 0)
represents a movement to the right. In this case, the following applies:
The “1” means the player moves one unit (or pixel) in the horizontal
direction ( x axis)
The “0” means the player doesn’t move up or down ( y axis)
If the player moves according to this vector in every frame, the character
will steadily move to the right by 1 pixel each frame.
When we only want direction without caring about the distance or speed, we
can normalize the vector. A normalized vector has a length (or magnitude)
of 1 and still points in the same direction. This is especially useful when
combining direction with other values, such as when multiplying a direction
vector by a speed to get velocity.
For example, if we normalize the vector (2, 0), we get (1, 0). It still points
right, but now has a standard length of 1, making it easy to scale consistently
in game logic.

Coordinates in Godot
An important quirk of screens is that the origin (0, 0) is in the top-left corner
of the screen. This means that y is negative as we move upward and positive

as we go downward. This is shown by the vector (4, 3) in Figure 5.6 :

Figure 5.6 – Computers render the screen downward from the top left (This image is by Godot Engine
contributors and is licensed under CC BY 3.0)

In Figure 5.6 , the vector (4, 3) has a direction or rotation of angle theta and
a length or magnitude of m . In this case, the arrow is a position vector
indicating a point in space relative to the origin.
One important thing to remember about vectors is that they usually show
direction and size (how far or fast something moves), but not the starting
position. Think of a vector like an arrow: it shows you which way to go and
how fast, but not where you are on the map. To know the actual position of
an object, you need to combine the vector with a starting point or reference.
However, there’s a special case that’s worth mentioning: position vectors .
In mathematics and game development (including Godot), a vector such as

Vector2(2, 3)

can also represent a position in 2D space. This type of vector

is understood to start at the origin (0, 0) and point to the coordinates (2, 3).
In this case, the vector tells you where something is located relative to the
origin.
So, depending on the context, vectors can do either of the following:
Show how far and in what direction something is moving (velocity or
force)
Indicate a position relative to the origin (like coordinates in space)
Understanding this difference helps avoid confusion, especially when
working with movement systems, physics, or spatial reasoning in your
games. If you invert a position vector; you effectively point back from the
position to the origin—another helpful way to understand how vectors work
in different contexts.
For example, in a game, a vector can tell you which way a player is moving
and how fast, but the player’s starting position is given separately as a point.
This is demonstrated in Figure 5.7 :

Figure 5.7 – Two identical vectors (This image is by Godot Engine contributors and is licensed under
CC BY 3.0)

In Figure 5.7 , both vectors represent a point of 4 units to the right and 3
units below the starting point.
We now have a conceptual understanding of vectors. In the next section, we
can look at how to implement them in Godot.

Using vectors in Godot
In Godot, there are two classes to represent vectors. 2D vectors use Vector2
and 3D vectors use Vector3 . Vector2 accepts an x and a y parameter, and
accepts x , y , and z parameters. Let’s take a look at Vector2 in
more detail.
Vector3

Vector2

is a class , which means it’s not just a simple data type like a

number—it’s a more advanced structure that includes built-in functions (or
methods) to work with 2D coordinates. While it behaves like a data type
because it holds two numbers ( x and y ), it also allows you to perform
operations such as adding, scaling, or rotating vectors.
It’s worth noting that Godot handles many values that might seem like
simple types as classes. For example, as mentioned in Chapter 4 , even
text in Godot is managed by the String class. This is a bit different from
some other engines or languages, where strings are considered basic types
without methods.
So, when you’re working with something such as Vector2 , you’re really
working with a powerful tool that’s designed to help you easily manage 2D
positions, directions, and movements in your game, with lots of useful
functions built right in.
If we wanted the player to move one unit (or pixel) in the horizontal
direction ( x axis) and not up or down at all, and ensure the player moves
every frame, we could use the code that follows:
var movement_vector = Vector2(1, 0)
func _process(delta):
position += movement_vector

The effect of this in Godot is shown by the Sprite2D moving across the
screen, as shown in Figure 5.8 :

Figure 5.8 – The Godot sprite moves across the screen to the right

Figure 5.8 shows the sprite moving across the screen with the x value
changing by 1 each frame and the y value not changing at all.
It is important to note that we can access the x and y variables of the vector
individually using dot notation , as shown in the following code:
# Access the individual x and y components of the position
var x_position = position.x
var y_position = position.y
# Display the x and y components in the output console
print("Sprite Position - X: ", x_position, " Y: ", y_position)

In this code, we store the current x and y positions of the sprite in separate
variables and then print them out to see how they change as the sprite moves
across the screen.

The effect of this in Godot is shown in the output console as the Sprite2D is
moving across the screen in Figure 5.9 :

Figure 5.9 – The console displays the x and y parameters of the vector as the sprite moves

Figure 5.9 demonstrates how we always have access to the parameters of the
vector. We can use this information to detect when we are near the edges of
the Viewport and then reverse the movement_vector . This will make the
sprite bounce off the sides of the screen. Implement this behavior using the
following code:
# Store the x and y positions of the edges of the screen
var horizontal_edge = get_viewport_rect().size.x
var vertical_edge = get_viewport_rect().size.y
# Check for screen boundaries to reverse direction
if x_position < 0 or x_position > horizontal_edge:
# Reverse the x direction
movement_vector.x *= -1
if y_position < 0 or y_position > vertical_edge:
# Reverse the y direction
movement_vector.y *= -1

This code successfully restricts or clamps the movement of the sprite so that
it remains within the screen boundary.
We can also perform mathematical operations on vectors such as addition,
subtraction, and multiplication. This is essential because it allows us to
manipulate objects’ positions, movements, and directions in a more dynamic
and flexible way. Thankfully, the game engine will perform all these
calculations for you, but it is good to understand what it is doing.

Movement and positioning
In game development, movement and positioning are at the core of creating
dynamic and engaging gameplay. In Godot, vectors are essential tools for
defining positions, directions, and velocities in both 2D and 3D spaces. By
understanding how to use vectors, you can move characters, projectiles, and
objects smoothly and accurately within your game world.
This section will introduce you to working with vectors in Godot, showing
you how to calculate directions, handle player movement, and position
objects effectively. These concepts form the foundation for creating
responsive and realistic game mechanics.

Vector addition
We use addition to update an object’s position by adding a movement vector
to its current position. For example, when you move a character across the
screen, you add a direction vector to the character’s position vector in each
frame.
Vector addition is shown in Figure 5.10 . The corresponding x and y values
are added together (Vector A (2,5) in blue added to Vector B (3,1) in green ,

which results in Vector C (5,6) in red ).

Figure 5.10 – Adding Vector (2,5) to Vector (3,1), resulting in Vector (5,6)

Figure 5.10 also shows that the order in which you add the vectors doesn’t
matter, as the resulting vector will always be the same.
To understand how this works in a game, we can consider the example of a
character jumping. This is shown in Figure 5.11 :

Figure 5.11 – Jumping using vector addition

To understand the jump mechanic, we can look at it frame by frame. Gravity
is always pulling the character downward; therefore, the acceleration vector
is always (0, -1).
The starting position is (0,0). When the jump button is pressed, the velocity
vector is set to (1,3) and the character moves up and to the right. If we add
the velocity to the position vector, we get a new velocity vector of (1,3) .
However, we must add the acc eleration vector, and the new result is velocity
of (1,2) . If we continue in this manner, we can move through the entire
jump cycle.

Vector subtraction
Subtraction helps calculate the distance or difference between two points,
such as the distance between a player and an enemy, which can be used for
collision detection or AI behaviors.
Vector Subtraction works in a similar way—subtracting each component
individually, vector subtraction helps determine a vector that points from one
position to another.
For example, imagine a ball is positioned at (1,2) and a hole is at (4,3) . To
find the direction the ball needs to roll to reach the hole, you can find the
difference by subtracting the ball’s position from the hole’s position.
This is illustrated in Figure 5.12 :

Figure 5.12 – Vector subtraction

Figure 5.12 demonstrates how vector subtraction can be used to calculate the
length and direction needed to reach a certain point.
The next fundamental operation we perform with vectors is multiplication.

Vector multiplication

Vectors have values for both direction and magnitude, but a value that only
represents magnitude is called a scalar .
When we talk about vectors, each number inside the vector is called a
component , and a single number itself is called a scalar . For example, (3,
4) is a vector, while 5 is a scalar. In games, multiplying a vector by a scalar
can be useful for changing its size (magnitude) without changing its
direction.
A normalized vector is a special kind of vector that has a length (or
magnitude) of exactly 1. It still points in the same direction, but its size has
been reduced to 1 unit. This is often used to represent direction without
affecting distance or speed.
For example, if a player is facing right, we might use a normalized direction
vector such as (1, 0). If we then multiply this by a scalar value, such as 100,
we get (100, 0), which can represent a position of 100 pixels to the right.
This is useful for calculating a target or arrival position:
var direction = Vector2(1, 0).normalized()
var distance = 100
var arrival_position = player.position + direction * distance

We can also see how vector multiplication can be used to scale an image.
Imagine the player gets a power-up that makes them grow. The player’s size
is represented as a vector, say (1, 2), meaning they have a width of 1 and a
height of 2. If the power-up makes the player grow to twice their size, we
multiply the size vector by a scalar of 2.
This is illustrated in Figure 5.13 :

Figure 5.13 – The effect of scaling (scalar multiplication)

In Figure 5.13 , multiplying the size vector by a scalar makes the player
twice as large in both width and height, but their overall shape and
proportions stay the same.
Multiplying a vector by a scalar effectively lengthens the vector without
changing direction. This can also be demonstrated with arrows, as shown in
Figure 5.14 :

Figure 5.14 – Illustrating scalar multiplication (This image is by Godot Engine contributors and is
licensed under CC BY 3.0)

Figure 5.14 shows that multiplying a vector by a scalar will result in a longer
vector. It is also important to note that multiplying a negative scalar will
reverse the direction.

Vector length
The distance from the origin to the x and y positions of the vector is known
as the length of the vector . This is also known as the magnitude of the
vector . To find this length, Godot h as a built-in length() function:

var vector_length: float = vector.length()

To under stand how the length() function works, think of this example. If a
character is moving in a 2D platformer with a ve locity vector v(4,3) , we
might want to determine how fast the character is moving to adjust
animations or implement effects such as dust clouds when they land.
To find the character’s speed, we calculate the length (or magnitude) of the
velocity vector v . We can visualize this vector as forming a right triangle,
where one side is 3 (the x component) and the other side is 4 (the y
component). Using the Pythagorean theorem, we can find the hypotenuse,
which represents the speed of the character. The formula for the magnitude
of a vector with components ( x , y ) and the resulting speed is shown in
Figure 5.15 :

Figure 5.15 – Using the Pythagorean theorem to determine vector magnitude

Figure 5.15 demonst rates how the length() function works to calculate the
magnitude of a vector. This means the character is moving at a speed of 5
units per second in the game world. This is visualized in Figure 5.16 :

Figure 5.16 – Visual representation of the length

Figure 5.16 demonstrates how the length of a vector is calculated. Note that
this also applies to 3D vectors.

Distance
Often, we want to find the distance between two objects, such as the player
and a motion sensor, to determine whether the player is close enough to
trigger an alarm. We can do this using the distance_to() function in Godot.
For instance, if the player is at position (3,3) and the motion sensor is at
position (1,2), we can calculate the distance between them to check whether
the player is within range of the sensor, which could activate the alarm.
The math behind the distance_to() function combines vector subtraction
and vector length. To calculate the distance [ D ], we subtract the player
vector [ P ] from the motion sensor vector [ M ] and then calculate the length
of the resulting vector:
D = (P - M).length()
D = √[(3 - 1)² + (3 - 2)²] = √[4 + 1] = √5 ≈ 2.24

This equation is demonstrated in Figure 5.17 :

Figure 5.17 – Calculating the distance to an object

Figure 5.17 shows how the distance to another object is calculated. It doesn’t
matter if you subtract the player vector from the motion sensor vector or the
other way around; the result is the same.

Normalization
When working with directions (rather than positions or velocities), it’s
essential that they have a unit length, meaning a length of 1. This simplifies
our calculations.
For example, imagine a robot that needs to move in the direction of (1,0) to
deliver a package at a constant speed of 20 m/s. What would the velocity of
the robot be? Because the direction vector has a length of 1, we can easily
multiply it by the robot’s speed to calculate its velocity: (20,0). If the
direction vector had any other length, the robot would move either too fast or
too slow.

A vector with a length of 1 is called normalized . So, how do we normalize
a vector (set its length to 1)?
It’s simple: we just divide each component by the vector’s length.
Since this is such a common operation, Godot has a built-in function to do it
for us. The function is called normalized() and can be used in our example
as follows:
extends Node2D
# Called when the node enters the scene tree for the first time.
func _ready():
# Normalize direction vector so it has a length of 1
direction = direction.normalized()
# Calculate velocity by multiplying direction by speed
velocity = direction * speed

There is still a lot to learn about vectors, and there are other operations such
as the dot product and the cross product . All of this is part of the field of
mathematics called linear algebra . However, you now have enough of an
understanding to make great Godot games, and the engine will do all the
mathematics for us!

Summary
In this chapter, we explored the fundamental concept of vectors and their
crucial role in game development. You learned how to manipulate vectors
within the Godot engine, applying vector addition, subtraction, and
multiplication to control movement and positioning. We also covered
important topics such as calculating vector length, determining distances
between objects, and normalizing vectors for consistent directionality.

By mastering these concepts, you are now equipped to use vectors
effectively in your game projects, enhancing gameplay mechanics and
interactions.
In the next chapter, we are going to turn from theory to practice as we create
our first 2D mini game in Godot!

Unlock this
book’s exclusive
benefits now
Scan this QR code or go to
packtpub.com/unlock ,
then search this book by name.
Note: Keep your purchase invoice
ready before you start.
OceanofPDF.com

6

Creating a 2D Mini-Game in
Godot – Part 1
In this chapter, you’ll take a major step by building your very first 2D platformer level in
Godot. You’ll learn how to design and construct a level using a tilemap, and then populate
it with key gameplay elements: a player character that moves and jumps, a patrolling
enemy to avoid, and collectible items to reward exploration. You’ll also set up a
checkpoint system to allow players to progress through the level.
This experience will give you the hands-on practice needed to take your game
development skills to the next level, as you’ll learn how to manipulate key elements of
level design and gameplay mechanics in Godot. With this knowledge, you’ll be able to
design more complex levels and gameplay features in future projects.
In this chapter, we’re going to cover the following main topics:
Building the level with a TileMap
Creating and controlling the player
Adding the CharacterBody2D template for the Player script
Cleaning the code
By the end of this chapter, you’ll be able to create an interactive, fully playable platformer
level and understand how these components work together to form the foundation of many
platformer games.

Technical requirements
To start with the chapter, you should know how to do the following:
Create a new Godot project
Create nodes
Create scenes

You should also know about variables and functions for use in GDScript (see Chapter 4
).
This chapter’s code files are available here in the book’s GitHub repository:
https://github.com/PacktPublishing/Godot-4-forBeginners/tree/main/ch6
Visit this link to check out the video of the code being run:
https://packt.link/DcrOS
The game assets used in this project are released under a Creative Commons Zero ( CC0
) license by Pixel Frog. Pixel Frog has allowed us to distribute, remix, adapt, and build
upon the material in any medium or format, even for commercial purposes.
They can be found here:
Pixel Adventure : https://pixelfrog-assets.itch.io/pixeladventure-1
Pixel Adventure 2 : https://pixelfrog-assets.itch.io/pixeladventure-2

Building the level with a TileMap
Building 2D levels with TileMaps is an efficient and organized way to create game
environments by reusing small, pre-designed tiles. This approach not only saves time and
resources but also allows for easy adjustments and consistent visuals across your level
design.
In this section, we’ll build the foundation of our 2D platformer by creating a level with a
TileMap, allowing us to efficiently design and organize the game environment. TileMaps
are essential because they make it easy to create detailed, grid-based levels while
optimizing performance, keeping game worlds manageable and visually consistent.
Let’s begin the process of building our level by creating a new scene and adding essential
nodes. Follow these steps to set up a functional, well-organized level using a
TileMapLayer :
1. Create a new Godot Project and give it a name – I have called it PixelAdventure .

2. We need a scene to represent the first level of the game. To do this, we create a new
2D scene, which will have Node2D as the root. Rename Node2D to Level1 .
3. We are now ready to add a TileMapLayer node to the Level1 scene. A
TileMapLayer node uses a TileSet , which contains a list of tiles that are used to
create grid-based maps. TileMaps are used in 2D game development to efficiently
create large, consistent levels by reusing small, predefined tiles. This improves the
performance of the game and also makes it easy to edit and customize levels.
4. Add a new TileMapLayer node as a child of Level1 . Your scene tree will resemble.
Figure 6.1 shows this as follows:

Figure 6.1 – Scene tree after adding the TileMapLayer node

5. Every TileMapLayer node needs a TileSet so that we can place individual tiles in the
scene to create the level. To create the TileSet, select the TileMapLayer node, then,
in the Inspector , find the Tile Set property and click on New TileSet , as shown in
Figure 6.2 :

Figure 6.2 – Creating a new Tile Set

6. Then click on TileSet , which will make the TileMap and TileSet tabs at the bottom
center of the screen visible, as shown in Figure 6.3 :

Figure 6.3 – The TileSet and TileMap tabs

7. In the Terrain folder of the Pixel Adventure assets, there is an image file called
. Create a folder in your Godot file system called Assets ,
then create a subfolder called TileMap . Drag and drop the Terrain image file into
Terrain (16 x 16).png

the TileMap folder, as shown in Figure 6.4 :

Figure 6.4 – Terrain.png added to TileMap folder

8. Now that the image is in our FileSystem , we can drag and drop it into the TileSet
tab, which will allow us to use the individual tiles. This is shown in Figure 6.5 :

Figure 6.5 – The TileSet is now loaded

9. We will not change anything on the TileSet at the moment. Our goal is to paint the
level. To do this, switch over to the TileMap tab and press D or click on the Paint
button. Now select tiles in the map and draw them in the Viewport onscreen, as
shown in Figure 6.6 :

Figure 6.6 – Painting tiles by selecting tiles and using the Paint tool

Figure 6.6 shows how you can use the Paint tool to select tiles and then paint them
into the scene by clicking. You can also hold shift + click to paint multiple tiles at the
same time. Go ahead and paint a level. You can do anything you like, and you are
welcome to copy my level, which is shown in Figure 6.7 :

Figure 6.7 – An example of a contained level

As Figure 6.7 shows, we now have a level for players to explore. It is important to
understand that this level is currently purely decorative – we cannot even detect collisions
as this world has no physics! In the next section, we will add the player and then return to
our TileSet to implement physics.

Creating and controlling the player
Now that we have a world, we need a player to explore it! In this section, we’ll focus on
building the foundation for a fully interactive 2D level. Each step will help us create a
playable environment while introducing essential Godot tools and techniques.
First, we’ll add a background to provide visual context for the level. Then, we’ll create and
configure a CharacterBody2D node as our player, complete with an AnimatedSprite2D
node to bring it to life and CollisionShape2D node to enable physics interactions. After
setting up the player’s animations, we’ll conclude by scripting the character controller,
allowing the player to move and interact with the level.
By the end of this section, you’ll have a functional and visually appealing player character
ready to explore the 2D world you’ve created.

Adding the background
We will follow the given steps to add the background to the level:
1. Add a new TextureRect node as a child of Level1 . Create a new folder in the file
system called Background and add the images from the Background folder of your
downloaded assets to it.
2. In Inspector , use the Brown.png background image for Texture . Set the Expand
Mode property to Keep Size and the Stretch Mode property to Tile .
3. Now, drag TextureRect to fill the entire Viewport and more if you wish. We have just
created a tiled background.

Figure 6.8 – Changing the properties of TextureRect

4. To ensure that the background appears behind every other node in the scene, position
the TextureRect node at the top of the scene tree as shown in Figure 6.9 :

Figure 6.9 – Lower nodes appear in front of higher nodes

Figure 6.9 demonstrates the order in which nodes are handled in the tree. It is in a
top-down fashion, starting at the root and going down each branch in turn. The level
now has a background and looks more polished.

Figure 6.10 – A background helps to round off a level

The player character is now ready to make an appearance. Create a new scene and add a
CharacterBody2D node as the root, then rename it to Player . Add an
AnimatedSprite2D node as a child as shown in Figure 6.11 :

Figure 6.11 – Adding an AnimatedSprite2D node to the player

Figure 6.11 shows the AnimatedSprite2D node. This is a sprite node that contains
multiple textures as frames to play for animation. In the next section, we will set up
various animations for the player’s actions.

Setting up the player animations
To animate a sprite, we use multiple frames that depict the sprite at various stages of
motion. These frames are often grouped together in a single image known as a sprite sheet
. To animate the sprite, we first import the sprite sheet and then divide it into individual
frames. To do this, select the AnimatedSprite2D node, and in Inspector , on the Sprite
Frames property, click on New SpriteFrames . This is shown in Figure 6.12 :

Figure 6.12 – New SpriteFrames

Clicking on SpriteFrames in Inspector , as in Figure 6.12 , will open the SpriteFrames
area at the bottom of the screen (see Figure 6.13 ). This is the space where we can import
frames and create new animations.

Figure 6.13 – The SpriteFrames area

As shown in Figure 6.13 , we currently have only the default animation, and no images or
frames associated with it. We will now create animations for all the players’ actions and

then import the sprites associated with each action from their sprite sheet. To do this,
follow these steps:
1. Start by renaming the default animation to idle . Then click on the Add Animation
button or press C trl + N . Rename that animation to run .
2. Create the following list of animations: double_jump , fall , jump , and wall_slide
. These are shown in Figure 6.14 :

Figure 6.14 – All the animations for the player actions

Now that we have the animation names ready, a s in Figure 6.14 , we can bring in
the images associated with each one.
3. In the FileSystem , create a new folder called Player . Now, find the Main
Characters

folder in the assets you downloaded from Pixel Frog and drag the images

for your player character into the Player folder in the file system. I chose to use the
ninja frog character. Select the idle animation and then click on the Add frames
from sprite sheet button or press C trl + S hift + O .
4. Now select the idle image file in your Assets folder. You must count the player
images and update the Horizontal and Vertical frame properties as required. Then

click on the Select All button, followed by the Add x Frame(s) button. This is shown
for the idle frames of the ninja frog in Figure 6.15 :

Figure 6.15 – Setting the Horizontal and Vertical Frames and adding them to the animation

5. After cutting the individual frames from the image (sprite sheet) as in Figure 6.15 ,
your SpriteFrames window will update with the images to be used for the idle
animation. This is shown in Figure 6.16 :

Figure 6.16 – The frames for the idle animation

As you can see in Figure 6.16 , there are controls for the animations in the bar at the
top. I have set the idle frame rate to 8 FPS , and looping is on. You can play with
these settings to find the ones that you like. You can see this in Figure 6.17 .

Figure 6.17 – Animation controls with looping and FPS highlighted

To set up the rest of the player animations, follow and repeat the same steps as you have
done for the idle animation. Our next task will be to ensure that the player can collide
with objects by assigning them a hitbox.
Important note
You may have noticed that the player appears blurry in the scene. This is
because of the default texture filter. Click on Project | Project Settings |
Rendering | Textures and change Default Texture Filter to Nearest . This
is the best setting for pixel art.

Detecting collisions
Detecting when and where objects collide in a game, as well as identifying which objects
are involved, is a key aspect of game development. In Godot, we handle this by assigning
each object to a CollisionShape2D node. This node allows us to define and adjust the
shape that surrounds the object, ensuring accurate collision detection.
The following are the steps for assigning a CollisionShape2D node:
1. Add CollisionShape2D node as a child of Player .
2. Choose RectangleShape2D for the Shape property in Inspector and resize it to fit
your player. This rectangle forms the bounding box for collisions on the player and is
shown in Figure 6.18 :

Figure 6.18 – Assigning RectangleShape2D to the CollisionShape2D node and resulting bounding box

As shown in Figure 6.18 , anything entering the rectangular collision shape will
register a collision. The shape is not visible during gameplay.
3. Save the Player scene as player.tscn , and then drag and drop the file from
FileSystem into the Level1 scene.
You now have a player in your level! However, if you play the game, the player is
stationary because no movement has been implemented yet. We will implement this later.

TileMap collisions
As stated before, our current level is just a painting; none of the tiles have collision
detection, and our player cannot move. To set up collisions on our tiles, we need to add an
element to our physics layers. To do this, follow these steps:
1. Select the TileMapLayer node in Inspector and click on Tile Set .
2. In the Physics Layers property, click Add Element . This is shown in Figure 6.19 :

Figure 6.19 - Adding an element to Physics Layers of a TileSet

Once you have added an element to Physics Layers of the TileSet, as shown in
Figure 6.19 , your TileSet will have two new properties in Physics Layers –
Collision Layer and Collision Mask . This is shown in Figure 6.20 :

Figure 6.20 – Collision Layer and Collision Mask of the TileSet

As can be seen in Figure 6.20 , the concept of collision layers and masks in Godot 4 plays
a crucial role in managing collisions and interactions between different elements in the
game world. Understanding how to work with layers and masks is essential for creating
complex and interactive game environments. These will be explained in more detail in the
next section.
Make sure you have added two Physics Layers elements, as one set is for ground tiles and
the other will be used for passthrough tiles.

Collision layers and collision masks
Collision layers are categories or groups that an object belongs to, which determine which
other objects it can interact with. By assigning an object to a specific Collision Layer , we
place it in a group that defines its potential interactions. For example, if object X is
assigned to layer 1, it’s treated as part of layer 1. Other objects can then be set up to detect
and respond to objects in that layer, depending on their own collision settings.

Collision masks, on the other hand, define which layers an object can detect and interact
with. For instance, if object X is on layer 1 but has a Collision Mask set to layer 2 , object
X will only collide with objects that are on layer 2 . This separation between layers and
masks allows us to control which objects interact, making it easy to ensure, for example,
that enemies only collide with players and not each other.
In Figure 6.20 , Collision Layer 1 is on, and Collision Mask 1 is on . This means that the
objects on layer 1 will collide with objects on mask 1. This is not very useful as it means
that the objects will collide with themselves (which is impossible), so we will change this
soon.
Keeping track of which numbers collide with which can be very difficult and even more so
as your game becomes bigger and more complex. It is therefore recommended that you
rename your layers to represent the things that exist on them.
In our level, most tiles will act as solid objects that the player can stand on and collide
with. However, to make the level more dynamic, some tiles will function as “jumpthrough” or “pass-through” platforms. These allow the player to jump up from below and
land on the platform. If the player presses down while on the platform, they will fall back
through to the ground below, adding an extra layer of interaction to the gameplay. This is
shown in Figure 6.21 .

Figure 6.21 – A jump-through platform

Because some of our tiles need to be solid and some need to be pass-through, we will add a
second element to Physics Layers of the TileSet, then name the layers so that we can keep
track of the interactions. Do this by clicking on the three vertical dots to the right of the
layer numbers and clicking on Edit Layer Names . I have named Layer 1 : player ,
Layer 2 : ground , and Layer 3 : pass_through . This is shown in Figure 6.22 :

Figure 6.22 – Two sets of physics layers and the Edit Layer Names button

As shown in Figure 6.22 , clicking on Edit Layer Names will allow you to name each
layer. You can see how I have named my layers in Figure 6.23 :

Figure 6.23 – Naming the collision layers

If you have a look at Figure 6.22 , in the first physics layer, Collision Layer 2 ( ground )
is on and Collision Mask 1 ( player ) is on . This means that the ground will collide with
the player.
In the second physics layer, Collision Layer 3 ( pass_through ) is on, and Collision
Mask 1 is on . This means that the pass-through will collide with the player.
We must also remember to turn on the corresponding layers in the Player node, as shown
in Figure 6.24 . This is so that the player looks for collisions on the ground and
pass_through

layers; otherwise, they would fall through the level.

Figure 6.24 – Setting the collision layers in Player

In Figure 6.24 , we are in the Player node, and we have turned Collision Layer 1 ( player
) on and Collision Mask 2 ( ground ) and Collision Mask 3 ( pass_through ) on . This
means that we have enabled collisions in the opposite direction so that the player will now
collide with the ground and the pass-through.
The final step of making our level interactive is to paint the tiles in the TileSet as collision
tiles.

Painting the tiles
To paint the tiles in the TileSet as collision tiles, follow these steps:
1. First, we need to select our TileMapLayer node, open TileSet at the bottom of the
screen, and then click on Paint .
2. In Paint Properties , select Physics Layer 0 . This is the ground layer. Now, paint
over all the tiles that you want to be ground tiles. I have chosen to leave the far-right
tiles as pass_through tiles and have not painted them as colliders. This is shown in
Figure 6.25 :

Figure 6.25 – Ground tiles are shaded – note the unshaded tiles reserved for pass-through

Quick tip : Need to see a high-resolution version of this
image? Open this book in the next-gen Packt Reader or view it in the
PDF/ePub copy.
The next-gen Packt Reader and a free PDF/ePub copy of
this book are included with your purchase. Scan the QR code OR
visit packtpub.com/unlock , then use the search bar to find

this book by name. Double-check the edition shown to make sure
you get the right one.

3. Now switch to Physics Layer 1 . This is the layer for the pass_through tiles. Now
we will paint the tiles we saved. You can adjust the collision polygon for each
individual tile. Make sure that you also set polygon_0_one_way to checked. This will
allow the player to jump through the tile from below. Now paint all the pass_through
tiles with this brush. This is shown in Figure 6.26:

Figure 6.26 – Adjusting the collision polygon, one-way collision, and painting the pass-through tiles

4. After adjusting the tiles as shown in Figure 6.25 and Figure 6.26 , you can run and
test the game. Although the player can collide with the tiles, there are no forces (such
as gravity) acting on the player, and it does not respond to input – you are basically
stuck wherever you are placed.
In the next section, we will work on scripting the player to control movement, animations,
and interactions, and to apply forces such as gravity.

Adding the CharacterBody2D
template for the Player script
Godot provides pre-written code templates for basic player movement. This saves us from
having to reinvent the wheel and allows us to make games faster.
In the Player scene, select your Player node and click on the Attach New Script icon as
shown in Figure 6.27 :

Figure 6.27 – The Attach New Script button

As can be seen in Figure 6.27 , you can attach a script to any node in Godot to customize
its behavior by selecting it and clicking on the Attach New Script button. When you click
the button, you will be presented with some options for creating the script, as shown in
Figure 6.28 :

Figure 6.28 – Note the Basic Movement template being used

As Figure 6.28 shows, the script will be created using a template, which means that there
will be pre-generated code for basic movement and also gravity. The script for this is as
follows:
extends CharacterBody2D
const SPEED = 300.0
const JUMP_VELOCITY = -400.0
func _physics_process(delta):
# Add the gravity
if not is_on_floor():
velocity += get_gravity() * delta
# Handle jump
if Input.is_action_just_pressed("ui_accept") and is_on_floor():
velocity.y = JUMP_VELOCITY
# Get the movement direction and handle deceleration
var direction = Input.get_axis("ui_left", "ui_right")
if direction:
velocity.x = direction * SPEED
else:

velocity.x = move_toward(velocity.x, 0, SPEED)
move_and_slide()

Quick tip : Enhance your coding experience with the AI Code
Explainer and Quick Copy features. Open this book in the next-gen Packt
Reader. Click the Copy button ( 1 ) to quickly copy code into your coding
environment, or click the Explain button ( 2 ) to get the AI assistant to
explain a block of code to you.

The next-gen Packt Reader is included for free with the purchase of
this book. Scan the QR code OR go to packtpub.com/unlock , then
use the search bar to find this book by name. Double-check the edition
shown to make sure you get the right one.

To make our project more manageable and to give it more structure, we will move a lot of
this code into new functions. Before we do that, we should understand the code line by
line:

extends CharacterBody2D

: This line tells Godot that this script is extending (or

using) the functionality of a built-in node called CharacterBody2D . This node is
specifically designed for 2D characters that move, such as a player.
and const JUMP_VELOCITY = -400.0 : These two lines define
constants . A constant is a value that won’t change during the game.
const SPEED = 300.0

SPEED

: This controls how fast the character can move left or right.

JUMP_VELOCITY

: This defines how fast and high the character will jump. A negative

value means the character will move upward when they jump.
func _physics_process(delta)

: This function is called every time the game

processes physics and is fixed at 60 frames per second. The delta parameter
represents the time that has passed since the last frame, ensuring smooth movement.
Next, let’s look at the following block:
# Add the gravity
if not is_on_floor():
velocity += get_gravity() * delta

This block adds gravity to the character if they are not on the floor (in the air):
is_on_floor()

checks if the character is touching the ground.

get_gravity()

fetches the current gravity value and, multiplying it by delta

, ensures that gravity affects the character at a consistent rate.
The velocity variable is a built-in variable representing how fast the character
is moving in both the x (horizontal) and y (vertical) directions. Adding the
gravity

value affects the y velocity (making the character fall).

Let’s look at the next block:
#Handle jump
if Input.is_action_just_pressed("ui_accept") and
velocity.y = JUMP_VELOCITY

is_on_floor():

This block handles jumping. It is explained as follows:
Input.is_action_just_pressed("ui_accept")

checks if the player pressed the

jump button (which is mapped to "ui_accept" by default). This is the spacebar
.

is_on_floor()

ensures the player can only jump if they’re standing on the

ground.
When both conditions are true, the character’s y velocity is set to
JUMP_VELOCITY

, which makes them jump upward.

Now, we move on to the following block:
#Get the movement direction and handle deceleration
var direction = Input.get_axis("ui_left", "ui_right")

This line gets the player’s input for left and right movement:
Input.get_axis

( "ui_left" , "ui_right" ) returns -1 if the player is

holding the left key, +1 if they’re holding the right key, and 0 if neither is
pressed.
Moving on to the next block:
if direction:
velocity.x = direction * SPEED
else:
velocity.x = move_toward(velocity.x, 0, SPEED)

If there’s input (the player presses the left or right key), the character’s x -axis
velocity is set to move in that direction at the speed defined by SPEED .
If there’s no input, the character gradually slows down using move_toward() , which
makes the x velocity smoothly approach 0 , simulating deceleration.
move_and_slide()

: This moves the character based on the velocity. It also handles

sliding along surfaces, such as the floor or walls, making movement smooth.
Now that we understand how the basic movement code works, it’s time to focus on
improving its structure. Writing clean, organized code is crucial for making our projects
easier to read, maintain, and expand as they grow in complexity. To achieve this, we’ll
refactor the movement code by breaking it down into individual functions, which will
enhance both readability and reusability.

Cleaning the code

Breaking your code into separate functions is part of the clean code concept, which helps
maintain organization and clarity as your project grows. By structuring your code this way,
it becomes easier to read, test, and debug. Each function focuses on a specific task,
reducing redundancy and making it simpler to spot and fix issues when they arise. This
approach also makes your project more scalable, as adding new features or changes
becomes smoother without cluttering up your core code.
Adding gravity, handling the jump, and getting the direction can all be placed in their own
functions. Change your code to match what you see in the following code block:
extends CharacterBody2D
# Constants for how fast the player moves and how high they can jump
const SPEED = 300.0
const JUMP_VELOCITY = -400.0
# This function runs every physics frame (ideal for movement and collision)
func _physics_process(delta):
# Apply gravity if the player is not on the floor
apply_gravity(delta)
# Check for jump input and apply jump force
handle_jump()
# Handle left/right movement input
handle_movement(delta)
# Move the character and handle collisions with the environment
move_and_slide()
# This function adds gravity to the player's velocity
func apply_gravity(delta):
# Only apply gravity if the player is in the air
if not is_on_floor():
velocity += get_gravity() * delta
# This function makes the player jump when the jump key is pressed
func handle_jump():
# Only allow jumping if the player is currently on the ground
if Input.is_action_just_pressed("ui_accept") and is_on_floor():
velocity.y = JUMP_VELOCITY
# This function handles horizontal movement input
func handle_movement(delta):
# Get the left/right movement input as a value between -1 and 1
var direction = Input.get_axis("ui_left", "ui_right")
# If there is movement input, update the velocity in that direction
if direction:
velocity.x = direction * SPEED
else:
# If no input, gradually slow the player down to a stop
velocity.x = move_toward(velocity.x, 0, SPEED)

The code functions in the same way as before, but now specific actions reside in their own
functions, so it is easier to find errors and make improvements.
The code is now clean and broken down into smaller and more maintainable parts. In the
next chapter, we will be customizing more of the players’ behaviors and playing the
animations. We will also add a collectible, an enemy, and a checkpoint to complete the
level.

Summary
In this chapter, we covered essential steps in building your first 2D platformer level in
Godot. We started by setting up a TileSet within the TileMapLayer node with collision
layers and painting the level using the TileMap system. From there, we created the player
character, importing the necessary animated sprite frames for different animations. With
the character in place, we implemented a default script using Godot’s CharacterBody2D
template. Finally, we took the time to clean and organize the code by splitting it into
individual functions, a key part of following the clean code principles.
In the next chapter, we will animate the player and code special abilities such as doublejump and wall sliding. We will also set up collectible items, an enemy to defeat, and a
checkpoint to reach to finish the level.

Join our community on Discord
Join our community’s Discord space for discussions with the author and other readers:
https://packt.link/godot-4-game-dev

OceanofPDF.com

7

Creating a 2D Mini-Game
in Godot – Part 2
In the previous chapter, we guided you through the process of creating your
first complete 2D platformer level in Godot. We built the level using a
TileMap , set up the player character with animations, and cleaned up the
default basic movement script. Now, it’s time to take things further by
adding more complex mechanics and refining how the player interacts with
the game world.
In this chapter, you’ll learn how to trigger player animations directly through
code. We’ll also dive into custom behaviors such as wall-sliding, doublejumping, and falling through platforms—common mechanics in many
platform games. We will also add collectible items and a patrolling enemy.
Finally, we’ll script a checkpoint system for completing levels, allowing
players to progress through the game.
In this chapter, we’re going to cover the following main topics:
Controlling player animations with code
Wall-sliding and double-jumping mechanics
Falling through platforms
Adding collectible items
Adding a patrolling enemy
Implementing level completion

By the end of this chapter, you’ll have a deeper understanding of how to
bring your game mechanics to life with code and create a more dynamic and
engaging platformer experience.

Technical requirements
By this point in the book, you should know how to do the following:
Create nodes
Create scenes
You should also know about variables and functions for use in GDScript (see
Chapter 4 ).
This chapter’s code files are available here in the book’s GitHub repository:
https://github.com/PacktPublishing/Godot-4-forBeginners/tree/main/ch7
Visit this link to check out the video of the code being run:
https://packt.link/goVK2
The game assets used in this project are released under a Creative
Commons Zero ( CC0 ) license by Pixel Frog. Pixel Frog has allowed us to
distribute, remix, adapt, and build upon the material in any medium or
format, even for commercial purposes.
They can be found here:
Pixel Adventure 1 : https://pixelfrogassets.itch.io/pixel-adventure-1
Pixel Adventure 2 : https://pixelfrogassets.itch.io/pixel-adventure-2

Controlling player animations
with code
Animations play a crucial role in bringing your game to life, making player
actions feel smooth and responsive. In this section, we’ll explore how to
trigger different player animations in code. By learning how to control
animations programmatically, you’ll gain the ability to seamlessly transition
between movement states such as idle, running, and jumping, enhancing the
overall feel and polish of your game.
Take a moment to consider the conditions that will trigger each animation
that we created in the previous chapter. We should try to imagine what will
cause the animation to play so that we can implement it in the code:
The idle animation is triggered when the player is stationary (both x
and y velocities are 0 ).
The run animation is triggered when the player moves left or right. To
ensure the sprite faces the correct direction, we’ll flip it based on
movement direction.
The fall animation is triggered when the player is moving downward
(the y velocity is increasing) and is not wall-sliding.
The jump animation plays when the player is moving upward (the y
velocity is decreasing) during their first jump (to prevent the player
from spamming jump to float or fly ).
The double-jump animation occurs when the player is already airborne,
jumps again, and is not wall-sliding.
The wall-slide animation triggers when the player is sliding down a
wall and pressing toward the wall. The sprite will flip to face away
from the wall they are sliding on.

In the previous chapter, we imported and named all the animations, and we
now have a clear understanding of the conditions under which each
animation should be triggered. However, to implement these animations
effectively, there are some missing pieces:
We have no way of knowing whether the player is currently wallsliding
We have no way of knowing whether this is the player’s first jump
We have no way of knowing whether this is a double jump
These checks are crucial because our animations need to accurately represent
the player’s actions and state. For instance, triggering the wall-slide
animation requires us to detect when the player is sliding against a wall.
Similarly, distinguishing between the first jump and a double jump ensures
that the correct animation plays for each action.

Helper variables
By addressing these gaps with helper variables , we can create a more
dynamic and responsive player character, where the animations align
seamlessly with the gameplay mechanics established in the previous chapter.
To ensure our character animations reflect the player’s actions, we need to
track certain states, such as whether the player is wall-sliding or how many
jumps they’ve performed. To do this, we’ll introduce two new variables.
Add the following variables at the top of your Player script, just after the
constants:
var jump_count = 0
var is_wall_sliding = false

These variables will help us manage and detect the conditions needed to
trigger the correct animations.
The preceding variables will solve our problems; we just need to use them in
the correct place. Starting with the jump_count variable. When the player
jumps or double jumps, we increase jump_count by 1 . When the player is
on the floor again, we reset jump_count to 0 .
In the handle_jump() function, increment jump_count as follows:
func handle_jump():
# Reset jump count if the player is on the floor
if is_on_floor():
jump_count = 0
# Jump from the floor (first jump)
if Input.is_action_just_pressed("ui_accept") and is_on_floor
velocity.y = JUMP_VELOCITY
jump_count += 1
# Double jump in the air
elif Input.is_action_just_pressed("ui_accept") and jump_coun
velocity.y = JUMP_VELOCITY
jump_count += 1

In the preceding code, when the player jumps, jump_count is increased by 1
, and when the player lands on the floor, jump_count resets to 0 .
Now that we’ve added the necessary variables to track the player’s state, we
can start implementing mechanics that use them in the next section.

Wall-sliding and doublejumping mechanics

In this section, we will create dedicated functions to handle wall-sliding and
double-jumping , ensuring smooth and responsive movement for the player.
These mechanics will not only enhance gameplay but also tie directly into
triggering the appropriate animations. We will also create an animate
function that calls all the specific animations.
Wall-sliding and double-jumping are unique player movements that require
additional logic to function correctly. By separating these actions into their
own functions, we can keep the code organized and easier to maintain while
ensuring that each mechanic behaves as intended. Let’s start by creating
these dedicated functions.

Double-jump function
The double jump is a classic mechanic in platformer games, giving players
an extra boost and greater control over their movement. To implement this
feature, we need to track when the player is in the air and determine whether
a second jump is allowed.
This section will walk you through creating a function to handle the doublejump logic, ensuring a smooth and responsive experience for the player.
Let’s look at the following code:
func double_jump():
# Handle double jump
if Input.is_action_just_pressed("ui_accept") and !is_on_floo
velocity.y = JUMP_VELOCITY
jump_count += 1

In the preceding double-jump function, first, check whether the player has
pressed the jump key and whether they are currently in the air (not on the

floor) and the jump count is less than 2 (to prevent flying). If all these
conditions are true, then the player can jump a second time.

Wall-slide function
Wall-sliding depends on another value to work: friction . This is so that we
can slide down the wall at a slower rate than if we fall. To see that in action,
add a new constant at the top of the program as follows:
const SPEED = 150.0
const JUMP_VELOCITY = -400.0
const FRICTION = 100

The preceding constant called friction will be the speed at which we slide
down the wall. The value of 100 is chosen because it delivers the best
effect; however, you could choose any number you feel looks best to you
when testing.
Now, implement the wall_slide function:
func wall_slide(delta):
if is_on_wall() and !is_on_floor():
if Input.is_action_pressed("ui_left") or Input.is_action
is_wall_sliding = true
else:
is_wall_sliding = false
else:
is_wall_sliding = false
if is_wall_sliding:
velocity.y = min(velocity.y, FRICTION)

The wall_slide function enables the wall-sliding mechanic for the player
by checking specific conditions and modifying their movement. To better

understand how this function works, let’s break it down step by step in the
following sections.

Checking conditions
The first if condition checks whether the player is touching a wall (
is_on_wall()

) and is not grounded ( !is_on_floor() ).

This verifies two things:
Whether the player is touching a wall using the is_on_wall() function
Whether the player is not grounded, as determined by the
!is_on_floor() condition

Detecting input
Inside the wall detection block, the following line checks for player input:
if Input.is_action_pressed("ui_left") or Input.is_action_pressed

This condition determines whether the player is pressing either the left (
) or right ( ui_right ) movement keys. This leads to two
scenarios:
ui_left

If either key is pressed, the code sets is_wall_sliding = true ,
enabling the wall slide
If no key is pressed, the variable is set to false , stopping the wall
slide

Resetting the wall slide

The else block ensures that if the player is not on a wall or is standing on
the floor, is_wall_sliding is set to false . This prevents unintended
sliding.

Limiting downward speed
The final check, if is_wall_sliding: , applies the line velocity.y =
min(velocity.y, FRICTION)

inside its block.

Here, the min() function compares the current downward velocity (
velocity.y ) with the predefined FRICTION value. If velocity.y is greater
than FRICTION (meaning the player is falling too fast), min() returns the
smaller of the two—the FRICTION value. This effectively caps the falling
speed during a wall slide, ensuring the player descends at a controlled,
slower rate.
This results in a smoother and more manageable wall-sliding experience,
preventing rapid, uncontrolled drops down the wall.
By combining these checks and actions, the wall_slide function ensures
the player can seamlessly transition into and out of a controlled wall slide
based on their input and environment. This sets the foundation for intuitive
gameplay mechanics.
Remember to call our new functions in the process function so that we can
use them:
func _physics_process(delta):
apply_gravity(delta)
double_jump()
wall_slide(delta)
move_and_slide()

The _physics_process(delta) function is where all our custom movement
and physics-related functions are called. By calling them, we are asking
Godot to run these functions as part of the physics engine.
is part of Godot’s game loop and runs at a fixed
interval, ensuring that the player’s actions and interactions with the game
world are updated consistently and in real time.
_physics_process()

It’s important to use _physics_process() for physics-based logic because
it’s synced with the physics engine. If we used _process() instead—which
runs every rendered frame and can vary depending on frame rate—it could
lead to jittery or inconsistent movement, especially on lower-performance
machines. This is because _process() does not guarantee consistent timing,
which is crucial for physics calculations.

Animate function
The next step is to rewrite the animation trigger conditions in the code. Each
animation trigger is described with a comment.
The AnimatedSprite2D node will play the corresponding animation, but we
need a reference to the node to call its functions. We can get the reference as
the scene is ready (loaded), and so we give the variable the @onready
annotation, as shown in the following code:
extends CharacterBody2D
@onready var animations = $AnimatedSprite2D

Next, we’ll declare a new function and call it animate :
#Handle Animations
func animate():

# Stationary player
if velocity.x == 0 and velocity.y == 0:
animations.play("idle")
# Player moving horizontally (left or right)
elif velocity.y == 0:
animations.play("run")
# Player is falling
elif velocity.y > 0 and !is_wall_sliding:
animations.play("fall")
# Player is jumping (first jump)
elif velocity.y < 0 and jumpCount == 0:
animations.play("jump")
# Player is double-jumping
elif !is_on_floor() and jumpCount > 0 and !is_wall_sliding:
animations.play("double_jump")
# Player is sliding on wall
elif is_wall_sliding:
animations.play("wall_slide")
# Flip the sprite based on movement direction
animations.flip_h = velocity.x < 0

Remember to call the animate() function in the _physics_process()
function:
func _physics_process(delta):
apply_gravity(delta)
standard_player_movement()
double_jump()
wall_slide(delta)
animate()
move_and_slide()

In the preceding code, we have again made sure to call all our custom
functions to run repeatedly in the physics_process function.
Now, test the game and your player should animate! Our next step is to set
up the pass-through platforms so that the player can jump up through a

platform from below and press down to fall through the platform from
above.

Falling through platforms
We created two different physics layers on the TileMap in Chapter 6 so
that the player can jump up and fall down through certain platforms.
Because we made these tiles as one-way tiles , we can jump through them
from below, with no need for coding.
Now, we need to set up the code that will allow our player to fall through
these platforms when we are standing on them and pressing down . Our code
should check whether the player is pressing down and then simply turn off
Collision Mask number 3 (the pass-through layer). This means that the
player will stop detecting collisions on the pass_through layer and will fall
until it reaches a layer that it is detecting collisions for, which is the ground
layer. This is demonstrated in the check_pass_through() function as shown
here:
func check_pass_through():
if Input.is_action_pressed("ui_down"):
set_collision_mask_value(3, false)
else:
set_collision_mask_value(3, true)

As can be seen in the preceding code, a new function has been created
named check_pass_through() . It then checks whether the user is pressing
the down key and, if so, it sets the value of Collision Mask layer number 3
to false (disabled). If the player is not pressing the down key, the value will
be reset to true (enabled).

Remember to add check_pass_through() to your list of function calls in the
_physics_process()

; otherwise, the function will not run!

func _physics_process(delta):
apply_gravity(delta)
standard_player_movement()
double_jump()
wall_slide(delta)
animate()
check_pass_through()
move_and_slide()

The player can now run, jump, double-jump, and wall-slide around the level
as well as fall through special platforms. Our next step is to scatter some
items around the level for the player to collect.

Adding collectible items
In many games, collectible items play a vital role in enhancing gameplay by
providing rewards, power-ups, or essential resources to the player. These
items can create a sense of progression, encourage exploration, and add
layers of strategy to the game. In this section, we’ll explore how to create a
collectible item system in Godot.
You’ll learn how to design a collectible item, detect when the player
interacts with it, and implement logic to grant rewards or effects. By the end
of this section, you’ll have a reusable system that can be extended to include
a variety of collectibles for your levels.
For the collectible item, we will use the Strawberry found in the Items |
folder. However, you may use any item you wish as long as you
adapt some of the steps that follow.
Fruits

Strawberry scene (our co
llectible item)
For our game, the player will collect Strawberries. Once the player has
collected all of the Strawberries on a level, a flag will appear which the
player will touch to complete the level.
Follow these steps to create the collectible item scene:
1. Create a new scene and add Area2D as the root node. Area2D is an
invisible node that defines a region of 2D space, which detects when
objects have collided or stopped colliding with it.
2. Add an AnimatedSprite2D node as a child node.
3. Recall that to animate a sprite, we use multiple frames that depict the
sprite at various stages of motion. These frames are often grouped
together in a single image known as a sprite sheet .
4. To animate the sprite, we first import the sprite sheet and then divide it
into individual frames. To do this, select the AnimatedSprite2D node,
and in the Sprite Frames property in Inspector , click on New
SpriteFrames . This is shown in Figure 7.1 :

Figure 7.1 – Creating new SpriteFrames

5. Clicking on New SpriteFrames in Inspector , as shown in Figure 7.1 ,
will open the SpriteFrames area at the bottom of the screen. This is the

space where we can import frames and create and name new
animations. This is shown in Figure 7.2 :

Figure 7.2 – The SpriteFrames area

As shown in Figure 7.2 , we currently have only the default animation
and no images or frames associated with it. We will now create
animations for the idle animation and then import the sprites
associated with it from the sprite sheet.
6. Start by renaming the default animation to idle .
7. In FileSystem , create a new folder called Collectibles .
8. Now, find the Items | Fruits folder in the assets you downloaded
from Pixel Frog (see the Technical requirements section) and drag the
images for your Strawberry into the Collectibles folder in FileSystem .
9. Select the idle animation and then click on Add frames from a Sprite
Sheet button or press C trl + S hift + O . Now, select the Idle image
file in your Collectibles folder.
10. Now, you must count the player images and update the Horizontal and
Vertical frame properties (see Figure 7.3 ) as required.
11. Then, click on the Select All button followed by the Add x Frame(s)
button. This is shown for the idle frames of the Strawberry in Figure
7.3 :

Figure 7.3 – Setting the Horizontal and Vertical frames and adding them to the animation

Now that you have cut the individual frames from the image (sprite
sheet) as in Figure 7.3 , your SpriteFrames window will update with
the images to be used for the idle animation. This is shown in Figure
7.4 :

Figure 7.4 – The frames used for the idle animation

Quick tip : Need to see a high-resolution
version of this image? Open this book in the next-gen
Packt Reader or view it in the PDF/ePub copy.
The next-gen Packt Reader and a free
PDF/ePub copy of this book are included with your
purchase. Scan the QR code OR visit
packtpub.com/unlock , then use the search bar
to find this book by name. Double-check the edition
shown to make sure you get the right one.

12. As you can see in Figure 7.4 , there are controls for the animations in
the bar at the top. I have set the idle frame rate to 20 FPS , and looping

is on. You can play with these settings to find the ones you like. You
can see this in Figure 7.5 :

Figure 7.5 – Animation controls with looping and FPS highlighted

13. To complete the setup of the Strawberry collectible, we need to add a
CollisionShape2D node as a child of the Area2D node. For the Shape
property of the node, select CapsuleShape2D and adjust it in the
Viewport to fit the Strawberry. This is shown in Figure 7.6 :

Figure 7.6 – Adjusting the collision to fit the Strawberry

The Strawberry can now collide with objects and detect when an object has
collided with it. We will need to write code to animate the Strawberry and to
do something when the player collides with it, such as removing the
Strawberry and adding 1 to the player’s Strawberry collection score.

Implementing the Strawberry
script
The Strawberry only needs to do two things: animate and disappear when the
player collects it. We will now program the Strawberry to do these two
things.
In the Strawberry scene, select your Strawberry node and click on the
Attach New Script button/icon, as shown in Figure 7.7 :

Figure 7.7 – The Attach New Script button/icon

The idle animation must play repeatedly; we have already set it to loop, so,
in the ready function, we just need to start the animation. To make it easier
to reference other nodes in a scene, Godot provides a built-in shortcut. By
preceding a node’s name with a dollar sign ( $ ), we can quickly access that
node and its functions directly.
This shortcut is particularly useful when frequently interacting with other
nodes in a scene, such as controlling a character’s animations or updating UI
elements, as it keeps the code more readable and efficient. Use this shortcut
to play the idle animation of the Strawberry, as shown in the following
code:
func _ready():
$AnimatedSprite2D.play("idle")

When our player collides with or overlaps a Strawberry, we want to signal
the Strawberry to execute a function. In the function, we can remove the
Strawberry from the level and add 1 to the number of Strawberries collected
by the player. Area2D nodes can respond to a variety of built-in signals, one
of which is when a body enters the area of the node.
To set this up, select the Strawberry node, then click on the Node tab (to
the right of the Inspector tab). In the Signals category, under Area2D ,
select the body_entered signal and click on Connect in the bottom-right
corner, or simply double-click the signal name. This is shown in Figure 7.8 :

Figure 7.8 – The body_entered signal of Area2D

A new window will pop up, which is shown in Figure 7.9 . You need not
worry about the details now and simply click on the Connect button.

Figure 7.9 – Connecting a signal to a method (function)

Clicking on the Connect button, as shown in Figure 7.9 , will create a new
function in the Strawberry script called _on_body_entered(body) . The
parameter called body contains a reference to the object that collided with
the Strawberry. To determine whether that body is the player , we can tag the
player as part of a group called Player .
Here’s how you do it:
1. Switch to your Player scene and select the Player node.
2. Again, click on the Node tab to the right of Inspector , then choose the
Groups sub-tab.
3. Click on the + symbol to add a group.
4. Name the group Player .

These steps are shown in Figure 7.10 .

Figure 7.10 – The Node tab, Groups sub-tab, and the + symbol to add a new group

With the group ready, we can check whether the body that entered the
Strawberry is in the Player group and if so, react accordingly. We can do this
in the Strawberry script as shown:
func _on_body_entered(body):
if body.is_in_group("Player"):
#add to player score
#remove the strawberry

Player

will keep track of how many Strawberries it has collected. We need

a variable in the Player script to keep count of the number of Strawberries
the player has collected, and we need a function in the Player script to add
one to the score each time a Strawberry is collected.
Return to the Player script and add the variable and function as shown in
the code:
var jumpCount = 0
var is_wall_sliding = false
var strawberry_count = 0
func add_score(amount):
strawberry_count += amount

The preceding code will increase the strawberry_count variable by an
amount each time it is called. We will call it in the _on_body_entered(body)
function of the Strawberry and remove the Strawberry from the scene once
collected, as shown here:
func _on_body_entered(body):
if body.is_in_group("Player"):
body.add_score(1)
queue_free() #remove strawberry

The built-in queue_free() function deletes a node from memory at the end
of the current frame as soon as it is safe to do so. It is the recommended
method for removing nodes from the scene.
With this code in place, when the Strawberry signals that another body has
entered its space, a value of 1 will be added to the Strawberry count of the
player, and the Strawberry will be removed from the scene.
Feel free to drag and drop the strawberry.tscn file into your level multiple
times so that the player has something to collect, as shown in Figure 7.11 :

Figure 7.11 – Dragging and dropping Strawberries into the level

The player can move through the level and collect Strawberries. To add a
challenge, we need an enemy to patrol.

Adding a patrolling enemy
This is a reminder that the enemies can be found here:
https://pixelfrog-assets.itch.io/pixel-adventure-2 .
We will be using the Mushroom enemy. Create a new scene and set it up
with CharacterBody2D , AnimatedSprite2D , and CollisionShape2D with
CapsuleShape2D only covering part of the mushroom, as shown in Figure
7.12 :

Figure 7.12 – Setting up the Mushroom scene

Use the sprite sheets provided in the Mushroom enemy folder and set up the
SpriteFrames and animations for idle and run to be looped at 20 FPS . I

created my own death animation using one frame from idle and rotating it,
as shown in Figure 7.13 :

Figure 7.13 – Animations for the Mushroom enemy

Attach a new script to the Mushroom node and ensure that the template
used is an empty object, as shown in Figure 7.14 :

Figure 7.14 – Using the Object: Empty template for the Mushroom enemy

Using the Empty template will ensure that our script is created with no
default or added code and is as simple as possible.
Add code to set values for the speed, direction, and health of the Mushroom,
as shown in the code:
extends CharacterBody2D
const SPEED = 75
var direction = 1
var health = 1

Note that the direction variable will have values of -1 or 1 to indicate
left or right movement, respectively.

Now, we have variables to control the speed, direction, and health of the
Mushroom enemy.
Also, add a function to apply gravity to the Mushroom, allowing it to fall
and touch the ground, as shown in the following code:
func add_gravity(delta):
# Add gravity.
if not is_on_floor():
velocity += get_gravity() * delta

If the Mushroom is not on the ground, gravity will pull it downward.
Now, create a function to make the Mushroom move. I have called mine
update_direction() and all it does is make the enemy move to the right at a
constant speed, as shown in the code:
func update_direction():
# Move enemy at constant speed
velocity.x = SPEED * direction

The velocity of the Mushroom in the horizontal plane is multiplied by speed
and direction.
Both functions must also be called in the _physics_process(delta)
function along with move_and_slide() , as shown in the code:
func _physics_process(delta):
add_gravity(delta)
update_direction()
move_and_slide()

We must also set collisions on the Mushroom so that it can collide with the
floor and the player. Do this by turning on Collision Layer 1 and turning on

Collision Mask 1 , 2 , and 3 .
If you drop a Mushroom into the level now and run the game, the Mushroom
will begin moving to the right until it collides with a wall.
We will detect when a Mushroom has collided with a wall using the built-in
is_on_wall() function and reverse its direction, as shown in the code:
func reverse_direction():
#Reverse direction when hitting a wall
if is_on_wall():
direction = -direction

Note that by inverting or negating the value of direction, we can determine
whether the Mushroom moves to the left or the right.
Make sure to call reverse_direction() after you have called
move_and_slide() , as shown in the following code, because otherwise,
collisions will not be detected correctly:
func _physics_process(delta):
add_gravity(delta)
moveEnemy()
move_and_slide()
reverse_direction()

If you place your Mushroom on a floating platform, when it reaches the edge
of the platform, it will fall off. To prevent this, use a RayCast2D node to
detect when the Mushroom is near the edge and then reverse direction. Add a
RayCast2D node as a child of Mushroom , as shown in Figure 7.15 :

Figure 7.15 – Adding a RayCast node to our Mushroom node

RayCast2D is simply an invisible ray cast by an object that looks for
collisions in the direction in which it was sent. In this case, we are looking
for collisions below us to determine when we are no longer on the floor. Our
ray is cast a little to the right of our Mushroom (I used Target Position x : 0
, y : 14 and Transform Position x : 15 and y : 7 ) so that we can see when
we are approaching the no floor zone and reverse the direction before we fall
off! Place your ray as shown in Figure 7.16 :

Figure 7.16 – Casting a ray downward from the right of the Mushroom

Now, we can write a function to reverse the direction of the Mushroom when
the ray is not colliding with the floor and to move the ray to the opposite side
so that it is always looking for no floor in the direction the Mushroom is
moving, as shown:

func platform_edge():
if not $RayCast2D.is_colliding():
direction = -direction
$RayCast2D.position.x *= -1

In the preceding code, as soon as the ray is no longer colliding with the
ground, the Mushroom’s movement direction is reversed and the ray is
moved to the other side of the Mushroom to detect collisions in the direction
that the Mushroom is moving. We must all turn on Collision Mask 2 and 3
for the RayCast2D node so that it will detect the floor.
Remember to call this function after move_and_slide() in the
function so that it runs after collisions have been
detected. Finally, place a Mushroom on a platform to test that it patrols the
_physics_process()

platform and does not fall off.

Mushroom stomping
The player should be able to hurt the Mushroom only by attacking it from
above. We will create a hurt zone or death zone for the Mushroom, which
will consist of an Area2D and CollisionShape2D node with a
RectangleShape2D node placed on top of the Mushroom.
The Mushroom will hurt the player if it attacks from the side. We will create
a hurt player zone on either side of the Mushroom, again made up of
Area2D and CollisionShape2D with RectangleShape2D . This is shown in
Figure 7.17 :

Figure 7.17 – Creating the death zone and hurt player zone

With these in place, we can make use of signals to detect when the player
has entered one of the zones and then react accordingly.
Connect the _on_death_zone_body_entered() and
_on_hurt_player_zone_body_entered()

signals to the Mushroom script.

Then, write code in the empty functions, as shown in the code:
func _on_death_zone_body_entered(body):
if "Player" in body.name:
body.velocity.y = -500
health -= 1
func _on_hurt_player_zone_body_entered(body: Node2D):
if "Player" in body.name:
body.hurt()

There is no hurt() function in the Player script yet. We should create that
now.

Open the Player script and add the following function so that the player can
be hurt by the Mushroom enemies:
func hurt():
print("Player hurt")

Take note that, for now, we just use a technique called stub testing in which
we simply display a message to verify that the function was called correctly.
Later, we will complete the full implementation of this function.
The _on_death_zone_body_entered(body) function runs whenever a body
enters the death zone area (jumps onto the Mushroom from above). We
check to see whether the body that entered the zone has the word Player in
its name. This is an alternative and equivalent option to checking whether
body.is_in_group("Player") . If the body does have the word Player in its
name, we add 500 to the velocity of the player to make it appear to bounce
off the Mushroom and we subtract 1 from the health of the Mushroom.
The _on_hurt_player_zone_body_entered() function runs when a body
enters the Mushroom from the sides. Again, if this body is the player, we run
the player’s hurt() function, reducing the player’s health.
When the Mushroom’s health is 0 , it should disable collisions, stop
detecting collisions with the player, and play the death animation. This is
achieved with the custom function shown as follows:
func mushroom_death():
if health <= 0:
$CollisionShape2D.disabled = true
$HurtPlayerZone.monitoring = false
$AnimatedSprite2D.play("death")

The mushroom_death() function should be called in the _physics_process()
function, as shown in the code:
func _physics_process(delta):
add_gravity(delta)
moveEnemy()
move_and_slide()
reverse_direction()
platform_edge()
mushroom_death()

Connect the _on_animated_sprite_2d_animation_finished() signal of the
AnimatedSprite2D

node of the Mushroom. When the death animation is

finished, it will trigger the function to remove the Mushroom from the scene,
as shown in the code:
func _on_animated_sprite_2d_animation_finished():
if $AnimatedSprite2D.animation == "death":
queue_free()

Add some more Mushrooms and collectibles to your level. To prevent
crowding the scene tree, add a new child node of the Node type. Rename it
Enemies and drag all of the Mushrooms under it. You can do the same for
Collectibles , as shown in Figure 7.18 :

Figure 7.18 – Organizing the scene tree by grouping nodes

Now that the level has enemies and collectibles, we need a win condition.
For our purposes, it will be that once the player has collected all of the
Strawberries, a checkpoint flag will fly. Touching that flag will end the level.
Let’s learn more about level completion in the next section.

Implementing level
completion
Level completion mechanics are a vital part of any game, providing players
with a sense of accomplishment and closure. In this section, we’ll create a
system in which collecting all the Strawberries triggers a sequence of events:
a checkpoint flag animates and flies out, signaling the completion of
objectives. The player then moves to the flag, touching it to end the level.

This system not only adds visual and interactive flair but also reinforces the
player’s progress and goal achievement. By the end of this section, you’ll
have a polished and rewarding level completion sequence to enhance your
game’s overall experience.
Create a new scene with the following:
Area2D as the root node (renamed to CheckPoint )
AnimatedSprite2D
CollisionShape2D with RectangleShape2D
The scene tree is shown in Figure 7.19 :

Figure 7.19 – Scene tree for the checkpoint scene

Create three animations for the flag, named flag_fly , idle , and trigger
. In the assets folder from Pixel Frog, navigate to the Items | Checkpoints
| Checkpoint folder.
For the idle animation, use the single frame called Checkpoint (No
Flag).png .
For the trigger animation, use the Checkpoint (Flag Out).png sprite
sheet. Do not loop the animation and run it at 20 FPS .
For the flag_fly animation, use the Checkpoint (Flag Idle).png
sprite sheet. Loop the animation and run it at 20 FPS .
An image of the flag_fly animation is shown as an example in Figure 7.20
:

Figure 7.20 – Setting up the flag animations for the checkpoint

Attach a script to the CheckPoint node to customize its behavior. We will
create our own signal to trigger the flag to fly out. Once the player has
collected all of the Strawberries in the level, the player will emit the trigger
signal. The CheckPoint code is shown and explained as follows:
extends Area2D
signal trigger
var level_complete = false
# signal that runs when the animation is finished playing
func _on_animated_sprite_2d_animation_finished():
$AnimatedSprite2D.play("flag_fly")
level_complete = true
# our own custom signal
func _on_trigger():
$AnimatedSprite2D.play("trigger")
# A signal that runs when a body enters
func _on_body_entered(body):
if level_complete:
get_tree().quit()

As shown, we create our own signal and call it trigger . Then, in Inspector
, we connect that signal to our script. We also have a Boolean variable called
level_complete to determine when the level is complete. The trigger

function linked to our signal plays the trigger animation and then signals
that the animation is complete, which switches to the flag_fly animation
and sets level_complete to true . For now, when the player touches the
flag, the game will exit.
However, we need to emit the trigger signal from the Player script once
they have collected all the Strawberries. Return to the Player script and add
a new variable called level_strawberries to keep track of the number of
Strawberries in the level, as shown:
var strawberry_count = 0
var level_strawberries

First, we should create a group called checkpoint and add the CheckPoint
node to that group. To do this, select the CheckPoint node in Inspector ,
select the Node tab, then choose the Groups sub-tab and add a new group
called checkpoint . This is shown in Figure 7.21 :

Figure 7.21 – Creating the checkpoint group

We also need a custom function that will check to see whether the level is
complete and then emit the trigger signal. If strawberry_count (which is
the number of Strawberries that the player has collected) matches
level_strawberries (which is the total number of Strawberries in the

level), then we get a reference to the checkpoint via its group name and emit
the checkpoint’s trigger signal. Finally, we reset the Strawberries to 0 so
that the signal is only emitted once and not constantly. This is shown in the
code as follows:
func complete_level():
if strawberry_count == level_strawberries:
var checkpoint =
get_tree().get_first_node_in_group("checkpoint")
checkpoint.emit_signal("trigger")
strawberry_count = 0

Remember to call the new complete_level() function in the
_physics_process(delta)

function.

Since all the Strawberries are in the Level1 scene, we need to attach a script
to the Level1 node so that it can count the Strawberries in the scene and
update the Player variables. This is shown in Figure 7.22 :

Figure 7.22 – Attaching a script to the level node

Counting the Strawberries in the level script is shown in the code as follows:
extends Node2D
@onready var player = $Player
@onready var strawberries = $Collectibles
func _ready() -> void:

player.level_strawberries =
strawberries.get_child_count()

In the preceding code, we get a reference to the Player scene as well as the
Collectibles

group of scenes (multiple Strawberries.) In the _ready

function, we update the player’s level_strawberries variable by setting it
to the count of all the Strawberries in the level.
Now, add a CheckPoint scene to the level, and you have a way to complete
it.
With that, the level is now playable!

Summary
In this chapter, we expanded our 2D platformer with essential gameplay
mechanics and refined player interactions. We controlled player animations
through code, ensuring smooth visual feedback for actions such as running,
jumping, and wall-sliding. We also implemented wall-sliding and doublejumping, adding versatility to player movement, and introduced fallingthrough platforms for dynamic level navigation. Alongside these, we added
collectible items to encourage exploration, a patrolling enemy to introduce a
challenge, and a checkpoint for tracking level completion.
In the next chapter, we will transfer our 2D skills and make a 3D platformer!

Unlock this
book’s exclusive
benefits now
Scan this QR code or go to
packtpub.com/unlock ,
then search this book by name.
Note: Keep your purchase invoice
ready before you start.
OceanofPDF.com

—————————

Part 3

—————————

Building and Beyond –
Your Game Development
Journey
In this final part of the book, you’ll take your skills to the next level by
building a 3D mini-game from scratch across two detailed chapters. You’ll
then explore how to polish your game with visual and audio enhancements
—often called “game juice”—to elevate the player experience. We’ll also
step back to examine core game design principles, helping you think
critically about what makes games engaging and enjoyable. Finally, we’ll
wrap up with a carefully curated selection of resources to support your
continued learning and growth as a game developer. By the end of this part,
you’ll be well-equipped to start creating your own complete games and
refining your craft.
This part of the book includes the following chapters:
Chapter 8 , Creating a 3D Mini-Game in Godot – Part 1
Chapter 9 , Creating a 3D Mini-Game in Godot – Part 2
Chapter 10 , Adding Game Juice
Chapter 11 , Understanding Game Design
Chapter 12 , Where to Next?
OceanofPDF.com

8

Creating a 3D Mini-Game
in Godot – Part 1
Creating a well-structured 3D game world requires understanding how to
compose scenes, design levels, and implement functional controllers. In this
chapter, we’ll jump into the essential building blocks of 3D game creation in
Godot. By learning how to compose and organize scenes, you’ll develop a
solid foundation for creating dynamic, interactive environments.
You’ll start by building a 3D character scene and attaching a script to control
its movement. Next, you’ll learn how to design levels by combining static
objects, collisions, and meshes. We’ll also implement a camera controller
that provides a smooth and responsive player view. Finally, we’ll integrate
everything into a complete level and test it to ensure functionality.
In this chapter, we’re going to cover the following main topics:
Working in 3D: a new dimension in Godot
Building a 3D character
Creating a level design
Working with a Character Controller script
Using variables
Exploring functions
Implementing a camera controller
Running tests

By the end of this chapter, you’ll be able to create reusable 3D scenes,
control your player character, and design levels that are both visually
appealing and functional. These skills are critical for building immersive 3D
games and will set the stage for more advanced features in future chapters.

Technical requirements
This chapter’s code files are available here in the book’s GitHub repository:
https://github.com/PacktPublishing/Godot-4-forBeginners/tree/main/ch8
The game assets used in this project are released under a Creative
Commons Zero ( CC0 ) license by Essssam. Essssam has allowed us to
distribute, remix, adapt, and build upon the material in any medium or
format, even for commercial purposes.
They can be found here:
https://essssam.itch.io/3d-leap-land
Visit this link to check out the video of the code being run:
https://packt.link/6dr7h

Working in 3D: a new
dimension in Godot
Until now, we’ve been working exclusively in 2D – learning the
fundamentals of Godot through flat scenes, sprites, and screen-space
movement. In this chapter, we’re stepping into 3D, where we’ll be working
with depth, perspective, lighting, and physics in a more complex
environment.

While the transition from 2D to 3D can seem daunting at first, Godot’s
consistent node and scene-based design makes the leap much more
manageable. The same principles of modularity and hierarchy still apply –
only now we’re dealing with 3D nodes such as Node3D , MeshInstance3D ,
and Camera3D , and building scenes in a three-dimensional space.
This chapter will walk you through the process of creating a basic 3D
character. You’ll learn how to assemble and organize the necessary
components into a standalone scene, which can later be reused and
integrated into a larger 3D world – just like we did in 2D.

Building a 3D character
Just because we are now working in three dimensions does not mean that the
node and scene design philosophy of Godot has changed. We will continue
to design different components of the game in their own scenes and then
build a level or master scene using them.
Important note
Note that you can fly around inside the 3D scene by holding
down the right mouse button and using the WASD keys as in
most games. If you use mouse scroll while holding the right
mouse button down, you can set the movement speed.
We shall start with the Player scene. By following these steps, you’ll create
a fully functional 3D player character – one that can move around your 3D
world using keyboard input and respond realistically to physics. This will lay
the foundation for building a complete 3D game, starting with one of its
most essential elements: the player.

1. Create a new Godot project and call it Leap Land .
2. Now, click on Other Node and add a CharacterBody3D node as the
root, as shown in Figure 8.1 :

Figure 8.1 – Starting a new 3D scene

3. Rename the CharacterBody3D node to Player . This node is designed
as a physics body, which is meant to be user-controlled.
4. Create a new folder in FileSystem and name it assets . Drag and drop
the obj and tex folders from the 3D Leap Land asset pack into this
folder. This is shown in Figure 8.2 :

Figure 8.2 – Importing the obj and tex folders from 3D Leap Land

5. In 2D, we needed to attach a sprite to the CharacterBody2D node in
order to display its texture. In 3D, we add a MeshInstance3D node as a
child of CharacterBody3D node, as shown in Figure 8.3 :

Figure 8.3 – Adding MeshInstance3D as a child

6. Select MeshInstance3D node and, in Inspector , find the Mesh
property. It is currently <empty> but drag and drop slime.obj from
FileSystem onto the Mesh property as shown in Figure 8.4 :

Figure 8.4 – Setting slime.obj as Mesh

7. The slime in the scene is gray . To correct this, we must drag the texture
file, palette.png , from the tex folder onto the slime in the Viewport.

The slime will be textured as shown in Figure 8.5 :

Figure 8.5 – Adding the texture to the slime

8. Now, give the player a hitbox by adding a CollisionShape3D node as a
child. Then, in Inspector , find the Shape property, and select a new
SphereShape3D . Use the orange handles to resize the hitbox to fit the
slime. My Position values for the CollisionShape3D node were x : 0.0
, y : 0.15 , z : 0.0 , but yours may vary.
9. To see anything, we need a camera in the scene. Add a Camera3D
node as a child and move it so that it is in a position to see the entire
slime. I placed mine at x : 0 , y : 1 , z: -2.5 and set the rotation to x :
-15

, y : -175 , z : -1 . This is shown in Figure 8.6 :

Figure 8.6 – Positioning the camera in the scene

10. Without light, we still won’t see much. Add a DirectionalLight3D
node as a child of the CharacterBody3D root node. This is light that
goes out in all directions infinitely, like the sun. You can angle the light
onto the player.
11. In the Transform property of MeshInstance3D node, rotate the mesh
by 180 degrees around the y -axis.
12. Save the scene as player.tscn and preview it by pressing F6 . It
should look like Figure 8.7 :

Figure 8.7 – The view of the slime in the game

The Player scene is now mostly complete and ready to be imported into
more complex scenes, such as the level scene, and this is what we will work
on next.

Creating a level design
Now that we’ve created our 3D player character, the next step is to build a
level for them to exist and move around in.
Level design in Godot means creating the environment – the floors, walls,
platforms, and scenery – that form the playable world of your game. In 3D,
this involves placing and arranging 3D objects in space to define where the
player can go, what they can interact with, and how the gameplay will
unfold.

In this section, we’ll create a basic 3D level using Godot’s built-in nodes and
tools. By the end, you’ll have a space for your character to walk around and
test movement.

Creating a level component
To build a level, we use various level components . These are the individual
parts that make up the environment, such as floors, walls, ramps, or
platforms. Level components are often made up of StaticBody3D ,
MeshInstance3D , and CollisionShape3D nodes.
Most parts of the level, such as the ground, walls, fences, bridges, and other
non-moving structures, are created using the StaticBody3D node. These
objects are not meant to move during gameplay and are unaffected by
physics forces or collisions. Instead, they provide a stable and optimized
foundation for the game’s environment.
Using StaticBody3D node for stationary elements is important for several
reasons:
Performance : Godot optimizes StaticBody3D nodes by excluding
them from costly physics calculations involving movement and
collision resolution. This significantly reduces CPU usage, especially in
complex scenes.
Physics stability : Because these bodies are fixed in place, they provide
reliable collision surfaces for moving objects such as players or
enemies, ensuring consistent interactions.
Lighting and baking : Static bodies also work well with light baking
and global illumination systems. Since they don’t move, lightmaps and

shadows can be precomputed accurately, improving visual quality
without runtime performance cost.
Although StaticBody3D nodes don’t respond to physical forces, they can
still be repositioned manually via code or animations, such as raising a
drawbridge or lowering a platform when triggered. This gives you flexibility
without sacrificing efficiency.
To visualize these components in 3D space, we use MeshInstance3D node,
which displays the visible shape of an object. To make these objects
interactable in the game world, such as allowing the player to walk on them
or bump into them, we pair them with a CollisionShape3D node. Let’s look
at an example of creating a level component in the next section.

Example: creating a grass platform
The process of creating a level component is shown in the following steps
and needs to be repeated for each component:
1. Create a new scene with St aticBody3D node as the root. Rename it
Grass.

Save it as grass.tscn .

2. Add a MeshInstance3D node and set the Mesh property to
ground_grass_4.obj

.

3. Drag palette.png onto the mesh to set the texture.
4. Add a CollisionShape3D node and select New BoxShape3D .
5. Use the handles to fit the hitbox around the ground model.
The scene should look as shown in Figure 8.8 :

Figure 8.8 – The ground scene

Important note
Note that this process will need to be repeated for each
component (piece of a level) you want to add to the level.
This is annotated in Figure 8.9 .

Figure 8.9 – Arrows pointing to different level components (all individual scenes)

In the next section, we’ll learn how to work with irregular collision shapes.

Handling irregular collision
shapes
Some models do not conform to regular collision shapes such as boxes or
spheres – for example, a curved or uneven structure, such as a bridge.
Fortunately, Godot provides tools to help generate collision shapes for these
more complex models automatically.
To see how this works in practice, we’ll set up a Bridge scene using an
irregular mesh and let Godot generate the collision structure for it:
1. Create a new scene with StaticBody3D as the root. Rename it to
Bridge and save the scene as bridge.tscn .
2. Add a MeshInstance3D node and set the Mesh property to
bridge_1.obj .

3. Drag palette.png onto the mesh to set the texture.
4. Select the MeshInstance3D node (the Bridge model).
5. Click on the Mesh menu at the top of the screen and click on Create
Collision Shape… as shown in Figure 8.10 :

Figure 8.10 – Autogenerating a collision shape for the Bridge scene

After clicking on Create Collision Shape… , a pop-up menu appears.
For Collision Shape placement , choose Sibling , and for Collision
Shape Type , choose Trimesh . This is shown in Figure 8.11 :

Figure 8.11 – Options for Godot to create the collision shape

Choosing Sibling ensures that the generated collision shape is
added as a separate node alongside the mesh, rather than as a
child of it. This keeps the scene hierarchy clean and makes it
easier to manage the mesh and its collision shape independently.
Selecting Trimesh as the collision type is ideal for static 3D
models (such as level geometry) that are not meant to move. A
Trimesh collision creates a detailed shape that matches the mesh
surface, which allows for accurate collision detection. However,
it’s best used only for static objects, as it is computationally
expensive and not suitable for dynamic or moving objects.
6. Godot will generate a collision shape polygon for Bridge , and the
resulting scene tree is shown in Figure 8.12 :

Figure 8.12 – The scene tree for the Bridge scene

Important note
There is a drawback to allowing Godot to generate the
collision shape for objects, and that is performance . Using
simple or primitive shapes for collisions is preferable as it
reduces the physics calculations required by a scene.

Creating the level layout
To begin creating the level, I started by exploring the models included in the
asset pack. These models represent various environmental elements, such as
terrain, structures, and props. I used the same process we followed earlier
when setting up the grass and bridge: importing the models into Godot and
turning each into its own scene .
By creating separate scenes for individual components, I was able to build a
modular set of level elements. These scenes were then combined to form the
complete level layout. You can follow the same approach—choose models

from the downloaded asset pack (refer to the Technical requirements
section), create scenes for each component, and then assemble them in a new
scene to design your level.
Finally, make sure to add a DirectionalLight3D node to your level scene.
This ensures the environment is properly lit, and that models appear with
realistic shading and depth.
The level I have created is shown in Figure 8.13 :

Figure 8.13 – An example level

Next, we’ll learn more about organizing a level scene effectively.

Organizing the level scene
In Figure 8.13 , each component in the level is a separate scene, making it
easy to reuse and manage them independently. Figure 8.14 shows the list of
scene nodes I used to construct the level. Note that I have grouped similar or
repeated objects – such as Fences , Grass , Crates , and Rocks – into their
own parent nodes:

Figure 8.14 – The individual scenes making up the level

Grouping is important because it keeps the scene tree organized, especially
for larger levels. It allows you to move or manipulate entire categories of
objects together, which can save time and reduce errors. For example, if you
want to disable all fences or apply a shader to all grass, having them grouped
makes this much easier.
It’s also worth noting that most of these objects, such as the ground, fences,
rocks, and bridges, are static. They don’t move during gameplay and should
be implemented using StaticBody3D for better performance and accurate
physics.
In contrast, dynamic objects such as the player are designed to move and
react to the environment and are therefore implemented using physicsenabled nodes such as CharacterBody3D .
This kind of structure not only helps with level design but also ensures
smooth performance and cleaner code management as your project grows.
As shown in Figure 8.14 , we now have a complex Level 1 scene that is
made up of many smaller scenes. Although we have a player in the scene,
there is no way to control it. In the next section, we will work on the
Character Controller script.

Working with a Character
Controller script
In this section, we will write a script that allows players to move the
character around the 3D world. This script is essential because, without it,
our character remains static – unable to walk, run, or jump through the level.
By the end of this section, you’ll have a fully controllable player character

that can respond to input and interact with the game environment in a
meaningful way.
Let’s begin by adding a new script to the CharacterBody3D node of the
Player scene. Make sure that Template is unchecked for Empty so that we
do not get any pre-made code and can make a completely custom character
controller as shown in Figure 8.15 :

Figure 8.15 – Adding an empty script to the player

When the Template check box is not checked, as in Figure 8.15 , we are
presented with a script that only has one line:
extends CharacterBody3D

This line means that this script is adding to or customizing the built-in
CharacterBody3D node in Godot. The CharacterBody3D node is used to
create 3D characters, such as players or enemies, which can move, jump, or
interact with the environment. By extending it, we can write our own code to
make the character behave exactly how we want.
Although we added a camera to our Player scene, this won’t be the only
camera used during gameplay. Instead, we’ll set up a second static camera in
the level that we can rotate to view the player from different angles. In
Godot, a scene can include multiple cameras, and you can choose which one
is active by marking it as Current in Inspector .

Using variables
Before we dive into the code, let’s take a moment to understand what it’s
doing. In this script, we’ll define a few important properties that control how
our player character moves, such as how fast they walk or how high they can
jump. We’ll use exported variables , which means these properties will not
only be defined in code but will also be visible and editable directly in the
Godot editor’s Inspector panel.
This makes development more flexible and efficient. Designers and artists,
for example, can fine-tune values such as movement speed, jump height, or
gravity without needing to touch the code at all. Meanwhile, programmers
can keep the logic organized in the script. This separation of concerns helps

teams collaborate more effectively, allowing everyone to test and balance the
gameplay quickly without risking breaking anything in the code.

Linking the Player script with
the camera
We can now start preparing the character to interact with other components
in the game world. One important element is the camera, which needs to
follow the player smoothly as they move through the level. To make this
possible, we’ll set up a way for the Player script to communicate with a
separate scene that controls the camera.
Later, we will create a View scene that will act as the camera controller.
We’ll give our camera a target to follow (which will be the player ). We will
also add a reference to this View so that we can control the camera’s
behavior, such as rotation or zoom, directly from the Player script.
Begin by adding these two lines to the Player script:
@export_subgroup("Components")
@export var view: Node3D

Here, the @export annotation makes a variable visible in Inspector . In this
case, it also organizes the variable under a new category or subgroup called
Components within the properties of the CharacterBody3D node. The
variable view will now appear in that subgroup, and it is designed to
reference a Node3D node, which we will create later to serve as the camera
controller. This is shown in Figure 8.16 :

Figure 8.16 – Exporting a group called Components and a variable called View

As can be seen in Figure 8.16 , adding the @export annotation makes a
variable editable directly in the Godot editor, allowing you to change its
value without modifying the code. This is especially useful for testing, as
you can adjust values in real time while the game is running.
Next, export another group for the movement properties of the player with a
variable for movement speed and jump strength:
@export_subgroup("Properties")
@export var movement_speed = 250
@export var jump_strength = 7

Because these variables are available in Inspector , we can find the right feel
for the movement of our player by adjusting the values as we test the game.
Now let’s add some general-purpose variables for the player:

movement_velocity

: To store how the player moves through 3D space

rotation_direction

: To keep track of the direction the player is

turning in
gravity

: To simulate the effect of gravity on the player

So, let’s add the following lines to the Player script:
var movement_velocity: Vector3
var rotation_direction: float
var vertical_velocity = 0

Let’s understand the important elements in this code snippet:
movement_velocity

stores the velocity vector based on player input for

movement
rotation_direction

holds the angle the character should rotate toward

based on movement direction
vertical_velocity

keeps track of the vertical force acting on the

character
In addition to movement, we need variables to manage the player’s jumping
abilities and track collectibles. Specifically, we’ll add variables to do the
following:
Detect when the player is on the ground
Control single and double jumps
Count how many Gems the player has collected
Let’s define these variables in the script:
var previously_floored = false
var jump_single = true
var jump_double = true

var gems = 0
var smoothing_factor = 10
const GRAVITY = 25

In this code snippet, previously_floored tracks whether the character was
on the ground during the last frame and is useful for detecting landings. This
will become clearer when it is used in code further on.
Finally, we need a reference variable for the 3D mesh that visually
represents the character. We’ll use this reference to adjust the model’s scale
during jumping and landing – an easy way to add visual appeal known in
animation as squash and stretch .
@onready var model = $MeshInstance3D

This line tells Godot to assign the MeshInstance3D node (a child of the
current node) to the variable model, but only after the scene is fully loaded
and ready. The @onready keyword ensures that the node exists when this
reference is made.

Alternative method for adding
reference variables
There is a shortcut for adding reference variables such as the preceding one
used for the player model. You drag the node that you want to reference into
the script, and, as you are about to release the mouse button, hold Ctrl on the
keyboard. Godot will automatically type out the reference for you, and you
can rename it if you wish. This is shown in Figure 8.17 :

Figure 8.17 – Drag the node into the script and hold down Ctrl as you release it

As our Player script grows, it’s important to keep things organized and
readable. Instead of writing all our logic in one long block, we’ll break it
into smaller, focused functions. Functions allow us to group related lines of
code under a single name, making our scripts cleaner, easier to understand,
and easier to maintain.
In the next section, we’ll start defining functions to handle key parts of our
character’s behavior. Each function will focus on one specific task, helping
us build a well-structured and reusable character controller.

Exploring functions
As mentioned earlier, as our player becomes more interactive, the script that
controls it will grow in complexity. To keep our code clean and manageable,
we’ll break it into functions: reusable blocks of logic that each handle one
specific task.

In this section, we’ll define functions to control gravity, handle movement
input, manage jumping behavior, and track Gem collection. Understanding
how to organize code in this way is a key step toward writing scalable and
maintainable scripts in Godot.
Let’s start by creating a function to handle gravity:
func handle_gravity(delta):
vertical_velocity += GRAVITY * delta
if vertical_velocity > 0 and is_on_floor():
jump_single = true
vertical_velocity = 0

Let’s break this down:
vertical_velocity += GRAVITY * delta

: This gradually increases the

gravity over time, simulating the effect of falling
: This checks if the
player is falling ( vertical_velocity > 0 ) and has landed (
if vertical_velocity > 0 and is_on_floor()

is_on_floor() returns true
jump_single = true

)

: Once the player lands, we allow them to jump

again
: Reset vertical velocity so that the player
doesn’t continue accelerating downward
vertical_velocity = 0

This function ensures the player is affected by gravity and can only jump
again once they’ve landed.
Now, let’s create a function to handle jumping:
func jump():
vertical_velocity = -jump_strength
model.scale = Vector3(0.5, 1.5, 0.5)
if jump_single:

jump_single = false
jump_double = true
else:
jump_double = false

Let’s look at this in detail:
: Reverses gravity to push the
player upward and create the jump effect.
vertical_velocity = -jump_strength

model.scale = Vector3(0.5, 1.5, 0.5)

: Adds a squash and stretch

visual effect, compressing the width and exaggerating the height of the
player for added game juice. You will learn about game juice in
Chapter 10 .
if jump_single:

: Checks if this is the first jump.

jump_single = false

: Marks that the first jump has been used.

jump_double = true

: Enables a second jump while in the air.

else

: Checks if the first jump has already been used.

jump_double = false

: Disables further jumping.

This function controls both the physics and visual feedback of jumping
while managing single and double jump logic.
At this point, it is good practice to create a custom input map for our control
scheme. Let’s delve into this in the next section.

Creating an input map
Godot allows us to create our own input map , which is a system that lets us
define custom actions, such as jump or move_left , and assign one or more
keys, mouse buttons, or gamepad inputs to each action. This helps keep our

code clean and flexible because we can refer to actions by name instead of
checking for specific key presses directly.
Now, let’s look at the steps for creating an input map:
1. First, click on Project | Project Settings | Input Map .
2. Click where it says Add New Action , type in the name of the action,
such as left , and then press Enter . Do this multiple times, adding
names for right , up , down , and jump . Later, we will need actions
for moving the camera independently, so add actions such as
camera_left , camera_right , camera_up , and camera_down .
3. Now, click on the + sign for each new action and then press the key you
would like to link to the action. This is shown in Figure 8.18 .

Figure 8.18 – Adding our own action events and keys

Now that we have created our own custom actions to associate with input as
shown in Figure 8.18 , we can go ahead and create a function for player
movement.

Implementing player controls
and actions
Let’s add the handle_controls function to handle the controls for player
movement:
func handle_controls(delta):
# Movement
var input := Vector3.ZERO
input.x = Input.get_axis("left", "right")
input.z = Input.get_axis("up", "down")
input = input.rotated(Vector3.UP, view.rotation.z)
if input.length() > 1:
input = input.normalized()
movement_velocity = input * movement_speed * delta
# Jumping
if Input.is_action_just_pressed("jump"):
if jump_single or jump_double:
jump()

The handle_controls function stores the player’s direction ( left , right ,
up

, or down ) in the input vector. It then adjusts the player’s movement

direction ( input ) to align it with the current view or orientation based on
the camera position. Without making this change, movement would always
be based on the global x and z position rather than changing based on the
perspective of the player camera.
To keep the player’s speed the same in all directions (particularly diagonals),
we must normalize the input vector (set its length to 1 ). This ensures that

diagonal movement isn’t faster than moving along a single axis, which
would otherwise give the player an unintended speed boost when pressing
two keys at once.
Now we must update the movement velocity based on input and speed.
To handle jumping, we must detect if the jump button has been pressed and
then call the jump() function if the player is able to jump (i.e., single or
double jump ).

Handling game events and
feedback
When the player collects Gems, we will increase the gem count and send a
signal to alert other parts of the game that the gem count has changed. To do
this, we will create our own custom signal at the top of the script.
As the second line of code in the script, add the following:
signal gem_collected

Now, a new signal will appear in Inspector , as shown in Figure 8.1 9 :

Figure 8.19 – Creating a custom signal

Next, we’ll create a new function in our script called collect_gems() . This
function is shown as follows:
func collect_gems():
gems += 1
gem_collected.emit(gems)

In this function, we will update the current count of the Gems and emit the
gem_collected

signal along with the current Gem count.

Now, create a function to handle the movement of the player called
handle_movement(delta)

, as shown and explained in the following code:

func handle_movement(delta):
var applied_velocity: Vector3
applied_velocity = velocity.lerp(movement_velocity,

delta * smoothing_factor)
applied_velocity.y = -gravity
velocity = applied_velocity
move_and_slide()

Here, the local variable applied_velocity calculates and stores the velocity
of the player in each frame. The calculation is done using the lerp function,
which uses linear interpolation to slowly move the current velocity (
velocity ) toward the target velocity ( movement_velocity ). This makes
the player’s movement much smoother.
Note
Linear interpolation is a technique used to smoothly or
gradually move from one value to another by having the
computer calculate and fill in all the values in between.
Setting the vertical part of the velocity to negative gravity makes sure that
the player is affected by gravity while the horizontal velocity is being
interpolated.
Finally, as shown in the last two lines of the code, we must update the
current velocity and call move_and_slide to move the character and detect
collisions.
Now we need a function to handle the rotation of the player:
func handle_rotation(delta):
if Vector2(velocity.z, velocity.x).length() > 0:
rotation_direction = Vector2(velocity.z,
velocity.x).angle()
rotation.y = lerp_angle(rotation.y, rotation_direction,
delta * smoothing_factor)

In the preceding code, the handle_rotation function checks to see if the
player is moving and then updates the rotation_direction global variable
by calculating the angle of the movement direction in radians.
Finally, the character’s y -axis is smoothly rotated to face the movement
direction using angle interpolation to prevent any abrupt rotation changes.
The final custom function for our player will handle respawning and
animation effects upon landing. Create the handle_respawn() function as
shown in the code:
func handle_respawn(delta):
var border_position_y = -10
# Threshold below which the player respawns
if position.y < border_position_y:
get_tree().reload_current_scene()
# Animation for scale (jumping and landing)
model.scale = model.scale.lerp(Vector3(1, 1, 1), delta
* smoothing_factor)
# Animation when landing
if is_on_floor() and vertical_velocity > 2 and
!previously_floored:
model.scale = Vector3(1.25, 0.75, 1.25)
previously_floored = is_on_floor()

Let’s investigate the handle_respawn() function:
Scene reload (respawning) : If the player’s positio n .y falls below
-10

(meaning they’ve fallen off the level), we call

to reload the current scene and
respawn the player at the starting position.
get_tree().reload_current_scene()

Resetting scale (restoring size) : We use
model.scale.lerp(Vector3(1, 1, 1), delta * smoothing_factor)

to

gradually interpolate the player’s scale back to normal after any squashand-stretch effects from jumping or landing.
Landing animation (squash effect) : If the player is currently on the
ground ( is_on_floor() ), was falling fast ( gravity > 2 ), and was
not on the ground in the previous frame ( !previously_floored ), we
trigger a squash effect by changing model.scale to Vector3(1.25,
0.75, 1.25)

.

Grounded state tracking : Finally, we update the previously_floored
variable to keep track of whether the player was on the ground during
the last frame.
To keep all these mechanics running smoothly, we need to call our custom
functions inside Godot’s main physics loop:
func _physics_process(delta):
handle_controls(delta)
handle_gravity(delta)
handle_movement(delta)
handle_rotation(delta)
handle_respawn(delta)

The _physics_process(delta) function is Godot’s built-in loop for physics
calculations, called every physics frame (by default, 60 times per second). It
ensures our game logic runs consistently, regardless of frame rate. By calling
our custom functions here, we keep gravity, movement, jumping, camera
effects, and respawning in sync with the physics engine.
Now that our character controller is working – handling movement, jumping,
and landing animations – it’s time to set up the camera so it follows the
player correctly in 3D space. A well-configured camera improves the
gameplay experience by helping players stay oriented and focused on their

surroundings. In the next section, we’ll connect the camera to the player and
script it to respond smoothly to player movement and rotation.

Implementing a camera
controller
To begin configuring the camera, we’ll first create a new scene that will act
as the camera controller and then link it to the player.
1. Create a new scene and add a Node3D node as the root. Rename this to
View . Now add a Camera3D node as a child. The scene tree is shown
in Figure 8. 20 :

Figure 8.20 – Scene composition for View

2. Select the Camera3D node and, in Inspector , set the Current
property to On – marking this camera as the one to use. You can also
adjust the field of view by setting the FOV property to 40 . This is
shown in Figure 8.2 1 :

Figure 8.21 – Setting the camera as current and adjusting FOV

3. Now, attach a script to the View node and save it as view.gd . Make
sure that you set the template to Empty .
Now we are ready to start building our Camera Controller script, which
will let the player move the camera and adjust the zoom using the keys on
the keyboard, which we defined in the input map.
The camera needs a target node to look at or focus on. This will be our
Player node. We will export this target as a variable shown in the following
code:
@export_group("Properties")
@export var target: Node

This exported target variable will appear in Inspector , allowing us to drag
and drop the Player node into it. The camera will then know what it should
follow.
Now export variables to control the zoom levels and rotation speed of the
camera:
@export_group("Zoom")
@export var zoom_minimum = 16
@export var zoom_maximum = 4
@export var zoom_speed = 10

These variables define the zoom behavior: zoom_minimum and zoom_maximum
determine how far in and out the camera can zoom. Additionally, zoom_speed
controls how quickly zooming happens when the input is triggered.
Next, let’s define the rotation_speed variable:

@export_group("Rotation")
@export var rotation_speed = 120

This variable sets how quickly the camera rotates around the player when the
player rotates or when input is used to turn the camera.
We will use two standard variables to track the current rotation and zoom of
the camera:
var camera_rotation: Vector3
var zoom = 10

Let’s explore this further:
camera_rotation

will store the current rotation angles (in degrees) of

the camera
keeps track of the current zoom value, which we will modify over
time based on player input
zoom

Finally, we need a reference to the actual Camera3D node within this scene
so we can manipulate it:
@onready var camera = $Camera3D

Using @onready ensures that this variable is set once the node is added to
the scene and ready to be used.
In the built-in _ready() function, we will store the initial rotation of the
camera:
func _ready():
camera_rotation = rotation_degrees # Initial rotation

This initializes the camera_rotation variable with the camera’s current
rotation angles so we can update and modify it from a known starting point.
Much like the player, the camera can be moved around the scene. Let’s
create a function to handle the camera input:
func handle_input(delta):
# Rotation
var input := Vector3.ZERO
input.y = Input.get_axis("camera_left", "camera_right")
input.x = Input.get_axis("camera_up", "camera_down")
camera_rotation += input.limit_length(1.0) *
rotation_speed * delta
camera_rotation.x = clamp(camera_rotation.x, -80, -10)
# Zooming
zoom += Input.get_axis("zoom_in", "zoom_out") *
zoom_speed * delta
zoom = clamp(zoom, zoom_maximum, zoom_minimum)

The handle_input(delta) function handles camera rotation and zooming
based on the input from the player. The horizontal and vertical rotation is
stored in the variable called input based on the keys the user is pressing.
Next, the camera rotation is updated based on this input. The input is limited
to a maximum of 1.0 , which we multiply by the rotation_speed variable
and delta to make everything smooth. Finally, we clamp the vertical
rotation to values between -80 and -10 degrees. This is to avoid excessive
tilting.
For zooming, we update the zoom variable based on the player input, which
we then multiply by zoom speed and delta to ensure smooth zooming.
Again, we limit the zoom level between our pre-defined minimum and
maximum zoom values.
Next, the _physics_process function needs to be implemented as follows:

func _physics_process(delta):
# Set position and rotation to targets
self.position = self.position.lerp(target.position,
delta * 4)
rotation_degrees =
rotation_degrees.lerp(camera_rotation, delta * 6)
camera.position = camera.position.lerp(Vector3(0, 0,
zoom), 8 * delta)
handle_input(delta)

Linear interpolation is used again to smoothly move the camera’s position
towards the target (the player).
We multiply by delta * 4 to control the speed of repositioning.
Now the current rotation is moved smoothly towards the desired rotation
using linear interpolation and multiplying delta * 6 for the speed.
To make a smooth zooming effect, we move the camera’s position along the
z axis to match the zoom level. We multiply by delta * 8 to control the
speed.
Finally, we call the handle_input(delta) function, which handles the
player’s input and controls the movements of the camera.
Although we hope that everything will function as expected, we need to test
it, correct it, and test it again. This makes game development an iterative
process in which we make a change, test to see that the change produces the
result that we are expecting and continue in this manner. Therefore, our next
step is to test what we have done so far.

Running tests

Return to the Level 1 scene. Drag the View scene into the level. Drag the
Player scene into the level. Select the View node and drag the Player scene
into the Target property of View , as shown in Figure 8.2 2 :

Figure 8.22 – Setting the player as the target for the camera to follow

Now select the Player node. In Inspector , drag the View scene into the
View property so that the player uses our View scene as the Camera
Controller. This is shown in Figure 8.2 3 :

Figure 8.23 – Setting our View scene as the camera controller for the player

Now run the Level 1 scene and test the game. You can move the player and
the camera around the level!

Summary
In this chapter, we explored how to build and organize scenes for a level. We
started by creating simple scenes using StaticBody3D , MeshInstance3D ,
and CollisionShape3D nodes to represent objects in the game world.
Next, we designed a Player scene with a script to control movement and
added a separate View scene featuring a Camera3D node that players can
control. Finally, we brought everything together by assembling a complex
level scene, combining all our individual scene components.

In the next chapter, we will add hazards and collectibles.

Join our community on
Discord
Join our community’s Discord space for discussions with the author and
other readers:
https://packt.link/godot-4-game-dev

OceanofPDF.com

9

Creating a 3D Mini-Game in Godot
– Part 2
Mastering game mechanics and refining player experience are essential steps in creating
engaging levels. In this chapter, we’ll take a deeper dive into designing interactive and dynamic
elements that enhance gameplay and polish the overall feel of your level. You’ll learn how to
create collectible power-ups that grant temporary abilities, introduce obstacles to challenge the
player, and add visual and audio effects that bring the environment to life.
Through practical activities, you will implement a collectible that temporarily boosts the player’s
jump height, enabling them to reach new platforms. You will design a cannon that shoots
cannonballs, providing an exciting challenge for the player to avoid. Finally, you will polish the
level by adding audio feedback for actions, background music for atmosphere, and visual effects
such as moving clouds to create a more immersive experience.
In this chapter, we’re going to cover the following main topics:
Exploring collectibles
Introducing obstacles
Completing our level
Polishing our level
By the end of this chapter, you’ll have a fully playable and visually appealing level with
mechanics that balance challenge and reward, preparing you to tackle even more complex
designs in the future.

Technical requirements
This chapter’s code files are available here in the book’s GitHub repository:
https://github.com/PacktPublishing/Godot-4-forBeginners/tree/main/ch9
The game assets used in this project are released under a Creative Commons Zero ( CC0 )
license by Essssam. Essssam has allowed us to distribute, remix, adapt, and build upon the
material in any medium or format, even for commercial purposes.

They can be found here: https://essssam.itch.io/3d-leap-land
Visit this link to check out the video of the code being run: https://packt.link/SDDNS

Exploring collectibles
Collectibles are a way of adding an objective to a level. By spreading them out, we can
encourage the player and reward them for their exploration. Collectibles can also give the player
new abilities (either temporary or permanent) or simply add to their score. They could be
collected just for fun or as a requirement to complete the level. We will add some Gems to our
level for the player to collect.

Creating the Gem scene
Now that we understand the role of collectibles, let’s build our first one—a Gem—using a
dedicated scene in Godot:
1. Create a new scene with Node3D node as the root.
2. Rename this Gem . Collectibles in 3D work in a similar way to 2D. In the 2D example, we
used Area2D node with CollisionShape2D node to detect when the CharacterBody2D
node entered the area of the Strawberry node. In 3D, we’ll do the same using Area3D node
with CollisionShape3D node , which allows us to detect when the CharacterBody3D node
(the player) enters the area of the Gem.
3. Add an Area3D node as a child of Gem .
4. Then add a MeshInstance3D node so that we can have a visual model of the Gem itself.
Use the gem.obj file as the mesh in the Mesh property of MeshInstance3D node . This is
very similar to adding a texture to a sprite in 2D. Remember to drag the palette.png
texture file onto the Gem mesh in the scene to give it color.
5. Finally, add a CollisionShape3D node as a child of Area3D . For the Shape property, it is
simplest just to contain the Gem in a BoxShape3D . All this is shown in Figure 9.1 :

Figure 9.1 – Setting up the components of the Gem scene

As shown in Figure 9.1 , the Gem can detect when something enters its area. However, we will
need to program it to react in the way we intend it to. To do this, we will add a script to the Gem.

Adding the Gem script
You should ask yourself what you want the Gem to do when the player collects it. In our 2D
game, we required the player to collect all the strawberries to complete the level. In this game,
the Gem will temporarily increase the jump height of the player so that they can reach the highest
platform, which will be where the checkpoint flag is.
With the purpose of our Gem defined, let’s set it up as a temporary power-up that boosts the
player’s jump height:
1. Begin by attaching a new script to the Gem node.
2. Select the Area3D node and connect the body_entered signal as shown in Figure 9.2 :

Figure 9.2 – Connect the body_entered signal of the Area3D node

3. We want to check if the body that entered the Gems’ area is the player. To do this, we first
need to create a group called player and add the player to it.
4. Return to the Player scene. In the Inspector , click on Node , then click on Groups . Click
on + and add a group called player . Make it a Global group. This is demonstrated in
Figure 9.3 as follows:

Figure 9.3 – Creating the player group

5. Once you have created the global player group, as shown in Figure 9.3 , you will notice
that the Player scene is now part of that group because the checkbox for the player group is
checked.
6. Because we only want to increase the player’s jump height temporarily, we will need to add
a timer to the player to act as a cooldown mechanism. In the Player scene, add a Timer
node as a child. Rename it to Jump_cooldown_timer , as shown in Figure 9.4 :

Figure 9.4 – Adding a timer to the player to make jump strength wear off

7. When the player collects the Gem, we will start the timer. If the timer is running, the player
can jump higher, but once the timer times out, we return the jump strength to the starting
value. In Inspector , set the timer to One Shot and set Wait Time to 3 seconds, as shown
in Figure 9.5 :

Figure 9.5 – Setting the jump power-up to last 3 seconds

8. As can be seen in Figure 9.5 , Wait Time represents the duration of the boosted jump. If
you want the jump power-up to last longer, simply increase this value.

9. Next, connect the timeout() signal of Timer as shown in Figure 9.6 :

Figure 9.6 – Connecting the timeout signal for the timer

10. Once you have connected the timeout() signal of the timer to the Gem script as shown in
Figure 9.6 , add the following code:
Add a new variable on line 23 called default_jump_strength and set its value to 7 :
var default_jump_strength = 7

Now, code the timeout function as shown:
func _on_jump_cooldown_timer_timeout():
jump_strength = default_jump_strength

This code will reset the jump strength to the default value once the timer has reached the
duration ( wait time ).

Quick tip : Enhance your coding experience with the AI Code
Explainer and Quick Copy features. Open this book in the next-gen Packt
Reader. Click the Copy button ( 1 ) to quickly copy code into your coding
environment, or click the Explain button ( 2 ) to get the AI assistant to
explain a block of code to you.

The next-gen Packt Reader is included for free with the purchase of
this book. Scan the QR code OR go to packtpub.com/unlock , then
use the search bar to find this book by name. Double-check the edition
shown to make sure you get the right one.

11. Before we leave the Player script, we should add a reference variable for the timer so that
we can start it from the Gem scene. Underneath the onready variable for MeshInstance3D
, add one for the timer, as shown here:
@onready var model = $MeshInstance3D
@onready var jump_cooldown_timer = $Jump_cooldown_timer

12. In the Player script, add a variable for the power-up jump strength:
var powerup_jump_strength = 10

Now add a function to increase the jump strength and start the timer when the Gem is
collected:
func on_gem_collected():
jump_cooldown_timer.start()
jump_strength = powerup_jump_strength

13. The Player scene is now part of the player group. It also has a timer set up to time the
duration of the increased jump strength, and we have provided access to the timer. Now
return to the Gem scene to complete the body_entered() function:
func _on_area_3d_body_entered(body):
if body.is_in_group("player"):

body.on_gem_collected()
queue_free()

This code will be triggered when a body enters the area of the Gem. If that body is part of
the player group, the body ( player ) will increase jump_strength to 10 . The
jump_cool_down timer of the body will start and run until it times out, queue_free()
ensures that the Gem will be removed from the scene.
14. Instantiate a Gem scene into the Level scene (in the Level scene, hit C trl + S hift + A , then
choose the Gem scene) and test the player can now reach the highest platform once they
have collected the Gem. You can now place Gems strategically around the level.
The player has a reward in the form of Gems, which add strength to the jumps. Now we will add
an obstacle to the level so that the rewards are not so easy to get.

Introducing obstacles
Obstacles introduce challenge and excitement to a level by creating hazards that the player must
navigate around or overcome. They encourage players to strategize, improve their skills, and stay
engaged as they progress through the game. Obstacles can take many forms, such as moving
platforms, spikes, or environmental traps, and can add variety to the gameplay experience. In this
section, we’ll add some obstacles to our level to test the player’s agility and timing, creating a
more dynamic and rewarding experience.

Creating the Cannon scene
A fun and dynamic obstacle to add to the level is a cannon that regularly fires a bullet, which the
player will have to avoid before reaching the checkpoint. The cannon is static and purely
decorative or set dressing. However, the bullet will move from the cannon, across the level. Set
up the Cannon scene by following the steps here:
1. Create a new scene with Node3D node as the root. Rename this to Cannon .
2. Add a StaticBody3D node as a child.
3. Add a MeshInstance3D node and use cannon.obj for the Mesh property.
4. Remember to drag palette.png to texture the cannon object.
5. Add a CollisionShape3D node and use a New BoxShape3D property to enclose the
cannon.
6. Add a Timer node and rename it to Cannonball_timer .

7. Add a Marker3D node and place it at the mouth/opening of the cannon: x position 0.0 , y
position 0.5 , and z position –1.0 .
Following these steps, the Cannon scene tree should look like the one shown in Figure 9.7 :

Figure 9.7 – Scene tree for the Cannon scene

The components in Figure 9.7 will be used to make the cannon functional. It is a static body
because it will not move, but the player can jump onto it and stand on it. The cannonball timer
will regularly spawn cannonballs, which move across the level. The marker is used to pinpoint
the position at which the cannonballs should appear.
We want the cannon to shoot a ball every three seconds. To do this, adjust the settings of the
Cannonball_timer node, as shown in Figure 9.8 :

Figure 9.8 – Settings for the cannonball timer

With the settings shown in Figure 9.8 , the cannon will automatically fire a ball every three
seconds. Adjust Wait Time if you want to change the firing rate.
The cannon is now ready for scripting; however, we still need a ball or bullet for it to fire. We
shall now prepare the Ball scene so that there is a projectile to launch from the cannon.

Creating the Ball scene
Create a new scene and use a CharacterBody3D node as the root. Rename it to Ball .
It’s important to note that we would usually use an Area3D node for a projectile, since this
allows us to detect collisions and trigger events such as applying damage or destroying the
projectile on impact. However, in our game, the cannonball is meant to act only as a physical
obstacle—it won’t damage the player but should simply push them if they come into contact.
Follow these steps to complete the Ball scene:
1. You have already created a new scene with CharacterBody3D node as the root.
2. You have renamed the root node to Ball .
3. Add a MeshInstance3D node as a child and use Bullet.obj as the Mesh property.
4. Apply palette.png as the texture of the bullet object.
5. Add a CollisionShape3D node and surround the bullet with a new CapsuleShape3D .
6. Rotate the CapsuleShape3D on the x axis and resize it to neatly fit the model.
7. Add a Timer node and rename it to Destroy_timer .
Following these steps, the Ball scene tree should look like Figure 9.9 :

Figure 9.9 – Components of the Ball scene

An important component seen in Figure 9.9 is the Destroy_timer node for the ball. It represents
the lifetime of the ball. Once it times out, we destroy the ball and remove the scene from the
level. Adjust the settings of the timer to match those shown in Figure 9.10 :

Figure 9.10 – Settings for the timer to destroy the ball

Figure 9.10 sets the lifetime of the ball to 5 seconds; the timer auto-starts but only runs once for
each ball. The ball needs to travel across the level and be destroyed. To do that, we will write a
script.

Writing the Ball script
A cannon isn’t much use without cannonballs—so let’s bring them to life with a script that
handles their movement and collisions. Follow these steps:
1. Attach a script to the Ball node. Set a speed variable and give it the value 3 . This is an
export variable so that you can change this value while testing the game, so that you can
find a value that suits your game best:
@export var speed = 3

2. In the process function, we will move the ball along the z axis. This is the depth axis and
represents the ball moving toward or away from us into or out of the screen. To move the
ball smoothly, we will change the position by multiplying speed by delta , as follows:
func _process(delta):
position.z -= speed * delta

3. Connect the timeout() signal of Destroy_timer and in it code the ball to be destroyed once
it has reached the wait time of the timer:
func _on_destroy_timer_timeout():
queue_free()

With this script, the cannonball can do the two tasks we wanted it to. It can move across the
level, and it is destroyed after a certain time. Now script the cannon to spawn cannonballs.

Writing the Cannon script
To write the Cannon script, first, we’ll attach a script to the Cannon node. Throughout the book,
I have used @onready var for variables that should be initialized when the scene is first created.
This time, I am going to show you an alternative to this shortcut by using the _ready function to
initialize variables. Let’s see this here:
1. We are going to instance the Ball scene (spawn a ball), and so we need a scene variable to
store a reference to the Ball scene. We also need a variable to represent the ball itself (the
ball variable), which will be an instance of the scene. We also need a reference variable
(the marker variable) to the Marker3D node so that we can position the ball to appear
where the invisible marker is:
var ball_scene
var ball_instance
var marker

2. None of the variables in the preceding code have been initialized, which is to say that they
do not have starting values. We will assign values to them in the _ready() function:
# Called when the node is added to the scene tree
func _ready():
# Load (preload) the Ball scene so we can create a new instance of it
ball_scene = preload("res://Assets/Scenes/ball.tscn")
# Load (preload) the Smoke Particle scene for visual effects
particles = preload("res://Assets/Scenes/smoke.tscn")
# Create an instance of the Ball from the preloaded scene
ball_instance = ball_scene.instantiate()
# Get a reference to the Marker3D node in the scene
marker = $Marker3D
# Set the Ball's position to the same location as the Marker3D
ball_instance.position = marker.position
# Add the ball instance to the current scene as a child
add_child(ball_instance)

The ready function is called once when the cannon is added to the scene to set the initial
state of the cannon. Let’s go into the line-by-line explanation of the code here:
The cannonball scene is loaded from the specified path, and we store it in the scene
variable. The preload keyword ensures the scene is ready to use when the game runs
and offers a performance improvement over the load function when using GDScript.
An instance of the Ball scene (a copy of the original scene) is stored in the ball
variable.
A reference to the Marker3D node is stored in the marker variable.
The position of the newly created cannonball is set to match the position of marker .
Finally, the ball instance is added to the Cannon node hierarchy (scene tree),
making it visible and active in the scene.
3. For the cannon to fire cannonballs at a regular rate, we need to use Cannonball_timer .
Connect the timeout() signal and add the code that follows:
func _on_cannonball_timer_timeout():
ball = scene.instantiate()
ball.position = marker.position
add_child(ball)

Because we set the Wait Time to 3 seconds, the code in the timeout() function will run
every 3 seconds. A new instance of a cannonball will be created at the position of marker ,
and the scene will be added to the hierarchy of the Cannon scene. This timer ensures that a
ball is fired repeatedly from the cannon.
4. Instantiate the Cannon scene in the Level scene and test that everything works as you
expect it to.
The level now has collectibles and obstacles. We should focus now on the win condition or
objective. For this, we will place a flag that the user must reach to complete the level.

Completing our level
To complete the level, the player must reach the flag . The flag is on the highest platform, and the
only way to reach it is by getting the Gem to power up the player’s jump, avoiding the
cannonballs, and racing to the flag.
These are all design decisions, and the assets in the level allow us to consider different options.
We could have required the player to obtain a key to unlock the gates to reach the flag. This is

why game development is so rewarding! Now we should make a scene for the flag.

Creating the Flag scene
Before creating the Flag scene, it would be helpful to decide what a flag should do, as this will
help us determine which nodes to use. In our simple case, the only thing the flag needs to do is
quit the game when the player touches it. Of course, if we were making more levels, we could
just as easily switch levels. Knowing this, an Area3D node is the best option for the flag. Follow
these steps to set it up:
1. Create a new scene using Area3D as the root node.
2. Rename it Flag .
3. Add a MeshInstance3D node and use flag.obj as the Mesh property.
4. Apply palette.png to texture the flag.
5. Add CollisionShape3D node as a child of the flag.
6. Enclose the flag with a New BoxShape3D .
After following the steps, your Flag scene hierarchy will look like the one shown in Figure
9.11 :

Figure 9.11 – The Flag scene hierarchy

7. Once again, we are utilizing the versatility of the Area3D node to detect when a
CharacterBody node, such as the player, enters its space. Add a script to the Flag node and
save it as flag.gd .
8. Now connect the _on_body_entered signal of the Flag node and then code it as follows:
extends Area3D
func _on_body_entered(body):
if body.is_in_group("player"):
get_tree().quit()

This simple code tests whether the body that entered the space of the flag was in the player
group. If it is, we exit the game.

Changing scenes
It is beyond the scope of this book to create multiple levels; however, if you had created another
level and wanted to switch to it once the player reaches the flag, it is quite simple to do so.
Firstly, you would need to have your second level created and saved as a scene, such as
level_2.tscn

. Save the path to the scene file in a variable and then use the built-in

get_tree.change_scene_to_file()

function to switch to the next scene. This is shown in the

code here:
extends Area3D
func _on_body_entered(body):
if body.is_in_group("player"):
var next_scene_file =
"res://scenes/level_2.tscn"
get_tree().change_scene_to_file(next_scene_file)

This code checks whether the player has entered a specific area. If so, it loads the next level of
the game. It uses groups to ensure that only the player triggers the action. It uses the scene path
to determine what level to load. This is explained line by line here:
When a body enters the area of the flag
The code checks whether that body is in the "player" group
Store the path to the level 2 scene file in a variable called next_scene
Use the change_scene_to_file method to change to the scene saved
Now that the player has a power-up to collect, an obstacle to avoid, and an objective to reach, the
level is minimally playable. Let’s now work on adding polish to the level in the form of things
such as particles, movement, and color.

Polishing our level
Creating a functional level is an important first step in game development, but making it visually
appealing and engaging for players requires an extra layer of effort—this is where level polish
comes in.
Polishing a level means enhancing its look and feel with elements such as dynamic visuals,
smooth animations, and vibrant effects. These additions not only make your game more
immersive but also help convey mood, add personality, and make gameplay more satisfying.

In this section, we’ll explore how to add movement, color, and particle effects to breathe life into
your level, turning it from a basic design into an experience that players will enjoy.
Godot provides a node called WorldEnviornment , which is used to set the default environment
properties for the entire scene, including post-processing effects, lighting, and background
settings.
In the Level 1 scene, add a WorldEnvironment node. In Inspector , find the Environment
property and choose New Environment . This is shown in Figure 9.12 as follows:

Figure 9.12 – Adding a new environment to the world

Once we have loaded a new environment, as shown in Figure 9.12 , we now have access to many
more properties and settings.

Setting the background color
Change the background color of the level to sky blue by clicking on Environment , choosing
Background , then Custom Color , and finding sky blue. This is shown in Figure 9.13 :

Figure 9.13 – Setting a custom background color for the level

Now that we have added background color to the level, as shown in Figure 9.13 , we should add
some smoke effects to the cannon after each shot fired.

Adding particle effects
Particle effects are a powerful tool in game development for adding visual flair and enhancing
the atmosphere of your game. They can simulate various natural phenomena such as fire, smoke,
rain, or explosions, as well as creating abstract effects such as sparkles, trails, or magical glows.
By incorporating particle effects, you can make your game feel more dynamic and engaging,
helping players better connect with the world you’ve created. In this section, we explore how to
create and customize particle effects to bring your scenes to life.

Creating the smoke scene
As mentioned earlier, we are going to create a little puff of smoke that rises into the sky after
each cannon shot. We will make use of one of the cloud models, which we will scale down and
rotate. Follow these steps to create the smoke scene:
1. Create a new scene using CPUParticles3D as the root node.
2. Rename the node to Smoke .
3. Expand the Drawing section and find the Mesh property.
4. Drag the cloud_1.obj file into the Mesh property. This is shown in Figure 9.14 :

Figure 9.14 – Using one of the clouds as Mesh to represent smoke

5. Remember to texture the mesh by applying the palette.png texture.
6. Expand the Gravity section and make the y value positive. Once you do this, the smoke
rises.
7. Reduce the Amount property to 1 , so that a puff of smoke will rise from the cannon.
8. Set the One Shot property to On . This is shown in Figure 9.15 :

Figure 9.15 – Changing the amount and setting One Shot to On

9. Orient the cloud vertically by expanding the Transform section of Node3D and rotating the
z axis by 90 degrees. This is shown in Figure 9.16 :

Figure 9.16 – Rotating the model on the z axis to make it vertical

10. Adjust the scale of the cloud over time, from 0 to full size ( 1 ). Do this by expanding the
Scale section and setting Scale Amount Minimum to 0 and Scale Amount Maximum to
1

.

11. Create a Scale Amount Curve by clicking on New Curve and adjusting the scale over time,
as shown in Figure 9.17 :

Figure 9.17 – Setting min, max, and scale curve

This sets the scale from 0 to 1; however, I recommend experimenting with the curve values
until you find a result that you are happy with.
The Smoke scene is complete and ready to be instanced in the Cannon script. When we
instance a cannonball from within the Cannon script, we should instance the smoke just
afterward. Now, let’s return to the Cannon script.

12. Add two new global variables called particles (to reference the particles scene file) and
smoke

(to be an instance of the scene):

extends Node3D
var ball_scene
var ball_instance
var marker
var particles
var smoke

13. Adapt the _ready function so that we also preload the smoke particles scene. The new lines
are commented in the following code. Create an instance of the smoke, position it at the
marker, make it a child of the Cannon scene, and set the emitting property to true :
func _ready():
scene = preload("res://scenes/ball.tscn")
particles = preload("res://scenes/smoke.tscn")
ball = scene.instantiate()
# Create an instance of the smoke particles
smoke = particles.instantiate()
marker = $Marker3D
ball.position = marker.position
# Also place the smoke effect at the Marker3D position
smoke.position = marker.position
add_child(ball)
# Add the smoke effect to the current scene as a child
add_child(smoke)
# Start the smoke particle effect so it emits immediately
smoke.emitting = true

14. Finally, we must create new instances in the timeout function so that a puff of smoke
appears each time the cannon fires:
func _on_cannonball_timer_timeout():
ball_instance = ball_scene.instantiate()
smoke = particles.instantiate()
smoke.position = marker.position
Ball_instance.position = marker.position
add_child(ball_instance)
add_child(smoke)
smoke.emitting = true

With these adaptations to the script for the cannon, you can test the level again. You will notice
now that each time a cannonball is fired, two little clouds of smoke trail into the air. This is a
simple way to add some dynamism to the level.
Another way to make a level more engaging is to add audio, such as sound effects and
background music. In the next section, we will learn how to work with audio.

Adding audio to our level
It would be fun if the player character made a noise when it jumped. Let’s add some audio!
1. To do this, we need to record a sound ourselves or find one that is in the public domain with
a Creative Commons license. Here’s one we can use for this project:
https://opengameart.org/content/jump-sound-16bit .
2. Download the jump.wav file. In FileSystem , go to the assets folder, and create a
subfolder called audio . Drop the sound file in there as shown in Figure 9.18 :

Figure 9.18 – Adding the jump.wav file to our audio folder

3. Open the Player scene and add an AudioStreamPlayer node as a child. In the Stream
property, drag and drop the audio file. Leave the rest of the properties unchanged. This is
shown in Figure 9.19 :

Figure 9.19 – Giving AudioStreamPlayer a sound file to play

4. Open the Player script and add a reference variable for AudioStreamPlayer to your list of
onready

variables:

@onready var model = $MeshInstance3D
@onready var jump_cooldown_timer = $Jump_cooldown_timer
@onready var audio_stream_player = $AudioStreamPlayer

5. We only want to play the jump sound effect when the player jumps. To do this, we tell
AudioStreamPlayer to play the file when the jump function runs. Add that request as the
first line in the jump function:

func jump():
audio_stream_player.play()

6. That is all that is required to play a sound effect when the player jumps.
But what if we wanted to play an effect when the player lands?
1. Grab another CC0-licensed sound effect from Open Game Art (
https://opengameart.org/content/jump-landing-sound ) and add it to
the audio folder.
2. To play the right sound at the right time, the code must be adjusted to first load the
corresponding audio file into AudioStreamPlayer before attempting to play it.
3. Add another line as the first line in the jump function to first load the file before playing it:
func jump():
audio_stream_player.stream =
preload("res://assets/audio/jump.wav")
audio_stream_player.play()

4. Similarly, when the player lands, we must load the corresponding audio file and then play it.
Do so by adding these lines after scaling the player when it lands, in the handle_respawn()
function:
if is_on_floor() and gravity > 2 and !previously_floored:
model.scale = Vector3(1.25, 0.75, 1.25)
audio_stream_player.stream =
preload("res://assets/audio/jumpland.wav")
audio_stream_player.play()

5. Using the technique in the code, we ensured that we loaded the correct audio file into the
player before we played it. The next step is to add background music to the level. Start by
downloading the background music (
https://opengameart.org/content/background-music-2-the-icecaves ) and adding it to the audio folder.
6. This time, we will add an AudioStreamPlayer node to the Level 1 scene. We will drag and
drop the Background Music 2.ogg file into the Stream property. Set the Autoplay property
to On . This is shown in Figure 9.20 :

Figure 9.20 – Setting the Autoplay property of the Stream player

7. There is one more step, and that is to ensure that the track is looping. Expand the
Parameters section and turn on looping as shown in Figure 9.21 :

Figure 9.21 – Turning looping on for the background music

As shown in Figure 9.21 , by turning on looping, we can have a background music track that
plays repeatedly in the level.
In game design, repetitive movement is often used to create dynamic and lifelike effects, such as
clouds drifting across the sky, waves lapping at the shore, or power-ups slowly rotating or
hovering up and down. This type of movement is typically achieved by adjusting an object’s
properties (such as position, size, or angle) back and forth in a smooth and natural way using the

oscillations of a sine wave. In our final section, we will use the sine function to move our
clouds slowly back and forth in our level.

Using the sine function
As mentioned earlier, rather than having the clouds sitting still in the sky, we will drift them back
and forth using a sine wave . Return to the Cloud scene and attach a script to the root node (
Cloud ).
The entire code to make the clouds drift is given here and then explained line by line afterward:
extends Node3D
@onready var mesh_instance_3d: MeshInstance3D = $MeshInstance3D
var time: float
func _process(delta):
time += delta
mesh_instance_3d.position =
vector3(get_sine(),get_sine(),get_sine())
func get_sine():
return sin(time * 0.5) * 0.5

Let’s break down this code here for a better understanding:
A variable called time is declared as a float to track the elapsed time. It is used to calculate
the sine wave for movement.
A reference is created for the StaticBody3D node of the cloud since this is essentially the
cloud object that we will be moving.
In the process function, we increase the time variable for each frame. This ensures that
the sine wave animation progresses smoothly over time.
Next, update the position property of the cloud ( StaticBody3D ) in every frame.
The x , y , and z coordinates are set using the get_sine() function, which produces a
smooth oscillating value.
The get_sine() function calculates a smooth oscillation based on the time variable.
time * 0.5

is the frequency of the wave, and this slows down the oscillation.

Multiplying the result by 0.5 outside the brackets is the amplitude of the wave. Here, we
are reducing it, making the movement less extreme.
The entire result is returned for use in updating the position in the transform property.
In essence, this script creates a smooth, oscillating movement for the cloud. The sine wave makes
the movement more natural.

Summary
In this chapter, you transformed your level into a dynamic and engaging experience by adding
key gameplay elements and refining its overall presentation. You created a collectible power-up
that temporarily boosted the player’s jump height, allowing them to access higher platforms and
complete the level. We introduced a cannon obstacle, which added a layer of challenge as the
player had to avoid its cannonballs.
To complete the level, you implemented a flag mechanic, giving the player a clear and satisfying
objective. Finally, you polished the level by adding sound effects for feedback, background
music for atmosphere, and moving clouds for visual appeal.
At the end of this chapter, you’ve not only developed the essential mechanics of a fun and
interactive level but also enhanced its presentation, making it more immersive and enjoyable for
players. These skills will serve as a solid foundation for creating even more intricate and polished
levels in the future.

Unlock this book’s
exclusive benefits now
Scan this QR code or go to
packtpub.com/unlock , then search this book
by name.

Note: Keep your purchase invoice ready before you
start.

OceanofPDF.com

10
Adding Game Juice
Game development isn’t just about mechanics and level design—it’s also
about how the game feels to play. This is where game juice comes in. Game
juice refers to all the little enhancements that make a game more satisfying
and responsive, from visual effects and sound design to UI feedback and
animations. Adding game juice can turn a basic game into a polished,
engaging experience that players love.
In this chapter, we’ll explore what game juice is and why it’s important.
You’ll learn how to make your game feel more polished and responsive by
adding dynamic effects that provide feedback to the player. We’ll implement
several juicy elements to enhance the experience: a confetti cannon that
bursts when the player reaches a checkpoint, a heads-up display ( HUD )based health bar where hearts gray out as health decreases, and immersive
background audio and sound effects that bring the level to life.
In this chapter, we’re going to cover the following main topics:
Understanding game juice
Implementing a health bar HUD
Adding a hit animation
Creating a confetti cannon effect
Adding audio and sound effects

By the end of this chapter, you’ll understand how small changes can
dramatically improve the feel of your game. You’ll have practical experience
in implementing visual and audio feedback that enhances player immersion,
making your game more enjoyable and satisfying to play.
Let’s begin to give your game that extra polish it deserves!

Technical requirements
By this point in the book, you should know how to do the following:
Create nodes and scenes (see Chapter 2 )
Work through the Pixel Adventure project from Chapter 7
You should also know about variables and functions (see Chapter 8 ) for
use in GDScript.
This chapter’s code files are available here in the book’s GitHub repository:
https://github.com/PacktPublishing/Godot-4-forBeginners/tree/main/ch10
Visit this link to check out the video of the code being run:
https://packt.link/W1K5s

Understanding game juice
When a game feels good to play, we now know that it’s usually thanks to
something called game juice . This refers to small but impactful
enhancements—such as subtle animations, particle effects, or sound design
—that make the gameplay more responsive, satisfying, and polished.

Juice doesn’t change the mechanics of the game, but it transforms how the
player experiences them. Hence, adding juice to a game involves taking a
working game and adding layers of satisfaction to improve its feel. For the
player, satisfaction is created by the senses, and so we need to feed those
senses. Creating visual effects and adding audio will enhance the player’s
experience. You can imagine this as if you are squeezing every drop of juice
out of a delicious orange.
Some examples of using game juice to improve the player experience are the
following:
A standard jump can feel more impactful with squash and stretch
animation
Collecting a coin feels more rewarding with a flash effect and a
satisfying sound
Taking damage in combat is more engaging with screen shake and a
brief pause for impact
In the next section, we’ll explore the foundational aspects of juicing.

Foundations of juicing:
animation and audio
This section will introduce you to the foundational techniques of juicing,
which we’ll soon apply in practical ways, such as a hit animation, health bar
HUD, confetti cannon, and audio feedback. These basics are just as useful in
3D as they are in 2D, and they’ll elevate your game no matter the genre or
perspective.

Visual feedback (animation and
particle effects)
Visual feedback plays a key role in making actions feel impactful. Two
common techniques used in game juicing are as follows:
Squash and stretch : Slightly deforming your character’s scale when
they land, jump, or change direction gives them a bouncy, lively
appearance. This animation technique makes movement feel more
expressive.
Particle effects : Adding dust trails when the player runs or jumps
makes movement more dynamic and grounded. Even small bursts of
particles can communicate energy and motion clearly.
You’ll soon be implementing these ideas in your own game, including the
following:
A hit animation that makes enemies react visually to player attacks
A confetti cannon that celebrates success with an explosion of particles

Audio feedback (music and sound
effects)
Audio is just as important as visuals when it comes to creating a juicy
experience. It reinforces player actions, adds personality, and builds
atmosphere. Consider the following:
Sound effects : A satisfying squish when landing or a crunchy impact
when hitting enemies can bring a scene to life
Background music : A well-chosen track can set the emotional tone of
your level, guiding how players feel as they explore

We’ll be exploring how to implement both ambient music and character
sound effects later in this chapter.

Implementing a health bar
HUD
A common user interface ( UI ) element in a game that visually represents
the player’s health is a health bar as part of the HUD. Its purpose is to
provide immediate feedback on how much damage the player has taken and
how close they are to death.
Three examples of how health is displayed to the user are shown in Figure
10.1 :

Figure 10.1 – Three different ways to display health in a game

In the subsequent section, we’ll implement a heart-based health system,
where each heart represents a portion of the player’s health, and hearts
become grayed out as damage is taken. This approach makes the information
easy to read at a glance while adding a bit of visual appeal to the UI.

Developing a heart-based health
system
To implement our heart-based health system, we’ll set up the UI, write the
logic to update the hearts based on the player’s health, and ensure the system
reacts dynamically as damage is done. Let’s walk through the steps to bring
it to life.
Let’s begin by opening the Pixel Adventure Godot project and adding a
new scene with an AnimatedSprite2D node as the root node. Rename the
node to HUD and save the scene as hud.tscn , as shown in Figure 10.2 :

Figure 10.2 – The HUD scene to represent player life

We are going to use a simple technique to indicate the loss of health. The
health bar will begin with three full red hearts. Each time the player is
injured, we will change one of the hearts from red to gray.
You can use free and open source image editing software, such as
LibreSprite ( https://libresprite.github.io/#!/ ), to draw
your own hearts and create four frames representing the changing health, as I
have done in Figure 10.3 :

Figure 10.3 – Frames of hearts representing the changing health of the player

Resources
If you don’t feel comfortable drawing your own hearts, you
can use the one created by Shlok Gupta. However, you will
still need to modify it in order to have hearts at different
levels of health. It is available on their Itch page here:
https://gamedevshlok.itch.io/heartpack .
When the images of your hearts are ready, go to the Sprite Frames property
of the AnimatedSprite2D node named HUD , and select New
SpriteFrames , as shown in Figure 10.4 :

Figure 10.4 – New SpriteFrames for the AnimatedSprite2D node

Now, click on the word SpriteFrames in the property to open the
Animation Frames window. Rename the default animation to idle and add
the four frames, as shown in Figure 10.5 :

Figure 10.5 – The idle animation for the health bar has four frames for the health total

As you can see in Figure 10.5 , whenever the player loses health, we will
change the animation frames to match. We don’t need to add a script to the

health bar; all we need is a reference to it in the script attached to
level1.tscn

.

In the Level1 scene, drag your newly created hud.tscn into your level and
place it toward the top left, as shown in Figure 10.6 :

Figure 10.6 – A good spot for the HUD

Once you have placed the HUD in the scene, your scene tree for Level1
should include the HUD scene and look like the scene hierarchy shown in
Figure 10.7 :

Figure 10.7 – The scene hierarchy for level 1

With the scene in place as shown in Figure 10.7 , it is time to open the script
attached to Level1 and make some additions so that the HUD will update the
hearts according to how much health the player has.

Updating the HUD in the Level
script
Now that our heart-based health system is in place, we need to make sure the
player’s current health is reflected on the screen. To do this, we’ll update the
HUD from the Level script. The HUD will visually change depending on
how many hearts the player has left, graying out hearts as damage is taken.
We’ll begin by adding an @onready variable to reference the HUD scene. In
the _process() function, we will update the HUD’s frame property to match

the player’s current health. This determines how many hearts are displayed
as active ( red ) versus inactive ( gray ). For example, if the player has three
hearts, we’ll set the HUD frame to 3 to show three red hearts.
Here’s the updated Level script:
extends Node2D
@onready var update_health_hud = $HUD
@onready var player = $Player
@onready var strawberries = $Collectibles
func _ready():
player.level_strawberries = strawberries.get_child_count()
func _process(delta):
update_health_hud.frame = player.get_hearts()

Let’s break down the code to understand it better:
update_hud

stores a reference to the HUD node so we can easily

access and update it.
In _process() , which runs every frame, we set the HUD’s frame to
reflect the player’s current number of hearts. This means the HUD will
visually update in real time as the player gains or loses health.
The line player.get_hearts() relies on a new function we need to create
inside the Player script. This function simply returns the current number of
hearts the player has:
func get_hearts():
return hearts

To support this, add a new variable at the top of the Player script to store
the player’s health:

var hearts = 3

The question is: why do we add this variable?
The hearts variable tracks how much health the player has. We initialize it
to 3 , meaning the player starts with full health. As the player takes damage,
this value will decrease.
Next, let’s create a hurt() function to reduce the player’s health when they
are injured:
func hurt():
hearts -= 1
if hearts <= 0:
death()

This function subtracts one heart whenever the player is hurt. If hearts
reaches 0 , we trigger the death() function, which we’ll now create in the
following code:
func death():
#shoot the player upward upon death
velocity.y = -600
#disable collisions so the player falls through the level
set_collision_mask_value(2, false)
set_collision_mask_value(3, false)

Here’s a breakdown of the preceding code:
velocity.y = -600

shoots the player upward when they die, adding a

bit of juice to make the death feel more dramatic
We disable collisions with the environment by turning off the level’s
collision layers, allowing the player to fall off the screen

Another bit of game juice that provides great visual feedback to the player—
helping them quickly recognize when they’ve taken damage—is a hit flash
effect . This common technique briefly changes the player’s appearance
(often to white or red ) to signal that they’ve been hurt, making the
experience feel more responsive and polished.

Adding a hit animation
In this section, we’ll create a simple animation that causes the player to flash
white for a short time when they’re injured. This effect not only makes the
moment of taking damage more dramatic but also helps the player stay
aware of their current health status, especially in fast-paced moments.
In your file explorer, locate the Pixel Adventure/Main Characters/Ninja
folder (you can download all the assets here:
https://pixelfrog-assets.itch.io/ ) and drag the Hit.png
Frog

file into the Godot FileSystem .
In the Player scene, select the AnimatedSprite2D node and add a new
animation called hit . Now, click on the Add Frames from Sprite Sheet
button and set it to 7 horizontal frames and 1 vertical frame. Then, select
all frames and import them. Set the animation speed to 16 FPS and not
looping. The hit animation will look as it does in Figure 10.8 :

Figure 10.8 – The new hit animation

Quick tip : Need to see a high-resolution version of
this image? Open this book in the next-gen Packt Reader or
view it in the PDF/ePub copy.
The next-gen Packt Reader and a free PDF/ePub
copy of this book are included with your purchase. Scan the
QR code OR visit packtpub.com/unlock , then use
the search bar to find this book by name. Double-check the
edition shown to make sure you get the right one.

To ensure that our animation runs when it needs to, add a helper variable
called isHit to our group of vars at the top of the Player script. It will be
a Boolean, which is set to false by default:
var isHit = false

Now, modify the hurt() function so that isHit is set to true when the
player takes damage:
func hurt():
isHit = true
hearts -= 1
if hearts <= 0:
death()

Now, we can modify our animate() function to include checks on the
number of hearts the player has, as well as whether they have been hit or not:
func animate():
if isHit:
animations.play("hit")
await animations.animation_finished
animations.play("idle") # transition back to idle
return # Prevent further changes this frame
if hearts == 0:
return # Dead, don't animate further
# Stationary player
if velocity.x == 0 and velocity.y == 0:
animations.play("idle")
# Player moving right
elif velocity.x >= 0 and velocity.y == 0:
animations.play("run")
animations.flip_h = false
# Player moving left
elif velocity.x <= 0 and velocity.y == 0:
animations.play("run")
animations.flip_h = true
# Player is falling
elif velocity.y > 0 and !is_wall_sliding:
animations.play("fall")
# Player is jumping (initial jump)
elif velocity.y < 0 and jump_count == 0:
animations.play("jump")
# Player is double-jumping
elif !is_on_floor() and jump_count > 0 and

!is_wall_sliding:
animations.play("double_jump")
# Player is wall sliding on the right
elif is_wall_sliding and
Input.is_action_pressed("ui_right"):
animations.flip_h = false
animations.play("wall_slide")
# Player is wall sliding on the left
elif is_wall_sliding and
Input.is_action_pressed("ui_left"):
animations.flip_h = true
animations.play("wall_slide")

The animate() function is responsible for switching between different
animation states based on the player’s movement, health, and whether
they’ve been hit. Let’s walk through each condition to understand what’s
happening.
First, let’s look at the code for the idle state:
if velocity.x == 0 && velocity.y == 0 && hearts > 0 && isHit ==
animations.play("idle")

If the player is not moving ( velocity.x == 0 and velocity.y == 0 ), still
alive ( hearts > 0 ), and hasn’t just been hit ( isHit == false ), we play
the "idle" animation.
Next, let’s examine the hit state:
elif isHit:
animations.play("hit")

If the player has been hit, we play the "hit" animation to show a reaction.
This usually plays for a short time before reverting to other animations.

This is how we detect running to the right :
elif velocity.x >= 0 && velocity.y == 0 && hearts > 0:
animations.play("run")
animations.flip_h = false

If the player is moving horizontally to the right ( positive x-velocity ),
not moving vertically, and still alive, we play the "run" animation and make
sure the sprite is facing right ( flip_h = false ).
The code for running left is similar:
elif velocity.x <= 0 && velocity.y == 0 && hearts > 0:
animations.play("run")
animations.flip_h = true

This will be the same as the previous condition, but for moving left. We flip
the sprite horizontally ( flip_h = true ) to face the left direction.
Here’s how falling is handled:
elif velocity.y > 0 and !is_wall_sliding && hearts > 0:
animations.play("fall")

If the player is moving downward ( velocity.y > 0 ), not sliding on a wall,
and still alive, we show the "fall" animation.
The jumping logic looks like this:
elif velocity.y < 0 and jump_count == 0 && hearts > 0:
animations.play("jump")

This condition checks whether the player is jumping upward ( velocity.y <
) and it’s their first jump ( jump_count == 0 ), which triggers the "jump"
animation.
0

Here’s the check for double jumping :
elif !is_on_floor() and jump_count > 0 and !is_wall_sliding:
animations.play("double_jump")

If the player is in the air (not on the floor), has used at least one jump, and
isn’t sliding on a wall, we show the "double_jump" animation.
This handles wall sliding on the right:
elif is_wall_sliding and Input.is_action_pressed("ui_right"):
animations.flip_h = false
animations.play("wall_slide")

If the player is sliding on a wall and holding the right movement key, we
play the "wall_slide" animation and face the sprite to the right.
And, finally, this is what we use for wall sliding (left) :
elif is_wall_sliding and Input.is_action_pressed("ui_left"):
animations.flip_h = true animations.play("wall_slide")

It is the same as for wall sliding (right) , but for the left side.
Everything is working almost as we want it to. However, you will notice that
the player gets stuck in the hit animation, and that is because there is no
event that sets the isHit variable back to false . The final step is to return
to the Mushroom scene, select the HurtPlayerZone node, select the Node

tab, then the Signals tab, and connect the body_exited() signal. Code the
signal function as shown here:
func _on_hurt_player_zone_body_exited(body: Node2D):
if body.is_in_group("Player"):
body.isHit = false

To be consistent, we should also call the isHit function from the Mushroom
script:
func _on_hurt_player_zone_body_entered(body):
if "Player" in body.name:
body.hurt()
body.isHit = true

The preceding code ensures that if the body that exited the HurtPlayerZone
Area2D node is part of the group called "Player" , the hit variable is reset
to false . This means that when the player stops colliding with the
Mushroom, the hit animation will also stop.
Now, everything is in place to provide satisfying visual feedback to the user
when they are playing the game to alert them that they are in danger.
Our next step is to add a fun visual effect to the checkpoint flag. We will fire
off a confetti cannon as a small celebration of finishing the level.

Creating a confetti cannon
effect
To reinforce the feeling of achievement and as an extra reward for
completing the level, when the player touches the checkpoint flag, we will

fire some multi-colored confetti from the flagpole. This will take the form of
a particle effect, which we will set up as its own scene. Let’s get started!
We’ll begin by creating a new scene with Node2D as the root node. Rename
the node to Confetti_Cannon , add a GPUParticles2D node as a child, and
rename this to Blue , as this will represent the blue confetti. This is shown
in Figure 10.9 as follows:

Figure 10.9 – The Confetti_Cannon node and confetti particles

Now, select the Blue confetti particles node. In Inspector , find the setting
for Process Material and then add New ParticleProcessMaterial , as
shown in Figure 10.10 :

Figure 10.10 – Creating a new particle process material

Next, click on ParticleProcessMaterial (the word) to expand the menu of
settings for the particle.
The confetti should spin (rotate) as it flies, but it shouldn’t move away from
the player. Enable Rotate Y and Disable Z in the Particle Flags settings, as
shown in Figure 10.11 :

Figure 10.11 – Particle Flags settings

The confetti should move in an arc to mimic the way confetti behaves in real
life. To achieve this, adjust the angle at which the confetti spawns. You can
adjust the numbers to suit yourself—I have set the minimum angle to 209
and the maximum to 327 , as shown in Figure 10.12 :

Figure 10.12 – Setting the min and max spawn angles for the confetti

Make sure to set the Direction variables as x = 0.0 , y = -1.0 , and z = 0.0
, as shown in Figure 10.13 .

The confetti particles should also spread out, and not all head off on the
same path. To spread them out along a range of angles, I chose a Spread
value of 100 , which will pick an angle between –100 and 100 degrees for
each new particle.
Additionally, since confetti is usually an explosive event, we want to vary
the Initial Velocity values of the particles. Both changes are shown in
Figure 10.13 :

Figure 10.13 – Varying the Spread and Initial Velocity settings of the confetti particles

To make the effect even more impressive, we can change the rate at which
each particle spins as it moves through the level. This can be done by
varying the Angular Velocity values. I’ve locked the rate at 280 , as shown
in Figure 10.14 :

Figure 10.14 – Setting the variable rate of angular velocity for the particles

The confetti should also accelerate away from the center at a steady rate, and
we can easily set this in the linear acceleration setting (that is, Linear Accel
) as shown in Figure 10.15 :

Figure 10.15 – Setting the linear acceleration for the particles

To prevent the confetti from getting too far away from the flag, we should
increase Gravity in the Accelerations section, as shown in Figure 10.16 :

Figure 10.16 – Increasing the gravity in the y direction for the particles

To control what the confetti particles look like, we head to the Display
properties of ParticlesProcessMaterial . Now, vary the Scale values of the

confetti particles—I have set the minimum size to 5 and the maximum to 20
. For Color , I chose sky blue . These changes can be seen in Figure 10.17 :

Figure 10.17 – Setting the scale variety and the color for the particles

The next step is to control how long these particles remain on screen and
how they behave while they are alive. The settings for this can be found in
the Time property. The default lifetime is 1 second, which is fine; however,
we must turn on One Shot so that the confetti only fires once and does not
keep spawning. You can vary Explosiveness and Randomness , or use the
values shown in Figure 10.18 :

Figure 10.18 – Adjusting the Time properties for the particles

The final step is to head to the Drawing property and tick the box to use
Local Coords . This just ensures that the particles follow their own path and
not the path of any parent nodes to which they may be attached. It keeps the

particles in the place where we put them in the scene. This is shown in
Figure 10.19 as follows:

Figure 10.19 – Setting the particles to use local coordinates in the Drawing property

To preview this confetti particle effect, scroll up to the very top of the
Inspector and turn on the Emitting checkbox. Each time you check it, you
should see the blue confetti particles fire in the scene, as shown in Figure
10.20 :

Figure 10.20 – Turning Emitting on fires the particles

We now have a scene for a sky-blue confetti particle, but a confetti cannon
should shoot a rainbow of colored particles into the sky.
To achieve this, duplicate the blue particle, then right-click on
ParticleProcessMaterial and choose Make Unique , then change the color
under the Display properties (as we did in Figure 10.17 ) and rename the
particle node to match. This is shown in Figure 10.21:

Figure 10.21 – The confetti cannon scene tree

Note that not all the confetti particles are emitting. We’ll fix this in the next
section.

Scripting the confetti cannon
To ensure that all the confetti particles fire at the right time, we attach a
script to the Confetti_Cannon node and define a fire() function as

follows.
extends Node2D
func fire():
$Blue.emitting = true
$Orange.emitting = true
$Green.emitting = true
$Yellow.emitting = true
$Red.emitting = true
$Pink.emitting = true

This fire() function turns on all the confetti particle emitters at once by
setting their emitting property to true . Each line targets a different
colored particle node— Blue , Orange , Green , Yellow , Red , and Pink
—and activates them simultaneously. This creates the effect of a celebratory
burst of colorful confetti when the fire() function is called.
By keeping all the emitters inside the Confetti_Cannon node and triggering
them through this one function, we keep our code organized and make it
easy to fire all the confetti with a single command.
Recall that the cannon fires confetti as a small visual reward for the player
when they complete the level and touch the checkpoint flag. It makes sense,
then, that the cannon should be attached to the checkpoint. We can do this
quite easily in Godot by dragging the confetti_cannon.tscn file into the
scene tree of the CheckPoint scene, as shown in Figure 10.22 :

Figure 10.22 – Adding the confetti cannon to the CheckPoint scene

Once the confetti cannon is part of the CheckPoint scene, we will need to
add some code to check_point.gd to call the fire method once the level is
complete.
Click on the CheckPoint ( Area2D ) node to select it in the scene tree. Now,
click on the Node tab and then the Signals tab. Connect the
on_body_entered() signal and code it as follows:
func _on_body_entered(body):
if level_complete:
$Confetti_Cannon.fire()

The preceding code is called when the _on_body_entered() signal is
received. This means that the player has collided with the checkpoint flag.
Then, if the level_complete Boolean is set to true , the fire() method of
the confetti cannon is called. The fire() method then sets the emitting
property of all of the confetti in the cannon to true .
With everything now in place, when you complete the level and touch the
checkpoint flag, you will be rewarded with a delightful burst of confetti.
In the final section, we will learn how to add sound effects and audio to our
levels to add another layer of polish and atmosphere.

Adding audio and sound
effects
Sound is a powerful tool in game development, shaping the player’s
experience in ways that visuals alone cannot. A well-crafted soundtrack sets

the mood, whether it’s a fast-paced action sequence or a calm exploration
scene. Along with this, sound effects provide immediate feedback for player
actions, making the game world feel more alive and responsive.
In this section, we’ll explore how to enhance our game’s feel with audio.
We’ll add background music to create an atmosphere and introduce sound
effects for key interactions, such as collecting items, taking damage, or
completing a level. By the end of this section, you’ll understand how to
implement and fine-tune audio to make your game more immersive and
engaging.
So, let’s make the level more enjoyable by adding some entertaining
background music. A good resource for royalty-free music is Incompetech :
https://incompetech.com/music/royaltyfree/music.html
I have chosen the track Adventures in Adventureland by Kevin MacLeod
from this website. The track is licensed under Creative Commons: By
Attribution 4.0 license (
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ ).
Let’s begin by making a new sub-folder in the Assets folder called Audio
and drag and drop the Adventures in Adventureland.mp3 file into it, as
shown in Figure 10.23 :

Figure 10.23 – Adding background music to our audio folder

To play audio, Godot has a special node called AudioStreamPlayer . It is
ideal for playing background music as it does not play audio positionally. If
you want audio to play from different sources on the screen, then you use the
AudioStreamPlayer2D or AudioStreamPlayer3D node.
Since the level will have background music, add a new AudioStreamPlayer
node to the level scene, as shown in Figure 10.24 :

Figure 10.24 – Adding an AudioSteamPlayer node to the level scene

With AudioStreamPlayer selected, look at its properties in Inspector .
Here, the Stream property is the audio source that it will play. Drag and

drop the MP3 file into Stream . Lower the volume to –20 dB and set
Autoplay to On . All these changes are reflected in Figure 10.25 :

Figure 10.25 – Setting up the stream for our audio player

Because Autoplay is set to true , the track will begin playing as soon as the
level loads. If you want to stop the music, all these settings can be changed
from the script attached to the level, and playing can be set to false .
Now that we’ve got background music up and running, let’s move on to
adding sound effects to the game.

Implementing a sound effect
Sound effects do not play automatically and continuously. Instead, they are
triggered by or paired with an event. A good example of this is when the
player jumps or collects something.

First, you will need to download a sound effect of your choice. You can visit
Open Game Art ( https://opengameart.org/ ) and search for a
jump sound and a coin or collectible sound. This website is an excellent
resource for free game assets, all made available under a Creative Commons
CC0 license.
Once you have a suitable jump sound and a collection sound, add your files
to the Audio folder in the Godot FileSystem . This is shown in Figure 10.26
:

Figure 10.26 – Adding sound effects to our Audio folder

Since things are simple in our game and we only have two sound effects, one
for jumping and one for collecting , we will add two AudioStreamPlayer
nodes to the Player scene to handle this. Rename the AudioStreamPlayer
nodes to reflect the sound effect they will play, as shown in Figure 10.27 :

Figure 10.27 – Adding multiple audio streams to the Player scene

For more complex games with multiple overlapping sound effects, adding
multiple AudioStream nodes is not the optimal solution, and you would
consider a Sound Manager scene or setting up some audio buses for music
and sound effects.
Each AudioStreamPlayer node should play the associated sound effect, so
make sure that you drag the correct file to each Stream , as shown in Figure
10.28 :

Figure 10.28 – Two audio streams for the two different sound effects

With the two audio streams set up with the right sounds and the default
settings, open the player.gd script and add two references to the
AudioStreamPlayer nodes as onready variables. You can do this by
dragging the nodes into the script and then, before releasing them, holding
Ctrl . This code is shown as follows:
extends CharacterBody2D
@onready var animations = $AnimatedSprite2D
@onready var jump = $Jump
@onready var collect = $Collect

Now that a reference to each of the nodes is available, we can find the right
point to trigger the stream to play. Jumping should be triggered when the
player presses the jump key.

In the standard_player_movement() function, the jump is handled through a
specific if statement.
Just after the condition that checks whether the spacebar is pressed and the
player is on the floor, call the play() function of the jump
AudioStreamPlayer node, as shown here:
func handle_jump():
# Handle jump.
if Input.is_action_just_pressed("ui_accept") and is_on_floor
jump.play()

This code will ensure that each time the player is on the floor and presses the
jump key, the jump sound effect will also play.
Moving on to the collection sound effect, it should play whenever the player
collides with a Strawberry. Fortunately, we already have a function in the
Player script that is called when this happens: add_score(amount) . Recall
that this function is called whenever a player collides with a Strawberry to
keep track of how many Strawberries have been collected. We can call the
sound effect to play when this method is called, as shown in the code here:
func add_score(amount):
collect.play()
strawberry_count += 1

The preceding code is called whenever the player collects a Strawberry in
the level. It plays the collection sound effect and adds one Strawberry to the
count of Strawberries collected.
With just a single line of code, we’ve added satisfying audio feedback to the
Strawberry collection, helping to make the moment feel more rewarding for

the player.

Summary
Game development isn’t just about mechanics and level design—it’s also
about how the game feels to play. In this chapter, we explored the concept of
game juice and how small enhancements can make a game more engaging,
polished, and satisfying.
We implemented several key elements to improve player feedback and
immersion. First, we introduced a health bar HUD using hearts that gray out
as the player loses health, providing clear and intuitive feedback on player
status. To further enhance responsiveness, we integrated hit animations to
make taking damage feel impactful.
Next, we added a confetti cannon effect at the checkpoint to celebrate level
completion, reinforcing player achievement with a burst of visual
excitement. Finally, we brought the level to life with background music and
sound effects, making the game world more immersive and dynamic.
By applying these techniques, we’ve demonstrated how small visual and
audio improvements can dramatically enhance the player’s experience.
Game juice transforms a basic game into one that feels polished, responsive,
and fun to play, helping to keep players engaged and invested in the game
world.
In the next chapter, we’ll take a step back from hands-on coding to explore
the bigger picture of game development: game design. Now that you’ve
experienced how small touches can enhance gameplay through polish and
feedback, it’s time to understand how those elements fit into a well-planned
design. You’ll learn how to structure your ideas, define gameplay mechanics,

and shape the player’s experience through thoughtful planning. This
foundation will help you make better design choices and avoid costly rework
as your projects grow in scope.

Join our community on
Discord
Join our community’s Discord space for discussions with the author and
other readers:
https://packt.link/godot-4-game-dev

OceanofPDF.com

11
Understanding Game
Design
Until now, the focus of this book has been to provide hands-on and practical
guidance on how to develop a game in Godot. However, games are rarely
made by opening a game engine and creating something with no plans.
Game design is the first step in game development. It is the blueprint for
crafting enjoyable, engaging, and memorable games.
This chapter will explore how game design acts as a guiding force, shaping
gameplay mechanics, narrative structure, and player experiences.
In this chapter, we’re going to cover the following main topics:
Understanding the foundations of game design
Exploring the game design document
Detailing the key elements of the GDD
By the end of this chapter, you’ll understand the value of thoughtful game
design in streamlining development, reducing costly errors, and improving
player satisfaction. Whether you aspire to design your own games or work
effectively as part of a development team, these lessons will equip you with
a clearer perspective on how great games are made.

Technical requirements
No prior experience or knowledge of game design is required.

Understanding the
foundations of game design
Games are a form of entertainment, and successful games are often
described as fun . But what does that actually mean? What elements come
together to create a fun, rewarding experience? These are the questions that
game design seeks to answer.
Hyper-realistic visuals and optimized programming alone don’t guarantee
that a game will be enjoyable. In fact, some of the most beloved games
succeed not because of how they look or how technically advanced they are,
but because of how they make the players feel. A game that is engaging,
satisfying, and memorable—regardless of graphics or performance—is a
product of thoughtful game design.
Let’s look at some examples:
Stardew Valley (initially released in 2016) : This indie farming
simulator became a global hit not because of cutting-edge graphics but
because of its satisfying gameplay loop, sense of progression, and
meaningful interactions with characters. Its game design focuses on
player choice, routine, and community-building—all of which
contribute to a deeply engaging experience.
Celeste (initially released in 2018) : Celeste is a challenging 2D
platformer that combines tight controls with emotionally resonant
storytelling. The design encourages perseverance, rewarding players for

mastering difficult sections, while also offering accessibility options
that respect different skill levels. It’s a perfect example of how game
design can support both gameplay and emotional impact.
Among Us (initially released in 2018) : This social deduction game
exploded in popularity thanks to its clever design that encourages
communication, deception, and collaboration. Despite its simple art
style, the core loop—figuring out who the impostor is—keeps players
engaged and coming back.
These examples show that great game design doesn’t always mean
complexity or realism. Instead, it means creating systems and experiences
that connect with players.
It is during the design process that these experiences are crafted, and it’s
important to be as detailed and thoughtful as possible. After all, you’re
laying out the foundation on which your entire game will be built.
Game design might feel more abstract than programming, and that’s because
it leans toward the arts and storytelling. As you’ve already experienced,
making a game is difficult; there are many moving parts that all need to
work together. Game design may be even more challenging because there’s
no strict formula for success. Unlike programming, there are no hard rules—
just principles, patterns, and a deep understanding of what players find
meaningful and enjoyable.

Introducing the game design
document
There are some established frameworks for documenting your design. Once
you have an idea for a game, capturing it using these industry-accepted

frameworks, such as a game design document ( GDD ) or a feature
checklist, will help you develop your idea more clearly and get you closer to
game design gold.
When working in Godot, having a solid design plan can make a huge
difference. For example, clearly defining your game mechanics early on
allows you to decide what nodes, scripts, and scenes you’ll need. If your
design includes character upgrades, level transitions, or specific interactions,
you can structure your Godot project with that in mind from the start.
Linking your design decisions directly to Godot’s scene system, input
handling, and scripting with GDScript will help you avoid guesswork and
rework and build a game that’s not only fun but also cleanly built and easier
to maintain.
In the next section, we’ll look at how to document your game design
effectively. This is a crucial step that helps you turn your ideas into clear,
actionable plans and ensures your development process in Godot stays
focused, efficient, and aligned with your original vision.

Why is documentation
necessary for your game
design?
You might think that because the game you’re making is small, or since
you’re the only person working on it, there’s no real need to write anything
down. However, this might be a short-sighted decision. Even the simplest
game projects benefit from clear documentation—it helps you stay
organized, think through your ideas more thoroughly, and avoid costly
missteps later in development.

It is essential to document your design so that you—and anyone else
working on the game—understand everything about the game and what
needs to be done to finish it. Games are complex and have many interactive
features. Often, you only figure out how to solve a problem while solving it.
A few months down the line, you might not even remember why something
was included or how it works. That’s where documentation becomes
invaluable.
Developing documentation for your game design is especially helpful when
working in Godot, as it allows you to plan the structure of your game more
efficiently, deciding what nodes you’ll need, how different objects will
interact, and how to organize your scripts in GDScript. This upfront clarity
reduces the risk of confusion or messy rewrites and helps you stay focused
as your project grows in complexity.
Creating a GDD helps you do the following:
Reduce rework and avoid duplicating effort by clearly outlining
decisions already made
Remember the why behind your design choices when returning to your
project after a break
Track changes and ideas throughout the development process
Identify interdependencies between mechanics, features, and systems
Stay consistent with your vision and scope
Make collaboration easier if you ever bring in additional team members
or contributors
Your game design documents do two important jobs: they look back to
capture all the decisions you’ve made so far, and they look forward, guiding
the game’s development. They serve as both a record of your thinking and a
roadmap for building your game.

Therefore, your GDD becomes your project’s single source of truth, keeping
you grounded, focused, and efficient throughout development.

Understanding the guiding
principles for the GDD
Firstly, it is important to note that GDDs are living documents . This means
that they can change often, and they should be continually looked at and
referred to during the development of the game. This is because, although
the core idea of the game may not change, many elements around it should
evolve, and the documentation should reflect that through adaptation.
Additional reading
You can see how commercial games were made by reading
their GDD on Gamescrye and Roobyx’s GitHub
repositories:
https://gamescrye.com/resources/gamedesign-documents/
https://github.com/Roobyx/awesomegame-design
To prepare the GDD, any good collaborative documentation and design
software, such as Notion ( https://www.notion.com/ ), Obsidian (
https://obsidian.md/ ), or OneNote (
https://www.OneNote.com ), will work well here. However, there
are also solutions tailored to the game development industry, such as

CodeDecks ( https://www.codecks.io/ ) and HacknPlan (
https://hacknplan.com/ ).
To make your game design documentation truly effective, it should follow a
few best practices. These principles will help ensure your ideas are
communicated clearly and can actually be used to guide development. Let’s
look at these in the subsequent sections.

Think visually
Use a mix of text, systems diagrams, flowcharts, wireframes, and other
visuals to communicate your ideas. Visuals act as a universal language that
transcends barriers, making complex concepts easier to grasp. They improve
communication and make ideas more accessible, actionable, and adaptable
for everyone involved.

Keep it brief and clear
Clarity and brevity are key. Your document should be the following:
Short and to the point : Use bullet points to convey ideas efficiently
Accurate : Be specific—include exact values for things such as speed
or jump height, and always write in the present tense
Prioritized : Make it clear which features are essential for your
minimum viable product ( MVP ), which are nice-to-have, and which
are purely optional

Stay organized
A well-organized document is far more usable. Best practices include the
following:

Use a web-based format : This makes it easy to access and update, and
allows for sections to be broken into separate, focused pages
Structure information logically : Start with general overviews and
move on to specific details only as needed

Learn by example
There is not a single correct way to write a design document. A helpful way
to get started is to study examples from real-world games. The Game Docs
website ( https://gamedocs.org/documents/ ) offers a curated
collection of design documents from commercial releases. Explore these to
see how others structure their ideas and adapt what works for your own
project.
Now that you understand the key principles behind effective documentation,
let’s take a closer look at what goes into creating a GDD.

Exploring the Game Design
Document
By now, we know that the GDD is a highly descriptive, living software
design document for a video game. For developers using Godot (or any
game engine), a well-prepared GDD helps streamline the development
process by clearly outlining gameplay systems, scene structures, and script
logic, making it easier to translate ideas into Godot’s node-based architecture
and GDScript.
The first page or home page of the GDD should be a high-level overview of
the game concept, which would give you the main idea behind the game.

This is also sometimes referred to as a pitch document . In the following
sections, we’ll look at the sections to include on this page.

Title: what will you call your
game?
The title is often a working title, which is subject to change as the game
evolves. The title should represent the main idea of the game, so it is worth
spending some time thinking about this.
As an example, our working title could be SILENT STATION . Let’s develop
this in the following subsections.

Team: who will build or develop
the game?
List the people working on the game and what exactly they are responsible
for. Don’t worry about designations; concentrate on exactly which aspects of
the project they will make functional.

Status: what is the status of the
project?
This is best described using a traffic light system or a kanban board. Create
color-themed headings: TO DO ( yellow ), DOING ( orange ), DONE (
green ), and BLOCKED ( red ). List the features of the game under each of
these headings. Anything blocking the progress of the game or any major
issues should fall under the red category. An example of this is shown in
Figure 11.1 :

Figure 11.1 – An example of a simple Kanban board for development tasks

Statement of concept: what is
your game about in one
sentence?
Describe the core features of your game in a single sentence . Try to include
the setting, main character, primary objective, and obstacles to overcome.
Here is an example from SILENT STATION :
A lonely astronaut must navigate a derelict alien space station (setting)
using only a flashlight to find missing crewmates (objective) while avoiding
hostile creatures that react to sound (obstacles).

Expanded concept paragraph
and USP: what makes your

game unique, and how can you
describe it in more detail?
In this section, we expand on the statement of concept and describe the
gameplay. Keep in mind that this is a paragraph that briefly expands on the
core loop and progression of the player. Highlight the games’ unique selling
points ( USPs ), which are sometimes called the hook —this is what will
keep the player invested.
Here is an example from SILENT STATION :
The player must explore pitch-dark, claustrophobic corridors with only a
limited beam of light, managing both visibility and sound. The game’s
unique mechanic is its sound-reactive enemies combined with real-time
voice input that can attract danger, making the microphone part of the
gameplay loop.

Genre: what type of game are
you making?
These are categories of video games that share similar gameplay
characteristics. While single-genre games still exist, it’s likely that these
markets are oversaturated, and you will have more success in mashing
together multiple genres to create new gameplay styles and mechanics.
Here is an example from SILENT STATION :
Survival horror with light puzzle-solving and exploration elements.

Audience: who is this game for?

This is the market you are targeting. Here, you might list the age range and
the Entertainment Software Rating Board ( ESRB ) rating. You will look
at the types of games this audience plays and perhaps even link to a more
detailed page of player profiles and how the game will appeal to them.
Here is an example from SILENT STATION :
Mature players (ESRB 16+) who enjoy narrative-driven sci-fi horror games
such as Alien: Isolation or Dead Space.

Experience: what should the
player feel or experience while
playing?
What will the player’s experience in the game be? How will the game make
them feel? How long does the experience last? This heading can link to a
detailed page on player progression and objectives, and the details can be
revealed there.
Here is an example from SILENT STATION :
The game is designed to create a sense of dread and tension, with brief
moments of relief. It encourages slow exploration, attention to audio cues,
and emotional connection through rescuing survivors.

Anchor points: what are the
core ideas, inspirations, or
reference points?

These are experiences in the game that tie the players to the character, invest
them in the story, and keep them playing. These could be opening scenes,
important boss battles, or major item discoveries that unlock narrative
development. Highlighting some of these here and then linking to a page that
gives more detail of the story arc is key here.
Here is an example from SILENT STATION :
The initial moment the astronaut loses contact with base
Discovering the first survivor in a cryo pod
First encounter with a sound-reactive enemy
Turning on the power to an entire sector using a stealth route

Platform: which platforms will
the game be released on?
This is the platform you are targeting. It could be PC, mobile, or console. It
could be one or all of them or something else entirely. Usually, you will
narrow your scope and focus on a single platform.
Here is an example from SILENT STATION :
PC (initial), with future potential for console.

Review competition: what
similar games exist, and how
will yours stand out?
List some games that are similar or even directly competing with yours.
Then, link to a page on which you analyze the competition in depth.

Highlight what sets your game apart.
Here is an example from SILENT STATION :
Like Alien: Isolation and Observation, but differentiates with unique
microphone input and sound as a core mechanic.

Assets: what art, sound, and
other resources will your game
need?
You might include some concept art that establishes the general tone of the
game and link to a more detailed document that lists all the known sound
and image assets needed for the game. This would include the interface,
animations, world, and characters in detail.
Here is an example from SILENT STATION :
Audio: environmental ambience, voice lines, creature sounds
Visuals: modular sci-fi interior tileset, dynamic lighting assets
UI: oxygen meter, flashlight battery icon, sound detection meter

Monetization: how will the game
generate revenue, if at all?
Here, you explain how the game will generate revenue. It might be that the
game is a one-time purchase or is free-to-play, or has in-game purchases.
Whatever the case may be, it needs to be expanded on the linked page on the
systems and features.

Using these as the main headings on the first page of your GDD and linking
them to other pages in the GDD, which contain further detail, will provide a
great overview of the concept for your game and give everyone reading it a
clear idea of what type of game this is and who it is aimed at.
The next step in the design process would be to focus on the key elements of
the game that now require more detail.
Here is an example from SILENT STATION :
Premium model – one-time purchase. Future DLC (Downloadable Content)
could add new storylines or challenge modes.

Describing game elements of
the GDD in detail
This section will highlight the parts of the GDD that require more detail. The
reason these sections need so much detail is that they are the fundamental
elements without which there would be no game.
Therefore, you and other team members need to have a very clear idea of
what is going into the game and how it works and affects other systems in
the game. Use the guidance in the subsequent sections to add as much detail
as possible to your game idea. Note that each heading represents a new page
or pages in the GDD.

Player progression and
objectives
In this section, you should answer the following questions about the player :

Who are they?
What do they know?
What is their narrative arc?
What are their goals?
How do they progress?
What is the core loop?
What is the outer loop?
The Player progression and objectives page links to anchor points on the
main page. As a web-based document, this would typically be a hyperlink,
but these points also connect conceptually, guiding how the game unfolds
over time.
To define progression clearly, it’s helpful to break it down into two layers:
Core gameplay loop : The core gameplay loop represents the
fundamental actions the player repeats to play the game. For example,
in a platformer, this might involve running and jumping to traverse a
level, attacking enemies, and avoiding hazards.
Outer loop : The outer loop, on the other hand, describes the broader
progression system—how players are rewarded for engaging with the
core loop. This could include unlocking new levels, gaining upgrades,
or progressing through a story.
The core loop should feed into the outer loop, and vice versa, creating a
satisfying and reinforcing gameplay experience.
Here is an example from SILENT STATION :
Player Progression & Objectives:
Start: Wake up in medical bay
Mid-game: Repair communication array

Late-game: Evacuate remaining crew
Core loop: Explore → Find tools → Avoid noise → Progress
Outer loop: Unlock new zones, backtrack with new tools, piece together
story

Game world and background
In this section, you should answer questions about the world:
World lore : Is there a back story that sets the scene for the game?
World physics : Can you run, fly, fall, float, and so on?
World points : How does the player progress through the game,
locations, and so on?
Easter eggs : Do you have any hidden surprises for the player to find?
This page can link to a new document on world fiction if required.
Here is an example from SILENT STATION :
Game World and Background:
Space station lore: abandoned research facility on a rogue moon
Gravity and oxygen are managed room by room
Hints at secret government experiments via environmental storytelling
The overworld map shown in Figure 11.2 is an example of how a game’s
world can be visually represented, helping to convey the structure, scale, and
key locations within your game’s setting:

Figure 11.2 – The overworld (Credit: https://kenney.nl/ )

This map gives a bird’s-eye view of the game world, showing how different
areas are connected and where key events or challenges might occur.
Including visuals like this in your GDD helps both you and your team stay
aligned with the spatial layout and narrative flow of the game.

User interface
This section should detail all the ways in which the player interacts with the
game world and receives information about the world and their own status.
Also, be sure to focus on the look and feel. You should answer these
questions:
What is the control scheme?
What is required to move from one screen to the next? (Consider
providing wireframes.)
What help or hint system do you provide, and what does it look like?
How do you present the controls on screen?
What does the Options menu look like?

What does the Pause menu look like?
Here is an example from SILENT STATION :
Minimal UI, primarily diegetic (flashlight glow, sound bars integrated into
helmet visor)
Figure 11.3 shows a UI mock-up demonstrating elements, such as buttons
and sliders:

Figure 11.3 – A UI mockup (Credit: https://kenney.nl/)

Audio and visual style
This page provides details on the atmosphere and ambience of the game. It
should clearly define how the game should look and sound. This all

contributes to the overall mood of the game, and you should answer
questions such as the following:
What is the color palette?
What is the musical style?
What is the art style?
Include references, examples, and concept art
Give an idea of the environment, characters, enemies, objects, and so
on
This page should link to your complete game asset list.
Here is an example from SILENT STATION :
Art style: stylized realism
Sound: layered ambient tones, positional audio, player breathing
Figure 11.4 shows an example of a color palette. For more examples, check
out Lospec ( https://lospec.com/ ).

Figure 11.4 – An example of a color palette

Game systems and features
Games are never really finished—there’s always the temptation to add new,
cool features that could make the game even better. So, how do you decide
which features to include in this section?
The answer is to list all systems and features required for either an MVP or a
vertical slice of the game to be playable:
An MVP is the simplest version of your game that includes just enough
core features to be functional and testable. It’s what you would show to
get initial feedback or confirm that the basic concept works.
A vertical slice is a small, fully polished portion of the game that
represents the final look, feel, and gameplay. It’s typically used to
showcase the game to others, such as in a pitch or trailer, and helps
clarify the quality and scope of the finished product.
Essentially, you are listing critical components without which the game
would not be playable. Consider answering these questions:
Why is this feature required?
How does this feature interact with any other features?
How does each feature contribute to gameplay?
How does each feature contribute to monetization or not?
Here is an example from SILENT STATION :
Flashlight system:
Why required: The flashlight is the player’s only way to navigate the
dark environment, creating tension and visibility control
Feature interaction: Integrates with power management and stealth
systems; has limited battery life, requiring strategic use

Contribution to gameplay: Controls how much the player sees,
influences exploration, pacing, and adds vulnerability
Contribution to monetization: Not directly, but critical for the
emotional tone and market appeal
Figure 11.5 illustrates how individual systems and features in a game
function like building blocks. Each block represents a different system, such
as movement, physics, UI, or level design. On their own, these systems may
seem simple, but when carefully connected, they support and enhance each
other to create a cohesive, engaging experience.

Figure 11.5 – How systems and features work together to create a bigger experience
(Credit: https://kenney.nl/)

Just like in Figure 11.5 , it’s the combination and interaction of these blocks
that form the full structure of a game.

Software requirements
This section should be dedicated to listing the software tools required to
develop the game and the assets, too, if necessary. It should also outline the
purpose of each tool. You should answer these questions:
What game engine will be used?
What will be used for world creation and level design?
What will be used for dialogue trees and narrative structure?
What will be used for mission and quest design?
What other tools are needed for the development of the game?
Here is an example from SILENT STATION :
Godot 4 for the game engine
Blender for modeling
Reaper for sound editing
Figure 11.6 shows a screenshot of the Godot engine interface:

Figure 11.6 – The Godot engine interface

Quick tip : Need to see a high-resolution version of
this image? Open this book in the next-gen Packt Reader or
view it in the PDF/ePub copy.
The next-gen Packt Reader and a free PDF/ePub
copy of this book are included with your purchase. Scan the
QR code OR visit packtpub.com/unlock , then use
the search bar to find this book by name. Double-check the
edition shown to make sure you get the right one.

Game objects
This page should list the details of all the objects defined in your game. You
should list the details of these elements, including the following:
All non-player characters ( NPCs ) and enemies
The story regarding NPCs and enemies
Dialogue of NPCs and enemies, including links to dialogue files
All NPC and enemy properties, such as abilities, special attacks, and so
on
All the attributes and values of other game objects, such as moving
platforms, and so on
All the functions, methods, or behaviors of the game objects
This page should link to the asset list page
This page should link to the asset attribute and property list page
Here is an example from SILENT STATION :
Enemies: “Echo Wraiths” – blind but highly reactive to sound

Survivors: Have dialogue trees and scripted events
Figure 11.7 demonstrates the assets linking to the world map:

Figure 11.7 – Assets linking to the game world map (Credit: https://kenney.nl/)

Detailed asset list
This is the page on which your design documents should be linked. It could
be a spreadsheet that is continually updated as it contains the entire asset list,
which defines each object and its properties. This would include every
object: all text, graphics, and audio content used in the game.
You should start this list as soon as you begin prototyping and testing
gameplay. This is because the number of assets you need will give you a
good indication of the scope of the game and an estimate of how long it will
take to make. If you do not create an asset list and keep it updated, it will be
very hard to keep track of the game development.
Here is an example from SILENT STATION :

You would link to the spreadsheet showing model names, file types, poly
count, and usage tags

Figure 11.8 – It is essential to keep a list of all assets in the game (Credit: https://kenney.nl/)

Prototypes
Often, you will want to test ideas, features, and mechanics. When you
develop prototypes to test these ideas, you should link them to your GDD.
Provide as much detail as you can about the prototype, including the date it
was made, the purpose of the prototype, and what it was testing. You should
also include how this changed the design of the game.
Here is an example from SILENT STATION :
Prototype 1: enemy AI sound detection test
Prototype 2: flashlight battery depletion vs. level pacing

Playtesting
While you are developing the game, you will conduct a lot of play tests. This
is an essential step in game development because it is an incremental
process. You should have links in your document to the outcomes of each
test you conduct.
The page should contain an overview of the following:
What were you testing?
Why were you testing it?
What did you learn from the test?
How did it affect the development of the game?
Here is an example from SILENT STATION :
Playtest 1 revealed players didn’t understand how sound affected enemy
behavior → added subtle audio tutorial in early level
Figure 11.9 demonstrates the concept of gray boxing, a technique used
during early testing phases of game development. In gray boxing , simple
shapes and placeholder graphics are used to build a level layout before
adding final art or assets. This allows developers to focus on testing core
gameplay mechanics such as movement, collision, level flow, and challenge
balance without being distracted by visuals.

Figure 11.9 – Record all the results of every test (Credit: https://kenney.nl/)

Gray boxing is a vital part of the broader testing and playtesting process,
helping teams identify design issues early, refine the player experience, and
ensure the game is fun and functional before committing to polished visuals.

Archive
Over time, you will try many different ideas and test several different
features as you develop your game. Not all these ideas will work, and so,
instead of throwing them out, create an archive and store them there.
Further down the development road, parts of those ideas and features may be
useful. The archive will also give you a sense of how your design has
developed over time, and you can get a good perspective on just how much
progress you have made.
Here is an example from SILENT STATION :
Original idea for two-player co-op archived but may return in expansion

Figure 11.10 – Take ideas from the archive and use them elsewhere in your design (Credit:
https://kenney.nl/)

Current concerns and
considerations
Because you will be deliberately limiting your scope, usually to just what is
required for an MVP or vertical slice, many of your ideas and features will
not make it to production. However, they can be marked for a future
expansion of the game.
Similarly, you may have concerns about implemented features, and they
might not currently be resolved or working just the way you want them to.
You should list these here, and once they are resolved, you should move
them to a new page or section for resolved issues with a detailed description
of what the issue was and how it was resolved.
Here is an example from SILENT STATION :
Uncertainty about microphone support on all platforms

Implementation details
Every feature, system, and mechanic in the game will need documentation
that details the technicalities of its implementation. They should demonstrate
in detail exactly how each element can be achieved by the developers. This
is the least design-focused page and instead is development-focused. It
should answer the following questions:
What algorithms and data structures are required?
How are features such as navigation, resources, and dialogue
implemented?
What procedural systems are needed?
How does the game’s economy function?
What network architecture is required?
What hardware is being targeted?
Are there any game cheats for testing purposes?
What is the project folder structure, and what are the file naming
conventions?
Here is an example from SILENT STATION :
Sound detection system uses raycasting and dynamic decibel thresholds
Enemies use a state machine switching between patrol, alert, and chase
With the implementation details in place, the design document shifts from
conceptual ideas to practical execution.
This section ensures that developers have a clear blueprint for building the
game’s systems effectively. With the groundwork laid, the next step is to
consider how all these elements come together during production, testing,
and iteration.

Summary
In this chapter, we explored the critical role of game design within game
development, with a specific focus on the structure and purpose of the GDD.
We broke down each section of the GDD in detail, covering everything from
the title and team composition to monetization strategies, game systems,
prototypes, and playtesting.
By walking through the key headings—such as the statement of concept,
audience, USPs, assets, player progression, and audio-visual style—we laid
out a clear framework for documenting every important aspect of a game.
This structured approach ensures that ideas are well-communicated, feasible,
and aligned with the project’s goals.
Creating a design document, even for a small single-screen game, is not just
a formality—it’s an essential step in bringing your vision to life. It provides
a roadmap for development, helping you stay focused and consistent while
also anticipating potential challenges. Additionally, a clear and wellorganized GDD acts as a valuable tool for collaboration, whether you’re
working solo or in a team, ensuring that everyone involved understands the
core ideas and direction of the game.
Ultimately, investing time in a GDD streamlines the development process,
reduces costly revisions, and lays the foundation for a polished, engaging
player experience. Whether you’re building a simple game or a complex
multi-level adventure, thoughtful design planning is what transforms
creative ideas into a playable reality.
Now that you’ve seen how to plan and document your game in detail, the
next chapter will guide you through what happens after your design is
complete. You’ll explore educational resources, ways to practice your skills,
connect with the game development community, find useful tools and assets,

and begin building your portfolio. You’ll also learn how to come up with
compelling game ideas and follow a design process for your future projects.

Unlock this
book’s exclusive
benefits now
Scan this QR code or go to
packtpub.com/unlock ,
then search this book by name.
Note: Keep your purchase invoice
ready before you start.
OceanofPDF.com

12
Where to Next?
Congratulations on reaching the final chapter of Godot 4 for Beginners !
You now have a solid foundation in using the Godot Engine to create
games, and you’ve developed practical skills to bring your ideas to life. But
the journey doesn’t end here—this chapter is designed to help you take the
next step in your game development career.
This chapter will introduce you to a variety of resources and opportunities
that will support your continued growth as a developer. From YouTube
channels and blogs to game jams and asset marketplaces, you will discover
valuable tools, communities, and experts that can inspire, teach, and elevate
your projects.
In this chapter, we’re going to cover the following main topics:
Utilizing educational resources
Exploring opportunities for practice
Community and networking
Utilizing tools and assets
Building your portfolio
Developing game ideas
Design guide for your next project

By the end of this chapter, you’ll have a curated list of resources to deepen
your knowledge, expand your skills, and connect with other developers.
You’ll also have discovered how to stay motivated, stay informed about the
latest trends, and build your presence in the game development community.
Wherever your game development journey takes you next, these resources
will be your foundation for continued learning and success. Let’s explore
what is out there!

Technical requirements
No technical setup is needed—just a willingness to explore, experiment,
and take the next step in game development.

Utilizing educational
resources
Learning how to develop games in Godot doesn’t stop with a single project
or tutorial; it’s an ongoing process. This section introduces a variety of
trusted educational resources, such as YouTube channels, blogs, and books,
that can help you deepen your knowledge, stay up to date with the engine’s
evolution, and find inspiration from experienced developers.
Whether you prefer watching video tutorials, reading step-by-step guides,
or learning from community insights, these resources will support your
journey as you grow your skills and take on more ambitious game projects.

YouTube

There are many free game development learning resources available on
YouTube. Because Godot itself is open source, the community around the
engine has a philosophy of sharing and helpfulness. There is a belief among
the community that we should not gatekeep knowledge and instead that we
all learn more through openness and sharing .
Some of the best Godot game development YouTube channels are the
following:
GDQuest ( https://www.youtube.com/@Gdquest ):
Arguably the best resource for learning how to create games with the
Godot Engine, GDQuest is a professional and well-established group
of Godot educators. This means that you will get the cumulative
knowledge of those highly experienced in the Godot Engine. I have
personally used their channel for the bite-sized explanations of various
nodes since they explain everything succinctly and get straight to the
point.
All the material on their YouTube channel is free, and if you respond
well to their teaching style, then it would be wise to explore their paid
courses, which I will discuss later in this chapter.
Heartbeast ( https://www.youtube.com/@uheartbeast ):
Another fantastic resource for anything Godot-related is the YouTube
channel Heartbeast. Benjamin was an early adopter of Godot, and his
tutorials are some of the most thorough, detailed, and yet beginner
friendly that I have ever seen. He has a great way of explaining why
things are done the way they are, and I highly recommend his channel.
If you are looking for the full experience of creating a game in Godot
from start to finish, with careful and detailed explanation along the

way, then Heartbeast is the channel for you. Benjamin also has paid
courses if you want to go beyond the basics discussed on his
YouTube channel.
Godot Tutorials (
https://www.youtube.com/@GodotTutorials ): If you
want to focus more on coding in the Godot Game Engine, then check
out the Godot Tutorials channel. This channel takes a detailed
approach to making games with Godot and includes elements of game
design in its teaching, too. The channel concentrates on coding
principles using GDScript within the Godot Engine, making it a great
place to visit for a deeper understanding of how to implement things in
Godot.
The channel has an accompanying website with text-based versions
of all the video tutorials. I really appreciate this as I learn better from
text, so if this is your learning style too, then check out
https://godottutorials.com/ .
GameDev Journey (
https://www.youtube.com/@GameDevJourney ): Finally,
if you enjoyed the way that the materials were presented to you in this
book, then you will enjoy the tutorials on my personal YouTube
channel. It also has an accompanying website with the same tutorials
presented in text format, which you can visit at
https://www.gamedevjourney.co.uk/home .
The tutorials are modular and focus on individual game mechanics.
Beyond tutorials, there are also developer diaries, discussions around
game assets and resources, and encouraging videos with advice to
keep you motivated.

Now, let’s move on to some blog recommendations.

Blogs
Game development is an area that is always evolving, and there is always
more to learn. There are some amazing blogs online covering game design
and the theory behind making games.
To stay up to date and remain aware of the current best practices, the
following blogs are useful:
Deconstructor of Fun (
https://www.deconstructoroffun.com/blog ): This
blog analyzes the design of popular, free-to-play games, with a critical
eye on what works and what doesn’t in terms of engagement,
retention, and monetization. Written by a team of developers who also
play games extensively, the content is especially valuable for aspiring
game makers who want to understand the balance between fun and
profitability. If you’re planning to build games for a living, this blog
offers real-world insights into what makes games successful in a
competitive market.
Game Design Skills (
https://gamedesignskills.com/blog/ ): This blog offers
a rich and steadily growing library of articles focused on the practice
of game design, particularly around how players interact with game
systems. It dives deep into mechanics, controls, progression, and
balancing, making it a great resource for aspiring and experienced
designers alike. Whether you’re learning the fundamentals or refining

your skills, this site is a valuable place to explore real examples and
practical design thinking.
Game Developer ( https://www.gamedeveloper.com/ ):
Game Developer is a go-to hub for anyone working in or studying the
games industry. It features detailed postmortems, developer insights,
and behind-the-scenes articles on released games, alongside regular
updates on industry trends and news. Ideal for students, indie devs, and
professionals alike, it’s a place to learn from real-world experiences
and stay informed about the evolving landscape of game development.
Whether you prefer quick insights or in-depth articles, these blogs are a
great way to stay current with evolving design trends and industry practices.
For a more structured and comprehensive approach to learning, see which
books are recommended at the end of this chapter in the further reading
section.

Exploring opportunities for
practice
In my conversations with many game developers, there is one piece of
advice that comes up repeatedly: start small when making a game. The
benefits of this approach are as follows:
Starting with a small game allows you to learn the core concepts, such
as movement, collisions, and basic mechanics, without being
overwhelmed by the scope of a larger game.
A smaller project can be completed faster. This gives you the
satisfaction of finishing something and seeing it in action. It also gives
you the experience of the process of making a game from start to

finish, which boosts confidence and motivation. Having a game that
others can play also gives you the chance to get feedback, which you
can learn from.
Having a small game provides a safe space for you to make mistakes
and learn from them. Trial and error is a great way to learn in the
beginning. In larger projects, your mistakes will compound and are
difficult to fix.
When you work on smaller games, you get the chance to develop
essential problem-solving skills without needing to balance multiple
systems at once.
Making many small games lets you build a portfolio gradually. A
collection of small but polished projects is better than having many
rough and unfinished large projects. This is a good way to showcase
your work.
Once you have completed some smaller games, you will have a better
understanding of game development workflows and will have laid a
foundation for yourself to undertake more ambitious projects.
A great way to practice your skills is to take part in game jams. We’ll
discuss this in the next section.

Participating in game jams
Game jams are time-limited events in which individuals or teams create a
game from beginning to end based on a given theme and set of constraints.
They usually last anywhere from 48 hours to a week and are open to
participants of all skill levels.

For beginners, game jams are a fantastic way of getting hands-on
experience. You’ll have the chance to practice everything from designing
mechanics to writing code, creating art, and composing sound—all in a
short burst of focused creativity. Don’t worry if you’re not confident in
every area—game jams often attract a wide range of people, and many
participants team up and learn from each other.
Additionally, you’ll also experience the full game development cycle:
brainstorming, prototyping, testing, and finishing a playable project. This
can be a huge confidence boost and a great portfolio piece. More
importantly, it’s a fun and welcoming way to connect with others who share
your passion for games. You can find a game jam to enter that suits your
skill level and time requirements on itch.io ( https://itch.io/ ).
They have a calendar of jams, and you can sign up for one that suits you at
https://itch.io/jams .
The other big jams are the following:
Godot Wild Jam : https://godotwildjam.com/
Ludum Dare : https://ldjam.com/
The Global Game Jam : https://globalgamejam.org/
Game jams are just one example of how powerful it can be to learn
alongside others. Whether you’re collaborating in a team, sharing feedback,
or simply seeing how others approach the same theme, these events
highlight the importance of community in game development.
In the next section, we’ll explore how getting involved in the wider game
development community, and building a professional network, can open
doors, provide support, and help you grow even further as a developer.

Community and networking
One of the most inspiring things about game development is its encouraging
and supportive community. Every game developer knows how difficult it is
to make a game, and they know what it is like to be starting out and to feel
that you don’t know how to do even the simplest things. This is why they
are always willing to help others learn. Game developers also rely on each
other for gameplay testing and feedback.

Why networking matters
Networking with fellow game devs can open doors and allow you to form
collaborations and gain mentorships, job offers, and gigs. Many game
developers find their first job in the industry or meet future collaborators
through the connections that they have built.
Networking also gives you visibility. By engaging with the community and
networking at events such as game jams, conferences, and meetups, you can
start to become noticed. This visibility can be crucial for landing jobs,
securing funding, or gaining traction for a game release.

Where to build your network
You can build your network and connect with the community on platforms
such as X , Reddit , and Discord servers. Participating in game jams will
get your name out there and may even give you the opportunity to be part of
a team.
Attending industry events and conferences, such as the Game Developers
Conference ( GDC ), and smaller local meetups can provide opportunities

to network in person and to learn from industry veterans.
You can also offer value to others even if you are new to game
development. It’s not all about asking for help; it is also about offering it! If
someone is looking for feedback or needs someone to play test their game,
don’t hesitate to volunteer.

People to follow
Some of the best professionals to follow on LinkedIn are the following:
Sergei Vasiuk (
https://www.linkedin.com/in/sergeivasjuk/ )
Gökhan Üzmez (
https://www.linkedin.com/in/gkhnuzmez/ )
Jakub Remiar (
https://www.linkedin.com/in/jakubremiar/ )
Amir Satvat (
https://www.linkedin.com/in/amirsatvat/ )
Mayank Grover (
https://www.linkedin.com/in/mayankgrover/ )
Mirko Minenza ( https://www.linkedin.com/in/mirkominenza/ )
Anton Slashcev (
https://www.linkedin.com/in/aslashcev/ )
By building a network and becoming part of a game development
community, you can grow your skills, learn, and foster a passion for
creating games. Surrounding yourself with like-minded individuals who
share your interests will allow you to find inspiration, guidance, and

camaraderie, which will make your game development journey more
rewarding.

Utilizing tools and assets
When working in game development, and especially when starting out, it is
so important that you have the right tools and assets to bring your ideas to
life. Game development is such a complex process and involves many
disciplines, including art, audio, programming, and design. Let’s have a
look at some tools and resources to help you with these aspects.

Tools
In this section, we’ll look at some essential tools across key areas of game
development:
Game engine : Our game engine of choice is Godot (
https://godotengine.org/ ) due to it being free and open
source. It is beginner-friendly, lightweight, and perfect for both 2D and
3D projects.
Graphic tools : Here are a few recommended tools for creating
graphics:
GIMP is a free and open source alternative to Photoshop:
https://www.gimp.org/
Krita is also a free and open source tool for creating digital
paintings and 2D art: https://krita.org/en/
LibreSprite is a free and open source alternative to Aseprite for
creating pixel art: https://libresprite.github.io

Blender is a free and open source tool for creating 3D models
and animations: https://www.blender.org/
Audio tools : Here is a list of free tools to get you started:
Audacity is a free tool for recording and editing audio:
https://www.audacityteam.org/
LMMS is free and open source software for composing music:
https://lmms.io/
Bosca Ceoil: The Blue Album is a free and open source tool for
making retro game music:
https://yurisizov.itch.io/boscaceoil-blue
Bfxr is a free tool for creating retro sound effects:
https://www.bfxr.net/
Version control : To track changes to your project and collaborate
with others, Git ( https://git-scm.com/ ) is great. Usually, Git
is paired with GitHub or GitLab.

Resources
Asset marketplaces exist that provide a variety of assets, including sprites,
3D models, music, and sound effects. Mostly, you need to purchase assets;
however, some vendors provide assets for free. Here is a list of such
vendors:
itch.io has an assets section that contains free and paid resources
created by indie developers: https://itch.io/game-assets
Kenney offers many game assets for free, and he has a clean and
simple style: https://kenney.nl/

Quaternius also offers free game assets focusing largely on low-poly
3D: https://quaternius.com/
OpenGameArt is a repository of free art and sound assets:
https://opengameart.org/
Freesound is a community-driven database of sound effects:
https://freesound.org
ZapSplat is a collection of royalty-free sound effects and music
tracks: https://www.zapsplat.com/
The BBC has released an archive of sound effects for personal use:
https://sound-effects.bbcrewind.co.uk/
Lospec is an amazing resource for color theory and color palettes:
https://lospec.com/
Pixabay and Unsplash are great resources for placeholder or
background imagery:
https://pixabay.com
https://unsplash.com/
BlenderKit is a good resource for free and premium 3D models that
are integrated with Blender: https://www.blenderkit.com/
Google , DaFont , and Font Squirrel all provide excellent fonts for
you to use in your projects:
https://fonts.google.com/
https://www.dafont.com/
https://www.fontsquirrel.com/
When creating your first games or prototypes, it is always best to start with
free resources or create your own. This will let you learn without spending
money. If you are using resources from elsewhere, you must remember to

check the license for any asset you download. This is even more important
if you plan to publish your game.
When developing, make use of placeholders or basic shapes in the early
stages. This frees you to focus on mechanics and gameplay rather than
visuals.
Finally, join communities where you can share resources and advice. By
using the right tools and knowing where to find assets, you can focus on
learning and building games.

Building your portfolio
A portfolio is a must-have for any aspiring game developer. This is because
game development is a fundamentally practical skill and not another
theoretical discipline. Of course, it is important to understand the
underlying concepts of design, programming, and art; however, the true
demonstration of a game developer’s ability is in their application of these
skills.
A portfolio of your work provides evidence of your mastery of these
concepts, and it showcases your experience with game development tools,
techniques, and workflows. Your ability to create functional, engaging, and
entertaining games will be clearly demonstrated. Include your completed
projects and prototypes to highlight your hands-on experience and problemsolving skills, to show that you are familiar with industry-standard tools
such as game engines and asset creation software.
A great place to start with a game’s portfolio is itch.io (see the
Participating in game jams section for website). You can create an account
on itch and host your games there for free just by signing up. Every itch

page can be completely customized, and you can follow their handy guide
for doing so here: https://itch.io/docs/creators/design .
Game developers are always learning, and your portfolio will reflect that.
You are on a lifelong journey as a developer. Your portfolio traces that
journey, proving that you have put theory into practice and that you can turn
ideas into playable realities.

Developing game ideas
Now that you have all this information, you might be keen to begin working
on a game for your portfolio. It can be daunting not knowing where to
begin. Creativity is not easy, and often a prompt is extremely helpful in
lighting the spark of inspiration, which can quickly turn into wildfire!
If you are struggling to come up with a game idea for your next project, you
can use a game idea generator:
https://letsmakeagame.net/game-idea-generator/ .
If a random idea doesn’t appeal to you, then you can try out these tried and
tested techniques for coming up with creative starters:
Mash-up hit games : Have a look at the core mechanics in at least two
hit games and then come up with a way to combine them into one
mechanic in your game. This can lead to some interesting and
emergent gameplay.
Simplify : Look at some complex games for inspiration and think
creatively about how you could simplify the experience into a casual
game for mobile. Think about adding constraints such as only using a
single screen or having gameplay last no longer than a minute.

Polish : There are so many games released daily on various digital
storefronts. This is a goldmine of ideas as many of these games are
rushed to market and are decidedly lacking in polish. You don’t have to
come up with a totally new idea; you need only execute a popular idea
well.
Surprise people : Take an idea to ridiculous levels. Often, the key to a
great game is the unexpected and the element of surprise.
Feeling is fun : Appeal to the player’s emotions. Your audience may
well forget what your game was about, but they will never forget how
it made them feel. This will encourage word-of-mouth advertising.
Use new tech : With the rise of generative AI, everyone has access to a
sounding board for ideas and an infinite well of feedback and
assistance. Make use of this technology.
Personal inspiration : Your game will be unique and relatable if it is
inspired by your own real-life experiences.
Reversals : Inverting familiar concepts can be a good source of
interesting ideas. For example, instead of playing as the hero saving
the world, what if you played as the villain trying to avoid being
stopped? Overlord (initially released in 2007) and Untitled Goose
Game (initially released in 2019) both play with this idea—letting the
player cause chaos instead of preventing it.
Reverse engineer : You can deconstruct and rebuild well-known and
successful games and add a new twist to them. Take Tetris (initially
released in 1984), for example. What if instead of fitting blocks
together, your goal was to break apart a complete structure? Or
imagine a farming game such as Stardew Valley (initially released in
2016) but set on an alien planet where you must adapt your crops to
strange biomes and manage oxygen levels.

Now that you’ve explored different ways to generate unique and engaging
game ideas, it’s time to take the next step—turn those ideas into a fully
planned project. In the next section, you’ll find a practical design guide to
help you shape your concept into a game you can start building.

Design guide for your next
project
Once you have the idea, the following design principles can help to make
your game a rewarding experience:
Curiosity should be rewarded : Players should be encouraged to
explore the levels that game developers have spent so much time
planning and designing. If they do stray from the main path, then it
should be worth that time investment. Bonus story content, hidden
treasures, rare items, or power-ups will keep players exploring and
make gameplay fresh.
Clear separation between win and lose conditions : Do not confuse
the player with ambiguous win-and-lose conditions. Players need
accurate and immediate feedback on why they have failed and how
they can succeed. Visual cues can help a lot here. Using things such as
progress bars, health bars, danger symbols, and color references will
give the player confidence.
Consistency is key : Teach the players the rules of your game and then
stick to those rules. Patterns build trust for players and create a
consistent game world that the player will enjoy exploring.
Show don’t tell : A tutorial level can be extremely dull, and since it’s
often the first level a player experiences, it has the potential to put

someone off the game entirely. The best tutorials subtly guide the
player to discover the solutions and gameplay mechanics on their own,
without breaking immersion.
One excellent example of this is Portal (first released in 2007) by
Valve, which introduces each new mechanic through cleverly
designed puzzles that gradually increase in complexity. The player
learns by doing, not by reading instructions. This kind of interactive
learning keeps players engaged and makes the tutorial feel like a
natural part of the game.
Fair is fun : Humans have a strong sense of justice, and they want
things to be fair. Don’t increase the difficulty by allowing the enemies
to break the rules that apply to the player. By this, I mean enemies that
can teleport and defy the in-game physics—basically, cheat.
Avoid negative reinforcement : If a player has worked hard to earn a
reward, don’t take it away from them. If something is taken away from
the player without their input, it can feel unfair. Allow the player to
give up an item by choice, usually through selling or swapping.
Clear objectives : One of the most frustrating things for a player is not
knowing what to do next. Even in open-world exploration games, the
player should always have a clear sense of what they can do next. This
can be a completely linear path or a choice between multiple goals.
The journey can be challenging, but the objective must be obvious.
A great example of this is The Legend of Zelda: Breath of the Wild
(initially released in 2017). While the game gives players the freedom
to explore, it consistently provides gentle guidance through
environmental cues, map markers, and subtle NPC dialogue to help
players orient themselves and choose what to tackle next.

A foundation of fun : Fun is a nebulous term. Essentially, what we
mean when a game is fun is that the player is always incentivized to
continue playing. The core gameplay must be fun; it must incentivize
the player to continue the journey because if not, then no amount of
rewards, content, or story will matter.
Player knows best : Listen to feedback and implement changes and
suggestions early on. Are players bored, frustrated, or confused?
Players will point out the real issues, things that prevent them from
wanting to continue playing. Player feedback can save your game.
Respect the player : If you offer the player a choice, then you must
honor their decision. Do not provide false choices to force the player
into a correct decision. This can ruin immersion. Your game’s
outcomes should match the player’s expectations.
Now that you have a solid foundation for designing your game, you are
ready to explore specific areas of game development. The following
resources have been curated to help you continue learning and growing as a
developer.

Further reading
Vanhove, S. (2024). Learning GDScript by Developing a Game with
Godot 4: A fun introduction to programming in GDScript 2.0 and
game development using the Godot Engine . Packt Publishing Ltd. (
https://www.packtpub.com/enin/product/learning-gdscript-by-developing-agame-with-godot-4-9781804616987?

srsltid=AfmBOorONDSKsGBPgQdezH_3z6R8z1cQn57bahYjmhfNzjd4JT3EP3t )
“Sander Vanhove is a seasoned game developer with over 20 games
to his credit. This book will serve as your entry point into game
development, showing you how to leverage the powerful features of
the open source, versatile GDScript 2.0 to develop your ideas, from
simple platformers to complex RPGs.
Whether you’re an aspiring game developer, a hobbyist seeking a
creative outlet, or simply someone intrigued by the world of game
programming, this book will guide you through the intricacies of the
Godot 4 game engine. Starting with a primer on the fundamentals of
programming, you’ll cover everything from data to logic, while
familiarizing yourself with Godot’s built-in tools such as the physics
engine, navigation, and cameras. As you progress, you’ll unlock
deeper insights into more advanced tools that will take your
programming to the next level. Aided by easy-to-follow step-by-step
tutorials, examples, exercises, and experiments, you’ll seamlessly
integrate this newfound knowledge to create a vampire survivor-like
game from scratch.
By the end of this book, you’ll have become proficient in leveraging
the Godot 4 game engine to bring your gaming visions to life.”
Campos, H. (2025). Game Development Patterns with Godot 4: Create
Resilient Game Systems Using Industry-Proven Solutions in Godot .
Packt Publishing Ltd. ( https://www.packtpub.com/enus/product/game-development-patterns-withgodot-4-9781835880296?

srsltid=AfmBOoo26F6O5FFeCa5HioxsnGU9jrLlGrs8DHG
UhT6ho3YN5r77i6Gj )
“Henrique “ Ludonaut ” Campos is an indie game developer and
game designer working in the industry for years. He began as a
university teacher in 2015 in the computer graphics and artificial
intelligence chairs and worked in the GDQuest team from 2018 to
2022. Henrique is also an independent consultant for studios and
schools. Under the alias of Ludonaut , Henrique creates game
development content on his YouTube channel, making games, assets,
e-books, and courses that can be found on his itch.io profile. As the
author of The Essential Guide to Creating Multiplayer Games with
Godot 4.0 , Henrique paved the way for Godot users to make
reusable and scalable code libraries for Godot Engine projects .
If you are a game developer, game designer, technical artist, or solo
developer with programming experience in Godot Engine and the
GDScript programming language, this book is for you. It is perfect
for professionals looking to create solid, reusable, and reliable
architecture that can adapt and grow with their creative vision.”
Bradfield, C. (2023). Godot 4 Game Development projects: Build five
cross-platform 2D and 3D games using one of the most powerful open
source game engines . Packt Publishing Ltd. (
https://www.packtpub.com/en-cy/product/godot-4game-development-projects-9781804610404 )
“Chris Bradfield has worked in the internet technology space for
over 25 years. He has worked in the online gaming space for several
MMO and social gaming publishers in South Korea and the United
States. In his game industry career, he served as a game designer,

developer, product manager, and team leader. In 2012, he discovered
a love for teaching and founded KidsCanCode to provide
programming instruction and curriculum to young students. He is a
member of the Godot Engine documentation team and works to
provide learning resources for game development students around the
world.
This book is for game developers at all levels, from beginners seeking
an introduction to experienced programmers aiming to delve into the
intricacies of Godot Engine 4.0. It is a valuable resource for
newcomers and a treasure trove of insights for experienced
developers. Prior programming experience is a prerequisite.”
Obuz, K. (2022). Game Development with Blender and Godot:
Leverage the combined power of Blender and Godot for building a
point-and-click adventure game . Packt Publishing Ltd. (
https://www.packtpub.com/en-us/product/gamedevelopment-with-blender-and-godot9781801816021 )
“Kumsal Obuz is a self-taught but veteran web developer with more
than 15 years of experience in two different countries, leading teams
and projects of various sizes. After several years of preparation and
transition, he started his own game studio in August 2020. He
launched a small puzzle strategy game at the end of 2020 and is
currently working on an ambitious farming simulation game. He also
likes to mentor (perhaps due to his genetic background, since both of
his parents are teachers!). Because of his love for Godot, he founded
and still organizes the Godot Toronto Meetup group.

This book is for game developers who are looking to make the
transition from 2D to 3D games. Readers should have a basic
understanding of Godot, being able to navigate the UI, understand
the Inspector panel, create scenes, add scripts to game objects, and
so on. Previous experience with Blender is helpful but not required.”
Johnson, J. (2023). Godot 4 Game Development Cookbook: Over 50
solid recipes for building high-quality 2D and 3D games with
improved performance . Packt Publishing Ltd. (
https://www.packtpub.com/en-mx/product/godot-4game-development-cookbook-9781838826079?
srsltid=AfmBOorXABpX5GKKuUDe8VzCkqBkVdbBV6aClIA
g1A0VunYHftfrI_Nq )
“Jeff Johnson is a game developer who started using Unity 4.0 in
2014 and released a couple of games on itch.io. In 2018, he created
999 Dev Studio. Toward the end of developing Escape From 51 , he
changed engines to Godot 3.0.2 and ported almost the whole game to
Godot from Unity. He released Escape From 51 on itch.io as well as
some mobile games on Google Play.
Godot 4 Game Development Cookbook is for seasoned game
developers who want to acquire skills in creating games using a
contemporary game engine. It is an invaluable resource for indie
game developers and Godot developers who are familiar with Godot
3 and have some level of expertise in maneuvering the interface.”

Summary

You’ve reached the end of Godot 4 for Beginners , but your journey as a
game developer is just beginning. In this final chapter, you explored the
next steps you can take to continue growing your skills, from educational
resources and communities to asset marketplaces and game jams. You saw
just how important networking, participating in industry events, and
building a strong portfolio to showcase your work are.
Game development is a continuous learning process, and by engaging with
these resources, you can refine your craft, stay inspired, and connect with
like-minded creators.
It has been a pleasure for me to provide some stepping stones for you on
your game dev journey. Keep experimenting, keep creating, and, most
importantly, keep making games!

Join our community on
Discord
Join our community’s Discord space for discussions with the author and
other readers:
https://packt.link/godot-4-game-dev

OceanofPDF.com

13
Unlock Your Book’s
Exclusive Benefits
Your copy of this book comes with the following exclusive benefits:
Next-gen Packt Reader
AI assistant (beta)
DRM-free PDF/ePub downloads
Use the following guide to unlock them if you haven’t already. The process
takes just a few minutes and needs to be done only once.

How to unlock these benefits
in three easy steps
Step 1
Have your purchase invoice for this book ready, as you’ll need it in Step 3 . If
you received a physical invoice, scan it on your phone and have it ready as
either a PDF, JPG, or PNG.

For more help on finding your invoice, visit
https://www.packtpub.com/unlock-benefits/help .
Note : Did you buy this book directly from Packt? You don’t
need an invoice. After completing Step 2, you can jump straight
to your exclusive content.

Step 2
Scan this QR code or go to
packtpub.com/unlock .

On the page that opens (which will look similar to Figure 13.1 if you’re on
desktop), search for this book by name. Make sure you select the correct
edition.

Figure 13.1 – Packt unlock landing page on desktop

Step 3
Once you’ve selected your book, sign in to your Packt account or create a new
one for free. Once you’re logged in, upload your invoice. It can be in PDF,
PNG, or JPG format and must be no larger than 10 MB. Follow the rest of the
instructions on the screen to complete the process.

Need help?
If you get stuck and need help, visit
https://www.packtpub.com
/unlock-benefits/help for
a detailed FAQ on how to find your
invoices and more. The following
QR code will take you to the help
page directly:

Note : If you are still facing issues, reach out to
customercare@packt.com .
OceanofPDF.com

packtpub.com
Subscribe to our online digital library for full access to over 7,000 books
and videos, as well as industry leading tools to help you plan your personal
development and advance your career. For more information, please visit
our website.

Why subscribe?
Spend less time learning and more time coding with practical eBooks
and Videos from over 4,000 industry professionals
Improve your learning with Skill Plans built especially for you
Get a free eBook or video every month
Fully searchable for easy access to vital information
Copy and paste, print, and bookmark content
A t www.packtpub.com , you can also read a collection of free
technical articles, sign up for a range of free newsletters, and receive
exclusive discounts and offers on Packt books and eBooks.

Other Books You May
Enjoy
If you enjoyed this book, you may be interested in these other books by
Packt:

Game Development Patterns with Godot 4
Henrique Campos
ISBN: 978-1-83588-028-9
Create reusable and scalable code that follows SOLID principles
Identify common game development issues and apply industrystandard solutions

Understand feature requests and how to turn them into concrete
solutions leveraging design patterns
Analyze game development pathologies to figure out underlying issues
Architect reliable systems that are understandable, intuitive, and
scalable
Structure professional, collaborative game systems that are easy to
maintain

Learning GDScript by Developing a Game with Godot 4
Sander Vanhove
ISBN: 978-1-80461-698-7
Develop your GDScript 2.0 programming skills from basic to
advanced, emphasizing code cleanliness

Harness Godot 4’s integrated physics engine to control and manipulate
in-game objects
Design a vibrant and immersive game world by seamlessly integrating
a diverse array of assets
Master the art of processing input from various sources for enhanced
interactivity
Extend the reach of your game by learning how to export it to multiple
platforms
Incorporate simple multiplayer functionality for a dynamic gaming
experience

Packt is searching for
authors like you
If you’re interested in becoming an author for Packt, please visit
authors.packt.com and apply today. We have worked with
thousands of developers and tech professionals, just like you, to help them
share their insight with the global tech community. You can make a general
application, apply for a specific hot topic that we are recruiting an author
for, or submit your own idea.

Share your thoughts
Now you’ve finished Godot 4 for Beginners , we’d love to hear your
thoughts! If you purchased the book from Amazon, please click here
to go straight to the Amazon review page for this book
and share your feedback or leave a review on the site that you purchased it
from.
Your review is important to us and the tech community and will help us
make sure we’re delivering excellent quality content.
OceanofPDF.com

Index
Symbols
2D Mini-Game
background, adding to level 136 - 138
collisions, detecting 142 , 143
level, building with TileMap 132 - 136
physics layer 146 , 147
player animations, setting up 139 - 141
player, controlling 136
player, creating 136
TileMap collisions 143 , 144
tiles, painting 148 , 149
3D character
building 192 - 196
3D dimension
working 192
3D Mini-Game
audio, adding to level 242 - 245
background color, setting 238
Ball scene, creating 231 , 232

Ball script, writing 233
Cannon scene, creating 230 , 231
Cannon script, writing 233 - 235
Flag scene, creating 235 , 236
Gem scene, creating 224 , 225
Gem script, adding 225 - 229
level, completing 235
level, polishing 237
particle effects, adding 238
scenes, modifying 236 , 237
sine function, using 246 , 247
smoke scene, creating 238 - 242
3D objects
creating 56 - 58
material, applying 65 , 66
material, creating 62 - 65
3D scene
moving around 59 - 61

A
albedo 64
animate function 163 , 165 , 260
argument 105
assignment operator 93

Audacity
URL 308
audio effect
adding 270 , 271
audio tools 308
Audacity 308
Bfxr 308
Bosca Ceoil 308
LMMS 308

B
Ball scene
creating 231 , 232
Ball script
writing 233
BBC
URL 308
Bfxr
URL 308
Blender
URL 308
BlenderKit 309
blog recommendations
Deconstructor of Fun 304

Game Design Skills 304
Game Developer 304
Bosca Ceoil
URL 308
built-in method 50

C
camera controller
implementing 215 - 219
Cannon scene
creating 230 , 231
Cannon script
writing 233 - 235
CharacterBody2D template
adding, for Player script 149 - 153
Character Controller script
working with 203 , 204
clean code concept 154 , 155
CodeDecks
URL 281
collectible items 166
strawberry scene 166 - 170
collectibles 224
collision layers 144

collision masks 144
community 306
comparison operators 101 , 102
equality 101
greater than 101
greater than or equal to 101
less than 101
less than or equal to 102
not equals 102
confetti cannon effect
creating 262 - 270
scripting 268
constants 152
coordinates 118 , 119
Creative Commons Zero (CC0) 158 , 192
cross product 129
custom functions
using 104

D
DaFont
URL 309
delta 25 , 27
design principles 311 , 312

directional light 73 , 74
direction vector 117
dot notation 121
dot product 129
double-jump animation 159 , 160
double-jump function 160 , 161

E
educational resources
blogs 303 , 304
utilizing 302
YouTube 302 , 303
Entertainment Software Rating Board (ESRB) 284
exported variables 204

F
fall animation 158
fire() function 268
Flag scene
creating 235 , 236
Font Squirrel
URL 309
foundational techniques, game juice
audio feedback 251

visual feedback 251
FreeFont
URL 309
Freesound
URL 308
friction 161
functions 89 , 208
exploring 208
game events and feedback, handling 212 - 215
input map, creating 209 , 210
_physics_process(delta) 91
player controls and actions, implementing 211
_process 90
_process(delta) 90
_ready 89 , 90
return values 107 , 108

G
game design 277
documentation, significance 279 , 280
examples 278
foundations 278 , 279
game design document (GDD) 279
anchor points 285

assets 285
audience 284
elements, describing 286
expanded concept paragraph and USP 283
exploring 282
genre 284
guiding principles 280 - 282
monetization 286
platforms 285
player’s experience 284
project, status 282
review competition 285
statement of concept 283
team 282
title 282
game design document (GDD), elements
archive 298
audio and visual style 290
current concerns and considerations 298
detailed asset list 295
details, implementation 299
game objects 294
player progression and objectives 286 , 287
playtesting 297 , 298

prototypes 296
software requirements 292 , 293
systems and features 291 , 292
user interface 288
world and background 287 , 288
Game Developers Conference (GDC) 306
game development
practice opportunities, exploring 304
Game Docs
reference link 282
game engine 6 , 307
game ideas
developing 310 , 311
game jams 305
Godot Wild Jam 306
Ludum Dare 306
participating in 305
The Global Game Jam 306
game juice 250
examples 250
foundational techniques 251
game loop 90
Gamescrye
reference link 280

GDScript 56 , 84
Gem scene
creating 224 , 225
Gem script
adding 225 - 229
GIMP
URL 307
Git
URL 308
Godot 6
features 7
URL 8
Godot 4
setting up 8 - 11
Godot 4.0 3
Godot Project Manager 12
graphic tools 307
Blender 308
GIMP 307
Krita 307
LibreSprite 307
gray boxing 297
grouping 203

H
HacknPlan
URL 281
handle_controls function 211
handle_respawn() function
grounded state tracking 214
landing animation 214
resetting scale 214
scene reload 214
heads-up display (HUD) 249
health bar HUD
heart-based health system, developing 252 - 255
HUD, updating in level script 255 - 257
implementing 251 , 252
helper variables 159 , 160
hit animation
adding 257 - 262
hook 283

I
idle animation 158
input map 209
creating 209 , 210
instance 38

irregular collision shapes
handling 199 - 201
itch.io
URL 309

J
jump animation 158

K
Kenney
URL 308
Krita
URL 307

L
LEGO model 34
level completion
implementing 183 - 186
level component
creating 197
grass platform, creating 197 - 199
level design 196
creating 196
irregular collision shapes, handling 199 - 201
level component, creating 197

level layout, creating 201 , 202
level layout
creating 201 , 202
level scene, organizing 202
LibreSprite
URL 307
lighting 72
directional light 73 , 74
omni light 74 - 78
spotlight 78 - 80
linear algebra 129
linear interpolation 213
LMMS
URL 308
Lospec
URL 308

M
Material Maker
reference link 65
materials 62
applying 65 , 66
creating, for object 62 - 65
replicating 67

shiny metal material 68 , 69
texture, adding 71
transparent pink capsule 70
mathematical operators
addition 98
division 98 , 99
multiplication 98 , 99
subtraction 98 , 99
mesh 59
MeshInstance3D 59
minimum viable product (MVP) 281
movement 122
mushroom stomping 180 - 183

N
networking 306
professionals 307
with community 306
nodes 30 , 34
working 30
non-player characters (NPCs) 294
normalized vector 117 , 125 , 129
Notion
URL 281

O
Obsidian
URL 281
obstacles 230
omni light 74 - 78
OneNote
URL 281
OpenGameArt
URL 308
operators 98
comparison 101 , 102
mathematical 98 , 99
order of operations 100

P
parameter 105
particle effects 238
PascalCase 96
pass-through platforms
setting up 165 , 166
patrolling enemy
adding 175 - 179
PEMDAS 100
Pixabay 308

Pixel Adventure 1
reference link 158
Pixel Adventure 2
reference link 158
player animations
controlling, with code 158 , 159
player input
player reactions, scripting to 49
reacting to 39 - 48
player reactions, to player input
input handling 50 - 52
label, hiding 49
Player script
CharacterBody2D template, adding for 149 - 153
point 114
portfolio 309
building 309
positioning 122
position vectors 118
project
additional scene, adding 38
creating 12 - 22
editing 31 - 33
Label node, removing from Main scene 35 - 37

Q
Quaternius
URL 308

R
RayCast2D 179
resources 7 , 34 , 308 , 309
return values 106 , 107
Roobyx
reference link 280
run animation 158

S
scalar 125
scene 31 , 34
dynamic, making 23 , 24
SCREAMING_SNAKE_CASE 96
scripts 31
creating 84 - 88
shortcut operator 99
sine function
using 246 , 247
smoke scene
creating 238 - 242

snake_case 96
sound effect
adding 270 , 271
implementing 272 - 274
spotlight 78 - 80
sprite 39
sprite sheet 139 , 167
StaticBody3D node 197
using, for stationary elements 197
strawberry scene 166 - 170
Strawberry script
implementing 170 - 173
String 97
stub testing 181

T
tests
running 220
TileMap 157
level, building 132 - 136
tools 307
audio tools 308
game engine 307
graphic tools 307

version control 308

U
unique selling points (USPs) 283
Unsplash 308
user interface (UI) 251

V
variables 93
creating 93 , 94
data types 95
naming conventions 96 , 97
Player script, linking with camera 205 - 207
reference variables method, adding 207 , 208
using 204
variable scope 101
vector addition 123 , 124
vector length 127
vector multiplication 125 , 126
vectors 114 , 115
distance, calculating to object 128
normalization 128
using 119 - 122
vector subtraction 124

velocity 116
velocity vector 116

W
wall-slide animation 159 , 160
wall-slide function 161 , 162
conditions, checking 162
download speed, limiting 162 , 163
input, detecting 162
resetting 162

Y
YouTube channels
GameDev Journey 303
GDQuest 302
Godot Tutorials 303
Heartbeast 303

Z
ZapSplat
URL 308
OceanofPDF.com

