Graph Data Science
with Python and
Neo4j
Hands-on Projects on Python and Neo4j
Integration for Data Visualization and
Analysis Using Graph Data Science
for Building Enterprise Strategies
Timothy Eastridge

www.orangeava.com

Copyright © 2024 Orange Education Pvt Ltd, AVA™
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or
transmitted in any form or by any means, without the prior written permission of the publisher,
except in the case of brief quotations embedded in critical articles or reviews.
Every effort has been made in the preparation of this book to ensure the accuracy of the
information presented. However, the information contained in this book is sold without warranty,
either express or implied. Neither the author nor Orange Education Pvt Ltd or its dealers and
distributors, will be held liable for any damages caused or alleged to have been caused directly
or indirectly by this book.
Orange Education Pvt Ltd has endeavored to provide trademark information about all of the
companies and products mentioned in this book by the appropriate use of capital. However,
Orange Education Pvt Ltd cannot guarantee the accuracy of this information. The use of
general descriptive names, registered names, trademarks, service marks, etc. in this
publication does not imply, even in the absence of a specific statement, that such names are
exempt from the relevant protective laws and regulations and therefore free for general use.
First published: March 2024
Published by: Orange Education Pvt Ltd, AVA™
Address: 9, Daryaganj, Delhi, 110002 (INDIA)
275 New North Road Islington Suite 1314 London,
N1 7AA United Kingdom (UK)
ISBN: 978-81-97081-96-5
www.orangeava.com

Dedicated To
My sons
May you always see beyond the data
towards a more whole and complete world

About the Author
Timothy Eastridge is an Insights Strategist known for innovation and
thought leadership in integrating knowledge graphs with Generative AI
and Large Language Models (LLMs). His expertise in extracting
actionable insights from complex datasets positions him as a leader in
transforming data into insights. Tim’s innovative solutions have resulted
in billions of dollars of suspicious activity reports (SARs) for a major
bank related to the Paycheck Protection Program (PPP). He has also
consulted with the United States Government’s Pandemic Response
Accountability Committee (PRAC), leading the team in the
identification, prioritization, and indictment of fraudsters using a
combination of unsupervised machine learning and recommendation
systems.
Tim has also led GenAI projects in the private equity sector to deliver
millions in value to clients by implementing graph neural networks
(GNNs) to uncover alpha and new investment strategies. His mission is
to help clients illuminate the hidden connections within data to reveal
actionable insights.

About the Technical Reviewer
Siddhant Agarwal is currently leading Developer Communities for
APAC at Neo4j. Formerly, he pioneered India's first fintech community
as the 'Developer Relations Lead' at Open Financial Technologies,
100th unicorn of India. Prior to that, he spearheaded community efforts
as a Program Manager with Google's Developer Relations team in
India, overseeing programs like Developer Student Clubs, TensorFlow
User Groups, Google Developer Groups, and Google Developer
Experts. In 2019, he collaborated with the Ministry of Electronics and
Information Technology, Government of India, to launch 'Build for
Digital India,' engaging over 7,000 students in solving India's
challenges.
He is passionate about design thinking and enjoys mentoring startups
to enhance their UX and designs. Recognized as one of ACM's
Distinguished Speakers, his career of roughly a decade has been
dedicated to building, scaling, and growing developer and startup
communities in India, launching ed-tech initiatives, fostering design
innovation, and contributing to the startup ecosystem.
In 2021, he was nominated as a finalist for the CMX Community
Industry Awards for his role in community building. As an avid public
speaker, he has shared insights at over 1,000 national and
international forums, reaching 300,000+ individuals.

Acknowledgements
This journey of writing Graph Data Science with Python and Neo4j has
been an enriching experience, one that I could not have embarked on
without the support and encouragement of many.
First and foremost, I extend my heartfelt gratitude to my data science
peers. Your expertise and feedback have been invaluable. Your
excitement, passion, and curiosity are an inspiration, and this book is a
testament to the collective knowledge and spirit of our community.
To my family, thank you. A special thanks to my wonderful wife, who
tolerated and supported my early morning writing sessions. Your
patience, love, and belief in my work provided much-needed strength
for this endeavor.
Lastly, I wish to acknowledge the global data science and open-source
community. This book draws upon the wealth of open-source tools,
shared knowledge, and collective wisdom of this vibrant community.
Together, we are pushing the boundaries of what's possible, making a
tangible impact on the world around us.
Thank you all for being part of this journey. Let’s continue to explore,
discover, and innovate for the advancement of data science and the
betterment of humanity.

Preface
Who is this Book For?
The focus of Data Science is to extract actionable insights and
intelligence from data. Graph Data Science is an important domain of
Data Science that stitches together data architecture and design, data
analytics, statistical analysis, and machine learning.
In Graph Data Science with Python and Neo4j, you will find a
comprehensive analysis of data analytics with graph theory,
accompanied by practical exercises that cover multiple aspects and
domains of graph data science. Readers will grasp both the
fundamentals as well as the practical experience to implement this form
of data analytics on their own. The book covers topics in graph data
science related to exploratory data analysis, supervised machine
learning, unsupervised machine learning, recommendation systems,
and more.
Whether you are new to data science or a seasoned veteran, you will
find this book to be a refreshingly simple introduction and application of
this form of analytics.
At its core, graph data science is simply an intuitive representation of
connected data. This book will illustrate how we can leverage this
intuitive, connected data design to supercharge our data analytics.
What this Book Covers
This book expands beyond a surface-level explanation and delves into
the nitty-gritty details of network structures, graph algorithms, and
similarity networks. This book provides a comprehensive
understanding of graph data science concepts.
Chapter 1. Introduction to Graph Data Science
This chapter is an introduction to graph data science. It starts with the
basics of graph theory and emphasizes the value of graph
visualizations in making data insights accessible. It explores the
synergy between data science, machine learning, and graph
technology. Additionally, it introduces Python programming as a crucial

skill for leveraging Neo4j's capabilities and sets a foundation for
advanced graph-based analysis in the chapters that follow.
Chapter 2. Getting Started with Python and Neo4j
This chapter guides you through the initial steps of setting up your
environment for graph data science with Python and Neo4j. It begins
with a walkthrough of installing Python, followed by an introduction to
the Cypher Query Language, which is used to interact with Neo4j
databases. The chapter also introduces Neo4j's interfaces, providing
clarity on how to navigate and utilize them effectively including how to
establish a connection between Python and the Neo4j database.
Chapter 3. Importing Data into the Neo4j Graph Database
This chapter compares graph databases to traditional relational
databases and speaks to the benefits of the Neo4j graph database. It
introduces graph database terminology, providing a foundation for
understanding graph data structures. The chapter also covers the
basics of the Neo4j Cypher query language which is used to query and
manipulate data in Neo4j. Finally, it guides readers through the process
of importing data into Neo4j.
Chapter 4. Cypher Query Language
This chapter centers around crafting Cypher queries. It starts with
basic MATCH, WHERE, and RETURN operations and moves to
advanced techniques using COLLECT, CONTAINS, and EXISTS. It
introduces the concept of counting relationships or "degrees" of nodes.
This chapter contains a section on generating Graph Data Science
(GDS) projections and creating "similar" relationships between nodes
based on common attributes. Finally, the chapter covers Cypher query
"explain" plans for optimizing query performance.
Chapter 5. Visualizing Graph Networks
This chapter dives into using Neo4j Bloom for graph visualization. The
chapter begins with setup instructions. It explains rules-based styling
as well as exporting data to CSVs for sharing and further analysis. The
chapter also speaks to the integration of graph data with Power BI for
advanced visual analytics, streamlining the process from setup to
creating compelling graph visualizations.
Chapter 6. Enriching Data with ChatGPT

This chapter begins by introducing the ChatGPT technology which lays
the groundwork for integrating AI-driven insights into graph data
analysis. The chapter explores a patent dataset, showcasing how to
uncover patterns and insights from a rich network of patents. The
chapter explores enriching data using the ChatGPT API in Python.
Next, it details creating embeddings of patent summaries, a step
crucial for understanding and leveraging the semantic content of
patents. Finally, it concludes with techniques for reducing the size of
vector embeddings, enabling their visualization with Plotly in Python.
Chapter 7. Neo4j Vector Index and Retrieval-Augmented
Generation (RAG)
This chapter covers vector indexing in Neo4j, starting with the
preparation of stock market text data for vector embeddings. It outlines
the process of creating and storing these embeddings in Neo4j,
demonstrating how to enhance the depth and utility of a knowledge
graph with contextual data.
Chapter 8. Graph Algorithms in Neo4j
This chapter explores advanced graph analysis techniques, starting
with centrality measures to identify the most influential nodes within a
network. It then explores community detection algorithms, which
segment graphs into closely connected clusters. The chapter also
introduces network embeddings and graph neural networks which are
cutting-edge methods that translate graph structures into numerical
representations, facilitating machine learning applications on graph
data.
Chapter 9. Recommendation Engines Using Embeddings
This chapter walks readers through the process of loading a patent
database dump into the Neo4j Desktop environment. It introduces two
approaches to building recommendation engines: 1) the RetrievalAugmented Generation (RAG) approach and 2) the RetrievalQA
approach. The RAG section explores how to enhance recommendation
systems by integrating retrieval capabilities with generative models,
while the RetrievalQA part covers question-answering models for more
precise recommendations.
Chapter 10. Fraud Detection
This chapter discusses fraud detection analysis which is a common use
case for graph databases due to the nature of interconnected data. It

discusses the importance of data engineering and the processes
involved in enriching the fraud dataset. Furthermore, the chapter
introduces graph data science techniques tailored for fraud detection.
Closing Summary: The Future of Graph Data Science
This concluding chapter envisions the future of graph data science. It
emphasizes the role of graph technology in deriving actionable insights
and the synergy between knowledge graphs and Large Language
Models like GPT for deeper contextual understanding. This forwardlooking perspective aims to inspire continued exploration in the field of
graph data science.
Libraries/Tools/Software/Platforms/Programming
Languages/Tech:
Neo4j: Graph database platform
Python: Programming language for data science
Cypher: Query language for Neo4j
Neo4j Bloom: Tool for visualizing graph data
Graph Embeddings: Techniques for node embeddings and
representations

A Note from the Author
Dear readers,
Welcome to this exciting journey into the world of graph data science! I
wrote this book to help others understand the concepts of graph data
science more quickly, so they can begin to explore and implement
these concepts on their own data. This topic has significantly changed
my perception of best data practices because so many data use cases
are truly graph problems. I am confident that you will quickly
understand and embrace this as you read through this book. My goal is
to help people like you get up to speed as quickly as possible. Code
examples and a GitHub repo with all the code are provided to ensure
that you are able to follow along with the examples and get your hands
dirty with graph data science straight away!
We will start by introducing concepts of knowledge graphs, which exist
all around us, along with the technologies used in this book to
communicate and implement graph data science, including Neo4j and
Python. Once we have set the foundation, we will dive into practical
applications such as constructing knowledge graphs from structured
and unstructured data using NLP techniques, implementing graph
algorithms, and visualizing graph data to gain insights and knowledge
from the data.
Furthermore, we will walk through many graph algorithms with helpful
code examples along the way to enable you to follow along and digest
the information in a meaningful way. Graph algorithms help us answer
routine (yet difficult) questions. For example, “Who is the most
‘important’ person in this social graph?” or “Which item will this person
‘most likely’ choose to purchase next?”, or “Which of these businesses
could be involved in illegal money laundering schemes?”
As you will see, the topic of graph data science stretches across many
verticals, which is why I wanted to write this book - to assist data
practitioners in their quest to better represent and interpret their data.
Let’s prepare to embark on this graph data science journey together.
All you have to do is follow along and stay curious – your brain will

weave a knowledge graph from the contents of this book, delivering
wisdom amidst the vast landscape of graph data science!
- Tim Eastridge

Downloading the code
bundles and colored images
Please follow the link or scan the QR code to download the
Code Bundles and Images of the book:

https://github.com/ava-orangeeducation/Graph-Data-Science-withPython-and-Neo4j

The code bundles and images of the book are also hosted on
https://rebrand.ly/674a11

In case there’s an update to the code, it will be updated on the existing
GitHub repository.

Errata
We take immense pride in our work at Orange Education Pvt Ltd and
follow best practices to ensure the accuracy of our content to provide
an indulging reading experience to our subscribers. Our readers are
our mirrors, and we use their inputs to reflect and improve upon human
errors, if any, that may have occurred during the publishing processes
involved. To let us maintain the quality and help us reach out to any
readers who might be having difficulties due to any unforeseen errors,
please write to us at :
errata@orangeava.com
Your support, suggestions, and feedback are highly appreciated.

DID YOU KNOW
Did you know that Orange Education Pvt Ltd offers eBook versions
of every book published, with PDF and ePub files available? You
can upgrade to the eBook version at www.orangeava.com and as
a print book customer, you are entitled to a discount on the eBook
copy. Get in touch with us at: info@orangeava.com for more
details.
At www.orangeava.com, you can also read a collection of free
technical articles, sign up for a range of free newsletters, and receive
exclusive discounts and offers on AVA™ Books and eBooks.

PIRACY
If you come across any illegal copies of our works in any form on the
internet, we would be grateful if you would provide us with the
location address or website name. Please contact us at
info@orangeava.com with a link to the material.

ARE YOU INTERESTED IN AUTHORING
WITH US?
If there is a topic that you have expertise in, and you are interested
in either writing or contributing to a book, please write to us at
business@orangeava.com. We are on a journey to help
developers and tech professionals to gain insights on the present
technological advancements and innovations happening across the
globe and build a community that believes Knowledge is best
acquired by sharing and learning with others. Please reach out to us
to learn what our audience demands and how you can be part of this
educational reform. We also welcome ideas from tech experts and
help them build learning and development content for their domains.

REVIEWS
Please leave a review. Once you have read and used this book, why
not leave a review on the site that you purchased it from? Potential

readers can then see and use your unbiased opinion to make
purchase decisions. We at Orange Education would love to know
what you think about our products, and our authors can learn from
your feedback. Thank you!
For more information about Orange Education, please visit
www.orangeava.com.

Table of Contents
1. Introduction to Graph Data Science
Introduction
Structure
Data Science and Machine Learning
Defining Graph
The importance of Graph Structures
Introducing Neo4j Graph Database
Knowledge Graphs
Introducing Python Programming Language
Conclusion
Multiple Choice Questions
Answers
2. Getting Started with Python and Neo4j
Introduction
Structure
Installing and Setting Up Python and Neo4j
Installing Python
Executing Python Code Using Common Libraries
Incorporating New Libraries Using Conda
Introduction to Cypher in Neo4j
Installing GDS and APOC Plugins
Installing and Setting Up the Neo4j Database
Neo4j Desktop Installation on Local Machine
Introduction to Neo4j Aura Database
Connecting Python to Neo4j
On-Premise or Cloud Configurations
Conclusion
3. Import Data into the Neo4j Graph Database
Introduction
Structure
Understanding the Neo4j graph database
Features and advantages of Neo4j for graph data science

Graph database terminology and concepts
Introduction to Cypher query language
Data import
Data transformations and preprocessing in Neo4j
Creating data with Cypher
Importing data into Neo4j Aura
Importing data into Neo4j desktop with admin import
Importing data into Neo4j with CSVs and Python
Importing data into Neo4j with Pandas
Conclusion
Things to Remember
4. Cypher Query Language
Introduction
Structure
Key elements of a Cypher query
Getting started with Cypher
Querying data of individuals with Cypher
Querying data of recipes with Cypher
Advanced querying and data manipulation with Cypher
Advanced filtering
Degree functions
Graph projections
Creating SIMILAR_RECIPE relationship
Canceling long-running queries
Explaining queries before executing
Conclusion
Points to Remember
5. Visualizing Graph Networks
Introduction
Structure
Graph Visualizations with Bloom
Setting Up Neo4j Bloom
Saving Cypher Queries in Bloom
Formatting Your Bloom Visualization
Rules-based Formatting in Bloom
Expanding Nodes in Bloom with Expand and Scene Actions
Visualizing with Power BI

Conclusion
Points to Remember
6. Enriching Neo4j Data with ChatGPT
Introduction
Structure
Getting Started with ChatGPT
Importing the Database in Aura DB
Exploratory Data Analysis (EDA) of the Patent Database
Enriching Neo4j Data with ChatGPT
Creating Embeddings of the Patent Summaries
Reducing the Dimension of Embeddings
Conclusion
Points to Remember
7. Neo4j Vector Index and Retrieval-Augmented Generation
(RAG)
Introduction
Structure
Neo4j Vector Indexing
Data Preparation for Vector Embeddings
Storing the Data in Neo4j as a Vector Embedding
Enriching the Knowledge Graph from the Embeddings
Semantic Search App with Streamlit
Conclusion
Points to Remember
8. Graph Algorithms in Neo4j
Introduction
Structure
Centrality
PageRank
Community Detection
Louvain Hierarchical Clustering
Similarity
Jaccard Similarity Index
Link Prediction
Adamic-Adar Index

Network Embeddings and Graph Neural Network
GraphSAGE
Conclusion
Points to Remember
9. Recommendation Engines Using Embeddings
Introduction
Structure
Patent Recommendations
Loading Patent Data
RAG Retrieval for Patents
RetrievalQA Chains for Patents
Conclusion
Points to Remember
10. Fraud Detection
Introduction
Structure
Exploratory Analysis of the Fraud Detection Dataset
Data Engineering
Graph Data Science for Fraud Detection
Conclusion
Multiple Choice Questions
Answers
Closing Summary: The Future of Graph Data Science
Introduction
The Evolution of Graph Technology
Key Takeaways from the Book
Index

CHAPTER 1

Introduction to Graph Data Science
Introduction
In this chapter, we will provide an introduction and overview of graph
data science as a method to explore contextual relationships in data. We
will explore the significance and versatility of graphs in various domains.
Our daily lives are full of graphs, from social media to the maps we use
to drive to work, to the recommendations provided to us on our favorite
TV streaming network.
We will analyze Python and Neo4j as the tools to learn and explore
graphs. These tools offer extensive libraries as well as robust community
support, which makes them a great choice for the journey of graph data
science.

Structure
In this chapter, the following topics will be covered:
Understanding Graphs, Graph Networks, and their Relevance
Introduction to Neo4j Graph Database
Overview of the Importance of Graph Visualizations
Data Science and Machine Learning
Introduction to Graph Data Science
Introduction to the Python Programming Language

Data Science and Machine Learning
Before we jump into the fascinating world of graph data science, it’s
important to clarify two fundamental terms: “data science” and “machine
learning.” While we assume a certain level of familiarity with these
concepts, we will guide you along the way.

Data Science is a multidisciplinary field that involves extracting
knowledge and insights from data through various techniques such as
data mining, data visualization, and statistical analysis. Data science
involves the end-to-end process of acquiring, cleaning, transforming,
and analyzing data to uncover patterns, make predictions, and drive
better decision-making:

Figure 1.1: Visual of end-to-end data analysis (Source: https://encryptedtbn0.gstatic.com/images?
q=tbn:ANd9GcRXeY_2rpyHpnH9QJYk61usUIQ1NTXrWrQefA&usqp=CAU)

Machine Learning, on the other hand, is a subset of data science that
focuses on developing algorithms and models that enable computers to
learn from data and make predictions or take actions without being
explicitly programmed. Machine learning algorithms learn from historical
data to identify patterns, make predictions, and automate decisionmaking processes on new, never-before-seen data.

Figure 1.2: Visual of a computer processing a large amount of historical data and then
exporting predictions (Source: https://www.dataversity.net/future-analytics-hype-real/)

In summary, while the two are often used as synonyms, data science
provides the foundation and tools to explore, interpret, and gain insights
from data, while machine learning leverages the data to build predictive
models and make accurate predictions and/or automated decisions.
Together, the two form a powerful combination that drives innovation
and enables data-driven solutions.

Defining Graph
While you might first think of a graph as a pie chart or an x and y axis,
we refer to a graph in this book as something else entirely. In discrete
mathematics and graph theory, a graph is a structure that consists of
objects or nodes (illustrated as dots in Figure 1.3) where pairs of objects
or nodes are connected or related in some way. These objects can be

referred to as vertices, nodes, or points. In this book, we will refer to
these objects as nodes.
The connections between the vertices are referred to as edges,
relationships, or links (illustrated as lines connecting the dots in Figure
1.3). In this book, we will refer to the connections between nodes as
relationships.
In Neo4j, data can be stored on both nodes and relationships. We will
refer to this data as properties of either the node or relationship:

Figure 1.3: Nodes and Relationships (created using DALL-E)

The Importance of Graph Structures
Although the concept of graphs may initially seem too “mathematical” or
abstract, the truth is that graphs are present in our everyday lives, and
we often think in terms of graphs without even realizing it.

Consider your social circle or network of friends. Each person can be
represented as a node, while the connections or friendships between
individuals can be represented as a relationship. This forms a social
graph that helps us understand how people are interconnected and how
information flows within our social circles.
In the realm of internet search, graphs are central to search engines like
Google. When you enter a search query, Google analyzes the web
graph to determine the relevance and importance of different web
pages. This enables the search engine to provide you with the most
relevant results, considering factors like page popularity, linking
patterns, and the overall structure of the web graph.
In transportation and logistics, graphs play a crucial role in route
planning and optimization. Road networks can be represented as
graphs, with intersections as nodes and roads as relationships. By
analyzing this transportation graph, algorithms can calculate the shortest
or fastest routes from one location to another, helping us navigate
efficiently.
In banking, graphs play a crucial role in detecting potentially suspicious
and fraudulent behavior in transaction data. Banks analyze transactional
data using graph-based techniques to identify patterns and anomalies
that may indicate fraudulent activities. By representing customer
accounts, transactions, and their relationships as a graph, banks can
detect unusual connections, such as multiple accounts linked to a single
individual, unexpected money flows, or patterns resembling known fraud
schemes. The graph-based analysis enables banks to proactively
monitor and mitigate risks, safeguarding the integrity of financial
systems and protecting customers from fraudulent activities. Graphs
provide a comprehensive view of transactional networks, empowering
banks to stay one step ahead in the constant battle against financial
crime.
Graphs are also integral to recommendation systems that suggest
products, movies, or music based on our preferences. By analyzing our
past interactions, such as purchases, ratings, or clicks, recommendation
engines create a personalized graph of our preferences. They then
utilize graph-based algorithms to find similar users or items, enabling
them to suggest relevant and personalized recommendations.
These examples only scratch the surface of how graphs are utilized in
various domains. We will cover each of these topics in depth in this

book.
In this chapter, we go beyond just providing you with a knowledge base.
Implementing graph data science techniques may initially seem
daunting, but don’t worry! We will guide you through practical code
examples that will not only deepen your understanding but also equip
you with the technical abilities required to implement these concepts
yourself. While there may be a learning curve, hang tight. This book will
provide you with everything you need to succeed. By the end, you will be
grateful that you invested the time to read this book, as it will empower
you to harness the full potential of graphs and unlock new insights in
your data analysis endeavors.

Introducing Neo4j Graph Database
Neo4j is an efficient native graph database. The term native means it
has been specifically built for handling graph data structures and their
associated algorithms and operations. Neo4j has a robust community
and documentation. As an open-source platform, it receives
maintenance from both internal Neo4j developers as well as a diverse
community of external developers.
Neo4j differs from non-native graph databases of the NoSQL or
relational types such as MongoDB, Amazon Neptune, SQL Server, and
ArangoDB. Furthermore, a native graph database differs from
Resource Description Framework (RDF) databases, which
specialize in data interchange on the Web, such as Virtuoso, Stardog,
and others. Lastly, vector databases have increased in popularity since
the release of ChatGPT and other more recent large language models
(LLMs). In this book, we will explore leveraging Neo4j to store vectors
and implement similarity searches. However, it is important to note that
Neo4j is not considered a vector database per se, unlike Pinecone,
Milvus, FAISS (Facebook AI Similarity Search), and others.
To summarize, Neo4j is a very popular graph database because of its
scalability, community, and native graph data structure. It’s a terrific
software choice for datasets that house many connections between data
points and where scrutinizing the interconnection of these data points is
critical.

Knowledge Graphs

As a data scientist by trade, understanding and appreciating the value
of tailoring data to address specific problems at hand is crucial. Whether
you are an analyst aiming to extract key insights from the data, a data
scientist striving to build accurate predictions, or an executive seeking a
cost-effective, flexible, and elegant data design, storing data as a Graph
can satisfy both you and your stakeholders’ needs.
Within the domain of graph data science, visualizations take center
stage as a powerful tool for unraveling the intricacies of complex
networks. They allow us to comprehend the subtle relationships within
interconnected data and effectively communicate valuable insights.
Visual representations play a vital role in bridging the gap between raw
data and actionable knowledge:

Figure 1.4: 3D picture of graph (created using DALL-E)

Data storytelling conveys insights, making data relatable and impactful.
Graphs enhance communication by visually representing complex
information, highlighting patterns, and engaging the audience. Graphs
condense data, support the narrative, and enable interactivity for deeper
exploration. Effective data storytelling combines narratives with concise
and intuitive visualizations to captivate and inform audiences, fostering
data-driven decision-making.
In this chapter, we will leverage Bloom for network visualization as well
as NetworkX. Bloom is developed and supported by the company Neo4j

and offers a terrific platform for data exploration and network analysis.
NetworkX is an open-source Python package often used in academia to
study the structure, dynamics, and connections of complex networks.
NetworkX provides basic visualizations using a Matplotlib backend, but
visualizations with this library are fairly limited and may not be suitable
for exploring larger networks. In such cases, one may choose to utilize
Bloom. There are several vendor tools and open-source options
available for visualizing networks as well, which are outside the scope of
this book, but are mentioned here:
Linkurious: It is widely used in various fields such as fraud
detection, intelligence analysis, and cyber-security.
Hume by GraphAware: Hume is built on top of Neo4j and aims to
help organizations derive insights from connected data through
visualization, analysis, and machine learning. Hume allows users to
create visualizations that reflect real-world entities and
relationships, making it easier to understand complex networks.
VizNetwork package in R: VizNetwork is a package available in
the R programming language. It is geared toward the visualization
of networks and graphs. VizNetwork allows users to create
interactive network graphs and is highly customizable, allowing for
different types of nodes, edges, and graph layouts.
Gephi: Gephi is an open-source network visualization and analysis
tool. It allows users to explore data through various graphs,
interactive visualizations, and statistical reports. Gephi is especially
popular in academic and research circles for its extensive
capabilities and customizability.
D3.js: D3.js is a JavaScript library for manipulating documents
based on data. It can be used to create intricate, interactive graph
visualizations in web browsers.
Power BI: Microsoft’s Power BI has some network visualization
plugins that can be used to incorporate graph data visualizations
into broader BI dashboards and reports. However, as of the
publication of this book, Power BI’s network visualization
capabilities are relatively limited. Users are restricted to specific
visualizations without much ability to customize visualizations.

Figure 1.5: Graph visualization with Neo4j Bloom

Introducing Python Programming Language
Python is a versatile and easy-to-learn programming language and is
often the choice for developers who work with data analysis,
aggregation, and manipulation. The company Neo4j supports a Python
API driver to connect to the Neo4j database, making for seamless
integration. We will cover all the configuration and connection steps in
this book.

Furthermore, Python has emerged as one of the most popular
programming languages in the data science community in recent years
due to its ease of use, extensive libraries, and community support. The
language is readable and therefore caters well to professionals without a
traditional software engineering background. In data science, Python is
widely used for tasks such as statistical analysis, natural language
processing (NLP), machine learning, deep learning, and more.
Python is a natural fit to connect to Neo4j due to its relevance in the data
science community, Neo4j-supported driver, as well as its extensions to
libraries such as NeworkX, which is designed for the creation,
manipulation, and analysis of complex graph networks.
It is also worth noting that Neo4j supports drivers for other programming
languages such as C#, Java, and Node.js. The terrific Neo4j community
has also created community drivers for Go, PHP, Ruby, R, and Scala.

Conclusion
In this chapter, we explored the significance and versatility of graphs in
various domains. Graphs are fundamental in our daily lives. The
flexibility of this data structure allows for many new opportunities for data
storage, data science, and visualization.
Graphs are critical in many domains, including web connections, social
interactions, fraud detection, optimal transportation routes,
pharmaceuticals, and many more.
We explored why this book covers Python and Neo4j as tools to learn
and explore graphs. These tools offer extensive libraries, simplicity, and
robust community support, which make them a great choice for the
journey of graph data science.
In summary, this chapter lays the foundation for understanding graph
data science and its relevance in real-world applications. In the next
chapter, we will walk step-by-step through the installation and
configuration of Python and Neo4j, so that you can follow along with
code examples throughout the book.

Multiple Choice Questions
1. Which of the following
understanding networks?

best

defines

the

significance

of

a. To analyze social media trends
b. To map out connections and relationships in various domains
c. To create visuals for presentations
d. To increase computer storage
2. What is the primary function of knowledge graphs?
a. Displaying statistical data
b. Linking interconnected data and concepts
c. Creating 3D graphics
d. Organizing data in tables
3. Why is Python frequently chosen for graph-related tasks?
a. It’s the newest programming language
b. It has a snake logo
c. It offers a range of libraries and tools suitable for graph
operations
d. It’s only for web development
4. What is Neo4j primarily used for?
a. Storing relational database tables
b. Processing large text files
c. Storing and querying graph data
d. Designing website interfaces
5. Why are graph visualizations crucial in the context of networks and
graphs?
a. They make data colorful and vibrant
b. They help spot patterns and relationships easily
c. They are necessary for printing
d. They increase the speed of the database

Answers
1. b
2. b

3. c
4. c
5. b

CHAPTER 2

Getting Started with Python and
Neo4j
Introduction
Python and Neo4j are both terrific tools for graph data science. Each offers
powerful tools and frameworks to analyze interconnected data. In theory, it is
possible to implement end-to-end graph data science with either Python or
Neo4j individually. However, in practice, it is much simpler to leverage both
tools together to maximize the value of each tool.
Python has become one of the most popular programming languages in the
data science community due to its rich ecosystem of libraries and packages,
allowing all users to leverage the incredible work of others and jumpstart their
analysis. Python comes with several integrated development
environments (IDEs) that facilitate code visualization, allowing users not
only to view and debug their code but also to create graphs, charts, and
various other visual representations of data.
Neo4j is a highly efficient native graph database well-known for its ability to
manage complex data relationships effectively. It is the most popular and
prominent graph database, which means the community and documentation
are mature and well-established. The vibrant community of developers sets
Neo4j apart. Being an open-source platform, it benefits from contributions
from these developers. This consolidation of a strong community and efficient
speed makes Neo4j a great choice in the realm of graph databases.

Structure
In this chapter, the following topics will be covered:
Installation Process of Python
Understanding Cypher Query Language
Installation Process of Neo4j
Understanding the Interfaces
Connecting to the Neo4j Database from Python

Code Examples for Better Comprehension

Installing and Setting Up Python and Neo4j
Now, we will walk through the step-by-step process of installing and setting
up Python and Neo4j on your system. As we discussed previously, Python is
a versatile programming language widely used in data science, while Neo4j
is a powerful graph database that enables efficient management and analysis
of interconnected data. This guide will assist you in unleashing the power and
potential of these two free software tools for your graph data science
projects.
Please note that Neo4j offers a free Neo4j Desktop version as well as a paid
Enterprise version of the database. For our demonstrations, we will use
version 5.15 of the free Neo4j Desktop database.

Installing Python
Python is available on multiple operating systems, including Linux/Unix,
Windows, macOS, Android, iOS, and others such as Raspberry Pi’s
Raspbian. Python’s cross-platform compatibility makes it useful in almost any
environment. Here are the steps for installing Python:
1. Navigate
to
the
Anaconda
website
(https://www.anaconda.com/download) and download the installer
corresponding to your operating system. Anaconda is a popular
distribution of Python and R programming aimed to simplify package
management and deployment of software required for data science and
machine learning projects. Anaconda provides simple and robust
package management, pre-installed libraries, and environment
management. It is a great choice for both novice and experienced data
enthusiasts, as it streamlines the setup and management of the tools
and libraries required for analytics.
2. Follow the on-screen instructions and run the downloaded installer.
Choose an installation path and select the options to fit your needs.
3. Open the Anaconda Navigator, a graphical user interface (GUI) that
provides access to Python packages, tools, and integrated
development environments such as Jupyter Notebook, as shown in
the following figure:

Figure 2.1: Anaconda application home screen

“Hello-World” Example with Python
“Hello World” is a programming practice employed to verify the functionality
of programming languages and ensure everything has been installed
properly.
Once you have the Anaconda Navigator dashboard open, click Launch under
Jupyter Notebook. Next, select the New button and select Python 3 (or
whichever version of Python you have installed on your machine). This will
open a new Jupyter Notebook:

Figure 2.2: Creating a Jupyter Notebook

The new Jupyter Notebook will appear something like this:

Figure 2.3: New Jupyter Notebook Interface

Next, type ``print(‘Hello World!’)`` into the blank cell and press CTRL +
Enter to execute the selected cell. Shift + Enter will run the current cell and
then automatically move to the next cell. Please note that we are using
Windows for our demonstration in this book. On a macOS, the command
would be Command + Enter.
Alternatively, you can click the Run button in the toolbar at the top of the
notebook:

Figure 2.4: Command executed in Jupyter Notebook

Executing Python Code Using Common Libraries
When you use Python through the Anaconda distribution, you have several
pre-loaded packages ready to be utilized. These packages encompass a
wide range of functionalities, and we will dive into a few of the most common
packages.
In the following code block, we will load packages in the first five lines, and
then create a pandas dataframe. Next, we will use Matplotlib to plot the data
and perform a simple linear regression with scikit-learn to generate a line of
best fit for the dataset. For context, here are a few descriptions:
pandas: A Python library used for data manipulation and analysis, useful

for working with structured data in rows and columns, handling missing

data, and performing other useful transformations and analysis.
Matplotlib: A plotting library with animations, interactive visualizations,
and other fundamental tools for scientific visualization.
scikit-learn: A Python library for machine learning with algorithms for
classification, regression, and more. It is known for its simplicity and
ease of use.
“Best Fit” in a dataset: In the context of machine learning, “best-fit”
refers to a model or a line that best represents the relationship between
variables. For instance, in linear regression, a best-fit line is a straight
line that minimizes the distance between data points.
import numpy as np
import pandas as pd
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
from sklearn.linear_model import LinearRegression
from scipy import stats
# Creating a Pandas DataFrame
data = {‘Column1’: [1, 2, 3, 4, 5], ‘Column2’: [6, 7, 8, 9,
10]}
df = pd.DataFrame(data)
# Plotting the data points from the DataFrame using Matplotlib
plt.scatter(df[‘Column1’], df[‘Column2’], color=’red’,
label=’Data Points’)
# Plotting the line using Matplotlib
plt.plot(df[‘Column1’], df[‘Column2’], label=’Line of Best
Fit’)
# Adding labels and title
plt.xlabel(‘Column1’)
plt.ylabel(‘Column2’)
plt.title(‘Simple Plot with Data Points and Line of Best Fit’)
plt.legend()
# Display the plot
plt.show()
# Performing a simple linear regression using scikit-learn
X = df[‘Column1’].values.reshape(-1, 1)
y = df[‘Column2’].values
model = LinearRegression().fit(X, y)
# Using SciPy to perform a simple t-test
t_statistic, p_value = stats.ttest_ind(df[‘Column1’],
df[‘Column2’])

print(“t-statistic:”, t_statistic, “p-value:”, p_value)

Figure 2.5: Python line chart example

In the preceding figure, we use the Matplotlib library to visualize the line of
best fit, which minimizes the distances between the red data points. This is a
common machine learning technique to represent the distances between
existing data points to predict new and unseen data.

Incorporating New Libraries Using Conda
As mentioned previously, utilizing Anaconda as your Python distribution
comes with several advantages, including the package manager, Conda.
Conda is a powerful package manager with a comprehensive library of over
7500 data science and machine learning libraries out of the box.

We will use the library xgboost in the next section to illustrate advanced
machine learning on a popular data science dataset. However, xgboost does
not come pre-installed with Anaconda. Therefore, we will need to use the
Conda package manager to install this library. If you try to load the xgboost
package before you install it with Conda, then you will see an error message,
as shown in the following figure:

Figure 2.6: Example error message in loading a Python package

Let’s use Conda to install this package:

Figure 2.7: Python package installation

Next, let’s install the libraries needed later to connect to the Neo4j database
via an API from Python and load these libraries into our workspace:

Figure 2.8: Install and loaded necessary Python packages

Introduction to Cypher in Neo4j
Cypher is a query language designed for working with graph databases,
particularly Neo4j. In the same way that relational databases use SQL, the
graph database uses Cypher. It is used to create, update, and retrieve data
from a graph database. Its structure is intuitive and allows for pattern
matching that is clear and expressive.
For example, the MATCH statement is used to retrieve data. A query that starts
with `MATCH (p:Person)` will search all person nodes in the database. We can
then use the WHERE clause to specify which persons to retrieve. Finally, we
can use the RETURN statement to indicate which elements to return in the
result set.

For beginners in the world of graph databases and Neo4j, mastering Cypher
is an important step to effectively query and analyze graph data. We will
continue to use Cypher throughout this book to help readers understand and
master the query language.

Installing GDS and APOC Plugins
The Graph Data Science (GDS) library and the Awesome Procedures on
Cypher (APOC) are two plugins that dramatically improve the capabilities of
the Neo4j database. We will need to install these plugins to perform
advanced graph algorithms, operations, and connection to Python via the
GDS driver.
The company Neo4j supports the GDS library, which includes 50+ data
science algorithms.
APOC is a library containing a collection of user-defined procedures and
functions that complement and extend the capabilities of Neo4j. The APOC
library is used for many tasks, such as:
Data integration of various data sources such as JSON or XML
Utility functions such as batch processing and generating UUIDs
Execute Cypher queries in parallel
Performance monitoring tools and execution plans
Geospatial functions such as calculating the distance between two
coordinates
Time series analysis
You do not need to worry about installing these Plugins if you are only using
Aura. If you are using Neo4j Desktop, then you will need to follow these
steps:
1. Click the gray area to the left of the Start button to select the database.
2. Click the Plugins tab.
3. Click Install under both the APOC as well as GDS dropdowns.

Figure 2.9: Steps to install Plugins on Neo4j Desktop

Installing and Setting Up the Neo4j Database
Neo4j is renowned for its ability to manage, query, and analyze data with
complex relationships and interconnected elements. Next, we will guide you
through the setup required to connect Python to both the free Neo4j Desktop
as well as the fully managed Aura Cloud database, which offers a free, smallsized server for experimentation.
Neo4j Desktop is a convenient local development environment optimal for
those looking to explore the capabilities of Neo4j without working with cloud
configurations or inert connectivity. It’s beneficial for small teams and
individuals working on a prototype or learning how to use graph databases.
Neo4j Desktop allows developers to have multiple graph instances and
projects running at the same time. Furthermore, its user-friendly interface
makes it easier to manage databases and install plugins. Lastly, data privacy
is inherently more controlled as the data resides on the local machine.
Neo4j Aura, on the other hand, is a cloud-based, fully managed database-asa-service, which is ideal for production deployments and scaling. Developers
can focus on building applications without the overhead concerns of
maintenance tasks and operational overhead associated with running a
database. Aura provides automated backups, high availability, and seamless
scalability; however, this comes at a financial cost. Not to worry, in this book,
we will tinker with the free version of Aura.

Neo4j Desktop Installation on Local Machine
Neo4j offers several ways to leverage its graph database software. Navigate
to this link (https://neo4j.com/download-center/#desktop) for options to install
the Neo4j Desktop to your local machine:

Once installed, click the Add button to create a new database within your
project:

Figure 2.10: Add a new database within your project

Next, click Start to start your database:

Figure 2.11: Start the Neo4j Desktop database

Once the database is running, click the dropdown next to Open and choose
Neo4j Browser. We will start with this interface as a means to interact with
some example data:

Figure 2.12: Open the Neo4j Browser

Once the Neo4j Browser is open, type ‘:play movies’ in the console and then
press Enter to execute this line of code:

Figure 2.13: Run command in Neo4j Browser for the Movies tutorial

You will see a slider box with 1/8 tabs, as illustrated above. This tutorial is
provided to help beginners understand how to use Neo4j. Navigate to the
second page, as shown in Figure 2.14, click the Play button, and you will see
your first graph appear in Neo4j! This is a graph where the nodes represent
People and Movies, and the relationships indicate whether the people
ACTED_IN, PRODUCED, or DIRECTED the movie:

Figure 2.14: Neo4j Browser movie data visualization

Introduction to Neo4j Aura Database
Another method to access Neo4j is to use the managed cloud environment,
Aura. To connect, navigate to the Neo4j Aura website and sign up for an
account. Once you are logged in, click “New Instance.” Be sure to save a
copy of the one-time generated password. Neo4j will not ask for a credit
card, so do not worry about paying to use the free database. If you decide to
scale up your application later, you can increase the size of your instance and
place a credit card on file at that time.
For more information, please visit https://neo4j.com/cloud/platform/auragraph-database/
Once the instance has been created, click Query:

Figure 2.15: Open Neo4j Browser to query the new Aura database

Once the Neo4j Browser is loaded, you can run the same ‘:play movies’ in
the console and then press ‘Enter’ to execute this line of code:

Figure 2.16: Run the Play Movies example

From here, you can follow the aforementioned steps to create your first graph
in the Aura database environment!

Connecting Python to Neo4j
Connecting Python to Neo4j enables developers to interact with the Neo4j
graph database using Python scripts. Once a connection has been
established between Python and Neo4j, you can create, read, update, and

delete nodes and relationships in the Neo4j database efficiently and easily.
We will first connect to the database and then cover these additional
functionalities in later chapters.
Connecting to Neo4j Desktop uses a local connection. (If you are using
the Aura DB, then there will be a URI connection string, which will be covered
later.) The port number in Neo4j Desktop, which is essential for the
connection, can be found by launching the Neo4j Browser. Open the Neo4j
Browser and look at the top left corner:

Figure 2.17: Local host connection to Neo4j Browser

Next, run the following code to connect to Neo4j. In this code snippet, first
load all the necessary libraries. Second, enter the URI string, username, and
password. Lastly, use the GraphDataScience function to create an API
connection between Python and Neo4j:

Figure 2.18: Connect to Neo4j using Python API

In the URI string, we use the Bolt protocol to communicate with Neo4j. This is
a binary protocol, which means it is optimized for transmitting graph data.
Bolt is faster in terms of data transfer compared to HTTP/HTTPS.
Additionally, Bolt supports TLS encryption out of the box to ensure secure
data transmission.

On-Premise or Cloud Configurations
While the topic of on-premises and specialized cloud Neo4j configurations is
outside the scope of this book, it is important to mention that Neo4j offers
robust documentation on this topic. Cloud computing and large-scale clusters
of on-premises servers are very common in production environments, and
system administrators typically handle various components such as:
System Installation and Setup
Memory Configuration
Security Configuration
Performance Tuning
Backup and Recovery
Network Configuration
Logs and Monitoring

If you are a system administrator and would like to learn more about Neo4j in
the cloud, refer to the following documentation link. If you are installing an onpremise Linux server, you can also find documentation at the same link:
https://neo4j.com/developer/guide-cloud-deployment/

Conclusion
Congratulations! You have successfully installed Python and Neo4j, created
your first Neo4j graph model, and connected your Python environment to the
Neo4j database. In this chapter, we discussed how to install Python and
Neo4j, so that you can bolster your graph data science journey at a rapid
pace. We walked through the step-by-step process of installing Python by
leveraging the Anaconda distribution, introduction to the Cypher query
language, and the installation of the Neo4j database.
In the next chapter, we will begin our analytics within the Neo4j database and
then connect Python to Neo4j to further bolster our analysis in the
subsequent chapter.

CHAPTER 3

Importing Data into the Neo4j Graph
Database
Introduction
In a world of ever-expanding data and increasingly complex relationships
between data points, graph databases have emerged as a powerful method
to model, store, and query interconnected data in an efficient and meaningful
manner. Neo4j, at the forefront of the graph data revolution, offers a
complementary product complete with various analytics methods out of the
box, enabling you to harness the full potential of your data.
In this chapter, we take a closer look at the Neo4j database with its flexible
and scalable design, which facilitates queries to quickly analyze these
relationships in the data. You will gain a strong understanding of the
fundamental mechanics of Neo4j.
The code examples are included, and you are encouraged to actively engage
with the code in this chapter. This hands-on approach will help facilitate a
deeper understanding of each concept discussed in this chapter.

Structure
In this chapter, we will cover the following topics:
Understanding the differences between graph databases and traditional
relational databases
Features and advantages of the Neo4j graph database
Graph database terminology
Introduction to the Neo4j Cypher query language
Importing data into Neo4j

Understanding the Neo4j Graph Database
Neo4j is a highly flexible and scalable graph database. Unlike traditional
relational databases, which use tables to store data, graph databases like

Neo4j use graph structures with nodes, edges, and properties to represent
and store data.
Neo4j is an open-source graph database, implemented using Java. The
architecture of Neo4j is built from the ground up and designed to manage
graphs with these key aspects:
Native Graph Storage: This means that nodes and relationships are
stored near each other under the hood, resulting in faster retrieval
times.
Index-Free Adjacency: Neo4j stores the data with index-free
adjacency, which means that nodes physically point to their connected
nodes in storage. This eliminates the need for index lookups and large
table scans, which significantly speeds up query performance.
Scalability: Neo4j is highly scalable and can handle very large datasets
as well as complex relationships between data points.
ACID Transactions: ACID (Atomicity, Consistency, Isolation,
Durability) properties are fundamental database transaction attributes
that guarantee the reliability of data in a database-managed system:
Atomicity ensures that each transaction is treated as an
indivisible, single unit where, if any step fails, then none of the
changes are committed, preventing partial updates and/or
corrupted data. This is extremely important in industries such as
Finance or E-commerce where each individual unit is extremely
important, and the accuracy of the transaction must be 100%
guaranteed.
Consistency of a transaction means the transaction is guaranteed
to remain consistent when transferring from one state to another.
This is very important in industries like Healthcare where patient
records must remain consistent across records.
Isolation enables the transaction to occur in a manner that makes
them appear as if they were processed sequentially which
prevents one transaction from affecting the data used by another
transaction. This is important in industries like Airline Reservations
or Stock Trading where multiple customers are attempting to claim
resources simultaneously. Isolation ensures these transactions do
not interfere with one another and that the transaction is executed
accurately.
Durability guarantees the committed transaction will remain
consistent even in the event of server failure or power outage. This

is important in Disaster Recovery situations to ensure critical data
is not lost.

Features and Advantages of Neo4j for Graph
Data Science
Neo4j offers many graph algorithms out-of-the-box, which enables you to run
‘In-Database Analytics.’ This ability to run algorithms in your database
without porting your data to another analytics environment running Python or
SAS will be more efficient, saving you money by reducing complexities in your
architecture as well as reducing data redundancy and server energy
expenses.
Furthermore, Neo4j offers a flexible schema. Unlike traditional relational
databases, which require a rigid schema, Neo4j allows for an adaptable data
model which can mold and be shaped over time. This enables you to evolve
your data store and refactor your schema as new data sources emerge.
Complex data models can be implemented without the need for extensive
planning and redesign, which results in faster development cycles.
The Cypher Query Language is a unique, intuitive query language developed
by Neo4j to make it simple to work with graph data. The language is easily
readable and mirrors the way we visualize graphs. Cypher allows the user to
generate complex, multi-hop queries with pattern matching in a simple 2-3
lines of code. In comparison, a relational database query to accomplish the
same task could be dozens of lines of code involving multiple sub-queries
and table joins, and would run more slowly compared to the Cypher query in
Neo4j.
To summarize, Neo4j is faster and easier to use for many of your
interconnected data needs, which saves you time and money. Not only can
you start building your data more quickly, but you can also query your data
more efficiently as well. In deciding to switch to a graph database like Neo4j,
you need to determine the right tool for the job. If you are working with data
containing many iterations of connections to other data points, then Neo4j
might be the right tool for you.

Graph Database Terminology and Concepts
As we jump into the graph databases, it is essential to familiarize yourself
with the fundamental terminology. Understanding these foundational
elements will provide you with the knowledge to succeed with graph
databases. Sometimes, it is easiest to imagine a graph database as a

complex spider web where each data point is connected to other data points.
Graph databases help solve the valuable CTO’s million-dollar (or billiondollar) question of how we connect the dots to draw data insights.
Nodes are the ‘dots’ in terms of connecting the dots. Nodes are much like
the individual records in a database (or rows in an Excel spreadsheet). Each
node can be represented by a Label such as ‘Movie’ or ‘Actor.’ Labels can
be thought of as the columns of a table in relational data.
Relationships connect the nodes (or dots in the connecting-the-dots
analogy). Relationships are directed and always have a start and end node
and represent the associates between nodes. For example, you may have
nodes of ‘Individuals’ and you can connect these individuals with the
relationship of ‘FRIEND_OF’ to illustrate that one individual is a friend of
another individual.
Properties are additional data elements stored on the node. For example,
you may have a label of an individual with properties such as Name, Date of
Birth, and Unique ID. Properties can be thought of as additional columns in a
relational database that help describe each record/row in the data.
Relationship Properties are data elements stored in the relationship. For
example, you may have a relationship of ‘FRIEND_OF’ between two
individuals and you may want to enrich this relationship with additional
attributes such as Timestamp of Most Recent Interaction, Count of
Messages Between Individuals, and Derived Weight / Score of Friendship.
Graph Traversal is the process of moving between nodes via relationships.
This is a fundamental operation in querying graph databases due to the
nature of how graph databases store connections. One of the terms
frequently associated with graph traversal is the “number of hops.” A hop in
this context refers to the transition from one node to another node via a
relationship. For example, in a social network graph, if Mitch is friends with
Carl, and Carl is friends with Nathan, moving from Mitch to Carl would be one
hop. Similarly, moving from Mitch to Nathan would be two hops. The number
of hops can be used as a measure of closeness between nodes in a graph.
“Degrees of separation” is a concept that closely parallels the idea of
“number of hops.” Degrees of separation is a term often used in social
networks to describe the distance between two points based on relationships
or the minimum number of connections needed for a chain of relationships.
For example, in the previous example with Mitch, Carl, and Nathan, Mitch
and Nathan are said to be two degrees of separation apart.

Introduction to Cypher Query Language

Cypher is the query language developed by Neo4j to provide an intuitive way
of working with graph data. Cypher is declarative by nature, which allows you
to describe what you are looking to find and not have to explicitly write how to
find it. It is often compared to SQL for relational databases in so far as it’s an
intuitive way to send a request to the database for the data you need. Cypher
is known for its simplicity as a means to efficiently query, transform, and
extract data.
Cypher was designed with a straightforward graph pattern matching syntax,
making the queries readable and easy to understand. Let’s break down the
following query:
1. Use the word ‘MATCH’ to select the pattern we are looking to return.
2. Create a variable, i1, to specify the Label of the first node we want to
match in our query. There are often multiple Labels in your databases,
such as ‘Individual’, ‘Address’, and ‘Phone’, which can be used to
distinguish between various entities.
3. Create the variable, r, to specify the type of relationship we want to use
to match the two nodes in our query. In this case, we are looking to
return the ‘FRIENDS_OF’ relationship.
4. Incorporate the ‘WHERE’ clause to specify the specific conditions that
must be fulfilled by the nodes and relationships being queried. In this
case, the individual, i1, must have a property, ‘name,’ equal to the value
of ‘Mitch.’
5. Use the ‘RETURN’ clause to dictate the elements to be returned. The
asterisk will instruct the query to return the entire set of matched
elements. Rather than use the asterisk, you could also write “RETURN
i1, r, i2” to accomplish the same result:

Figure 3.1: Syntax of a Cypher Query

When we talk about graph databases, it’s not just the graphical
representations that are valuable but also the ability to retrieve data in a
structured, tabular format. Cypher can efficiently return data as a relational
table. In the following example, we illustrate Cypher’s ability to return the
same data as above, but in tabular, relational form:

Figure 3.2: Relational, tabular data output from a Cypher query

Data Import
Data import is the foundational step of all data analytics processes bridging
data sources into a unified platform for analysis. Data import is pivotal as it
provides the data needed for analysis and impacts the quality and accuracy
of the derived insights. Effective data import ensures the subsequent steps of
data handling and transformation and pattern detection yield meaningful
results.

Data Transformations and Preprocessing in
Neo4j
Transforming data (aka preprocessing) is a critical step before ingesting data
into Neo4j. Graph databases thrive on connected data and the quality of the
insights you can gain depends on how well the data is connected and
structured.

Extract, Transform, and Load (ETL) is the process of extracting data from
various sources, transforming it into a structured format, and loading it into
the target data store or database. In the context of Neo4j, ETL is important as
it enables us to efficiently store, manage, and manipulate graph data.
We have included a Python script that executes the ETL procedures used to
create the datasets used in this chapter. While we will not go through each
step, we encourage you to take a look at this file and familiarize yourself with
the various methods you can use to arrange files in the format you need for
optimal graph import performance.
In general, it is best practice to create files of nodes and relationships in
Comma Separated Values (CSV) format. CSV files are plain text files that
use commas to separate values, which makes them versatile and compatible
with many processing tools. For those of you accustomed to using Excel, you
may have encountered Excel has a row limit which can be a constraint when
working with large files. CSV files, on the other hand, do not have this
limitation. By utilizing CSV files for nodes and relationship files, you can
handle much larger datasets. Lastly, CSV files are often more efficient in
terms of processing time and memory usage compared to other storage
methods, which is an advantage when importing into a graph database like
Neo4j.

Creating Data with Cypher
As we mentioned before, one method to load data into Neo4j is through direct
transactions with Cypher. In the following code, you can see that we create
new nodes with the label ‘Individual’ and connect these individuals with the
relationship, ‘FRIEND_OF.’
```
CREATE (mitch:Individual {name: ‘Mitch’});
CREATE (carl:Individual {name: ‘Carl’}),
(nathan:Individual {name: ‘Nathan’}),
(sophia:Individual {name: ‘Sophia’}),
(emma:Individual {name: ‘Emma’}),
(olivia:Individual {name: ‘Olivia’}),
(james:Individual {name: ‘James’}),
(michael:Individual {name: ‘Michael’}),
(emily:Individual {name: ‘Emily’}),
(madison:Individual {name: ‘Madison’}),
(david:Individual {name: ‘David’}),
(mitch)-[:FRIEND_OF]->(carl),

(mitch)-[:FRIEND_OF]->(sophia),
(mitch)-[:FRIEND_OF]->(emma),
(mitch)-[:FRIEND_OF]->(olivia),
(mitch)-[:FRIEND_OF]->(james),
(mitch)-[:FRIEND_OF]->(michael),
(mitch)-[:FRIEND_OF]->(emily),
(mitch)-[:FRIEND_OF]->(madison),
(mitch)-[:FRIEND_OF]->(david),
(carl)-[:FRIEND_OF]->(nathan);
```

While this method of import is straightforward, intuitive, and gets the job done
quickly, this method is not feasible for large data files. In the following
sections, we will explore some of the most common methods to import largescale data into Neo4j.

Importing Data into Neo4j Aura
Neo4j Aura can be one of the most convenient and easiest-to-learn
approaches for importing data into Neo4j. Aura comes with a ‘Data Importer
tool.’
In this section, we will walk you through the process of importing data into
Neo4j Aura, step by step, and help you understand the fundamentals while
also learning the Neo4j Aura environment.
We will start by loading the Recipe datasets in the code files for this chapter.
The free version of Aura has a limit of 200,000 nodes and 400,000
relationships. Therefore, we will utilize the ‘Sample_’ files of ingredients and
recipes to illustrate the load process and focus on the full data load onto
Neo4j Desktop in a later section.
1. First, click the Import button in Aura:

Figure 3.3: Import Data in Aura DB

2. From here, you can either click the dropdown and select ‘Open model
(with data)’ and choose the file ‘Aura-Recipe-data-importer.zip’ from
the reference folder for the chapter or recreate the following data model
using the sample files in the reference folder.
The data model for this dataset is straightforward: a recipe uses
multiple ingredients. Those ingredients are shared across multiple
recipes. Also, the ‘Recipe’ node has the directions for each recipe as
well as a URL to allow you to find the original recipe online:

Figure 3.4: Create a data model for import in Aura DB

3. Once you click the ‘Recipe’ node, the ‘Mapping Details’ will appear on
the right side of your screen. From here, you can select all the
properties you would like to include from the CSV file:

Figure 3.5: Select properties for mapping in Aura DB

4. Next, click on the relationship ‘USES’ to specify the unique IDs to connect
the nodes. In this example, we have a ‘Recipe_ID’, which is a unique
numerical ID for each Recipe. Similarly, we have the ‘Ingredient_ID’ to
specify each unique Ingredient.
You will notice the terms ‘From’ and ‘To’, which identify the direction of
the relationship between nodes. These terms can alternatively be
thought of as ‘Source’ and ‘Target’, where ‘Source’ corresponds to the
‘From’ and represents the starting point of the relationship, whereas
‘Target’ aligns with the ‘To’ and denotes the endpoint of the relationship:

Figure 3.6: Create relationship mapping in Aura DB

5. Once you have the data model formatted correctly and you see the
green check marks above the nodes and relationships, then click the
Run Import button:

Figure 3.7: Confirmation message of data import in Aura DB

6. After the import has been completed successfully, let’s open Neo4j
Bloom to visualize the data! Click the ‘Explore’ button on the Aura
homepage:

Figure 3.8: Explore the Aura DB with Bloom

7. We will explain how to format Neo4j Bloom later in this book. For now,
navigate to the top left of Bloom and select ‘neo4j’ to go back to the
Perspectives page. We will import a Bloom perspective created for you
and save it in the reference material for this chapter:

Figure 3.9: Navigate back to the Bloom perspectives

8. From here, you will need to first click ‘Import’ and then select the
‘Bloom_Recipe_Perspective.json’ file.
9. Secondly, select the box ‘Bloom_Recipe_Perspective’ to open the
Bloom perspective:

Figure 3.10: Import Bloom Perspective

10. Type ‘Return Recipe Graph’ in the search bar, then click Enter:

Figure 3.11: Run the Return Recipe Graph command in Bloom

11. You will see the following network appear. If you double-click on one of
the recipes, you will see all the directions involved in creating the recipe.
As you can see, “butter” and “cream of mushroom soup” are two
shared ingredients in the selected recipes. We will dive deeper into
shared connections, commonly used ingredients, and graph data
science algorithms to explore this data in more detail in later chapters of
this book:

Figure 3.12: Visual of the recipe graph in Bloom

Importing Data into Neo4j Desktop with Admin
Import
The Neo4j Admin Import tool is a command-line utility that comes bundled
with Neo4j Desktop, Neo4j Server, and Neo4j Enterprise. It is designed to
facilitate the high-performance import of large volumes of data into a Neo4j
database. This is the fastest method to import data into Neo4j because it
bypasses the transaction layer, which requires logging, thereby reducing
overhead and especially beneficial when you need to load a substantial
volume of new data.
While there are many advantages to using Admin Import, it’s important to
acknowledge certain limitations and prerequisites associated with the tool.
The tool does not permit updates or modifications to existing data in the
database. Its utility is confined to loading new data. Furthermore, the setup
process for Admin Import CSV files is marginally more complicated
compared to other import methods. Lastly, one must have administrative
privileges to execute the Admin Import tool from the command line terminal.
Therefore, this may pose a constraint in certain environments where
administrative access is restricted. It is important to balance the benefits with

these considerations in deciding when and how to effectively employ the
Admin Import tool.
Other import methods, such as Apache Spark, are currently required to log
each transaction to Neo4j. Therefore, even though Spark writes the data in
parallel, it is much slower to import the data compared to Admin Import.
Anecdotally, large Neo4j databases with more than 1 billion nodes and
relationships have been observed to take approximately 48 hours to load with
Spark. The Admin Import’s ability to dump the data into the database
reduced the load time from 48 hours to under 1 hour.
Before you begin with Admin Import, follow these steps:
1. Check the documentation for your operating system.
2. Check your version of Neo4j. If you are using version 4 rather than
version 5, then the syntax may appear different than it appears in this
book.
Here are the steps to run Admin Import:
1. Rename CSV headers to comply with the Admin Import standards. For
more information, refer to the following documentation:
a. https://neo4j.com/docs/operations-manual/current/tutorial/neo4jadmin-import/
b. https://neo4j.com/docs/operations-manual/current/tools/neo4jadmin/neo4j-admin-import/#import-tool-header-format
2. Move the CSV files to the Neo4j Import folder.
3. Open the Terminal and run the neo4j-admin script.
4. Optionally, from the Terminal, update the folder permissions for the new
database.
5. Run the ‘CREATE DATABASE <databaseName>’ command from the Neo4j
Browser.
6. Optionally, restart the Neo4j services/server.
The first step of the Admin Import process is to move the CSV files to your
Neo4j Import folder. This can be done in Neo4j Desktop by selecting the
‘Open Folder’ and then choosing ‘Import’ option from the drop-down menu:

Figure 3.13: Navigate to the Import folder in Neo4j Desktop

Here’s an example command:
neo4j-admin database import full -nodes=import/Sample_Admin_Import_Recipe_Node.csv -nodes=import/Sample_Admin_Import_Ingredient_Node.csv -relationships=import/Sample_Admin_Import_Recipe_to_Ingredient_Relati
onship.csv --id-type INTEGER recipe

Figure 3.14: Admin Import completion message

Importing Data into Neo4j with CSVs and Python
One of the most common methods of importing data into Neo4j is through
CSV imports with Cypher. We can run these Cypher commands directly from
Python. The CSV files must first be saved in the Import folder of your
database.

The following code will read the CSV from the Import folder, save the CSV as
a variable named row, and then create new Recipe nodes based on each
row of the dataset:
```
LOAD CSV WITH HEADERS FROM ‘file:///Fake_Data_FBI_Neo4j.csv’ AS row
CALL {
WITH row
CREATE (:Person {
full_name: row.full_name,
ssn: row.ssn,
ip_address: row.ip_address,
email: row.email,
phone_number: row.phone_number,
address: row.address,
suspicious_activity_report: row.suspicious_activity_report,
FBI_case_number: row.FBI_case_number
})
}
```

Note: When running this command in Python, you may need to use double
brackets {{}} in order for the Python interpreter to recognize code within the
brackets. You will see this illustrated in the accompanying code for this
chapter.
When using the CSV import method, we recommend using batch import to
separate the CSV into smaller chunks as a way to avoid running into memory
constraints. You can modify the preceding query to read the CSV into Neo4j
in chunks of 1000 rows with this code:
```
LOAD CSV WITH HEADERS FROM ‘file:///Fake_Data_FBI_Neo4j.csv’ AS row
WITH row
CALL {
WITH row
CREATE (:Person {
full_name: row.full_name,
ssn: row.ssn,
ip_address: row.ip_address,
email: row.email,
phone_number: row.phone_number,
address: row.address,
suspicious_activity_report: row.suspicious_activity_report,

FBI_case_number: row.FBI_case_number
})
} IN TRANSACTIONS OF 1000 ROWS
;
```

It is typically best practice to save each node and each relationship as its own
CSV in order to efficiently load the data into the database. However, you are
not required to save each node and each relationship as its own file. Instead,
you can store the information on the node imported from the CSV and then
modify the graph schema with Cypher like this:
```
MATCH (p:Person)
WHERE p.phone_number IS NOT NULL
MERGE (ph:Phone {{number: p.phone_number}})
MERGE (p)-[:HAS_PHONE_NUMBER]->(ph)
```

This code gathers each Person, creates a new node with the label ‘Phone’
based on the property from the Person node, and then creates a relationship
between the new Phone node and the Person node called
‘HAS_PHONE_NUMBER.’ You can follow along with the code attached to this
chapter to create the full dataset.
To visualize this data, we have included a JSON output of the perspective
with this chapter’s reference material. Import the Perspective and run ‘Return
Full Network’ to generate the following network image. We will go through the
steps required to generate images with Bloom in the next chapter:

Figure 3.15: Visual of Mock FBI Data

Importing Data into Neo4j with Pandas
When dealing with structured data, Pandas is a commonly used library in
Python to manipulate and work with data. Importing data into Neo4j from a
Pandas dataframe is flexible and convenient. However, this flexibility comes
at the expense of speed compared to high-performance data ingestion
options such as the Admin Import tool. The primary reason loading data
using Pandas (or Spark) is slower is that each transaction must be written to
the Transaction logs. The Admin Import tool, on the other hand, does not
need to write to the logs and simply bulk imports the data. Having loaded
billions of relationships into Neo4j using both a massively parallel Spark
method as well as the Admin Import method, we can attest that the Admin
Import Tool can be more than 10 times faster.

Let’s take a look at loading data using Pandas as this is a flexible method to
import data. This method does not require Admin privileges and can
therefore be a preferred method for loading ad-hoc, smaller datasets without
requiring additional teammates’ assistance to import your data.
The GDS library from Neo4j does not currently support data loads directly
from Pandas. Therefore, we will create a driver to connect to the database in
this section. Please note that when working with drivers and sessions, it is
important to close your session when complete. Therefore, we will create and
close sessions in the same command to ensure that we do not leave multiple
sessions open, which could cause latency for other database users:

Figure 3.16: Connect to Neo4j with Driver

We are going to use a popular dataset in the data science and machine
learning community called ‘Iris.’ This dataset can be considered the “hello
world” dataset of machine learning. It contains 150 samples from each of the
three species of the Iris flower: Setosa, Virginica, and Versicolor. The
objective is to predict the species of flower based on only the numerical
attributes of the flower: sepal length, sepal width, petal length, and petal
width, all measured in centimeters. The combination of features can help us
create a classification machine learning model to distinguish the Species
from one another.
We will be taking an innovative approach to convert the tabular data analysis
into a graph-based analysis. Graph-based analysis will enable us to harness
the power of Neo4j and Neo4j’s built-in predictive algorithms to complement
our machine learning pipeline. Here is a snapshot of the dataset:

Figure 3.17: Snapshot of Iris data

Follow along with the provided code to first convert this dataset into a list of
dictionaries that we can then import into Neo4j:

Figure 3.18: Iris dataset represented as a list of dictionaries

Once the data is stored as a list of dictionaries, we can import this data into
Neo4j using the following Cypher.
The ‘UNWIND’ clause expands a list of elements into separate rows, effectively
taking the data parameter and iterating over each dictionary referred to as a
‘row.’
The ‘MERGE’ clause ensures that a node with the label exists in the database.
If a label does not exist, then it creates a new node. If it does exist, then it
matches the existing node.
The ‘ON CREATE SET’ clause is used to set additional properties on the node
once the node has been created. We then create a comma-separated list to
set each of the columns from the original dataset as properties on the new
node:

```
with driver.session() as session:
session.run(“””
UNWIND $data AS row
MERGE (s:Flower_Record {Row_ID: toInteger(row[‘Id’])})
ON CREATE SET s.Target = toInteger(row[‘Target’])
, s.Sepal_Length = row[‘Sepal_Length’]
, s.Sepal_Width = row[‘Sepal_Width’]
, s.Petal_Length = row[‘Petal_Length’]
, s.Petal_Width = row[‘Petal_Width’]
, s.Species = row[‘Species’]”””,
{“data”:data})
```

Once complete, you will see new ‘Flower_Record’ nodes in Neo4j. Each
Flower Record contains the various data elements from the original row of
data as properties on the new node:

Figure 3.19: Illustration of Flower Records in Neo4j

With data stored in this format, we can now expand each of these node
properties into new nodes by using Cypher. In this next step, we transform
the data from static, row-by-row data into interconnected graph data, which
will supercharge our data analytics and machine learning capabilities:
```
// First, ensure there is a Petal_Length node
MERGE (p:Petal_Length)
ON CREATE SET p.name = ‘Petal Length’ // You could set properties
here if needed
// Match all Flower_Record nodes and connect them to the
Petal_Length node
WITH p

MATCH (s:Flower_Record)
MERGE (s)-[r:PETAL_LENGTH]->(p)
SET r.Petal_Length = toFloat(s.Petal_Length)
```

By going through each of these steps, you will create a dense network
containing all the Iris dataset records along with the connections to the flower
attributes. In a later chapter of this book, we will implement graph algorithms
to explore this data further:

Figure 3.20: Illustration of the connected Flower elements from the Iris dataset

Conclusion
Throughout this chapter, we explored data import methodologies, including
the Aura DB import tool, Admin Import tool, Pandas Dataframe import, and
CSV flat file imports. The Admin Import tool is well-suited for high-

performance data ingestion because it eliminates the need for logging.
However, the Admin import tool is slightly more complex than other import
methods and requires Admin privileges to run the import command.
Therefore, it may be worth exploring the best option that works for you and
your organization’s use case.
Importing data through CSVs and/or Pandas dataframes is a more flexible
approach. While this approach is slower due to transaction logging, it is
versatile and does not require any administrative privileges. Furthermore,
through the import process, data can be conveniently manipulated using
Pandas or Cypher to loop through lists or parse specific properties to
accommodate your data design.
In the next chapter, we will dive deeper into the Cypher query language for
data transformation and retrieval. This is a pivotal step in our analysis, which
leverages the true power and speed of graph databases to provide users the
requested data at lightning speed.

Points to Remember
Graph vs. Relational Databases: Graph databases such as Neo4j
are inherently different from traditional databases. They excel in
handling complex relationships and interconnected data. Traditional
databases, on the other hand, are optimized for tabular data structures.
Features of Neo4j: Neo4j stands out with its robust set of out-of-thebox features such as ACID compliance, flexible schema, and strong
support for relationship traversal.
Graph Database Terminology: Familiarity with terms such as nodes,
relationships, properties, and labels is essential for working with graph
databases like Neo4j and will serve the reader well for the remainder of
this book.
Cypher Query Language: Neo4j utilizes its own query language,
Cypher, for efficient traversal of the database. Cypher is crucial for
efficient querying, manipulation, and relationship matching in Neo4j.
Data Import Process: Importing data into Neo4j is a non-trivial yet
important step in the data analysis process. Understanding best
practices and which options work best for a given situation will ensure
optimal import performance and faster data insights.

CHAPTER 4

Cypher Query Language
Introduction
In this chapter, we will discuss the Cypher query language. Cypher is a
declarative graph query language that allows for efficient querying and
updating of graph databases. It was developed by Neo4j and is used to
query the Neo4j database.
Cypher is open and freely available for use. Neo4j has made efforts to
make Cypher a standard for querying graph databases by contributing it
to an open-source project called openCypher. The openCypher project
aims to make the Cypher query language available to a wider
community.
Here is an example of a simple Cypher query:
```
MATCH (a:Person)-[r:LIKES]->(b:Person)
WHERE a.name = ‘Carl’
RETURN b.name
```

In this query, we return data about people that ‘Carl’ likes. We first
anchor on our person node where the person’s name is ‘Carl’, then
expand to other people based on the ‘LIKES’ relationship and return
those people’s names.

Structure
In this chapter, we will cover the following topics:
Basics of cypher path finding queries (MATCH, WHERE,
RETURN)
Advanced cypher path finding queries (COLLECT, CONTAINS,
EXISTS)
Including the count of relationships (or “degree”) for nodes

Generating GDS projections
Creating “similar” relationships between nodes sharing common
attributes
Cypher query “explain” plans and canceling long-running queries

Key Elements of a Cypher Query
Let’s recap some of the key elements of a Cypher query:
Nodes: these are the entities of the graph and are denoted in
Cypher using enclosed parentheses with semicolons followed by
Node label name, for example, (:Person). They hold properties in
the form of key-value pairs.
Relationships: Relationships connect nodes explicitly and can
contain properties just like Nodes. In Cypher, these are depicted
with square brackets and dashes along with greater than (>) or less
than (<) sign to denote the direction, for example, (p1:Person)[r:CONNECTED_TO]->(p2:Person).
MATCH clause: This is somewhat similar to the ‘SELECT’ statement in
SQL. This clause matches the pattern of nodes and relationships
you are searching for.
RETURN Clause: Specifies the data returned from the query. The
MATCH clause identifies the pattern to match on, but the RETURN
clause specifies which elements of the pattern should be returned.
WHERE clause: This is used in a query to filter the data based on
certain criteria or criteria. This is similar to filtering data with SQL.
Once the MATCH clause defines a pattern to search for, the WHERE
clause limits the results of the search by filtering for only patterns
with specific attributes. NOTE: It is best practice to set an index on
any node or relationship properties used in the WHERE clause to
improve query performance.
LIMIT clause: This clause will limit the number of responses to
ensure the transaction does not bog down the server. This is akin
to other limit functions in other languages such as head(), TOP
100, and so on.

Getting Started with Cypher

In this section, we will begin writing Cypher queries based on the data
loaded in the previous chapter. While Cypher is intuitive to read and
follow along with, we recommend that you copy and paste the Cypher
queries into your own Neo4j Browser to follow along with this section.
Reading the Cypher code and visualizing the results of the query will go
a long way in helping you become fluent with Cypher.

Querying Data of Individuals with Cypher
In this section, we will walk through queries step-by-step. First, let’s
MATCH on the pattern of ‘Individual’ based on the data loaded in the
previous chapter. The query to create this data can also be found in the
Jupyter Notebook associated with this chapter.
Once we MATCH on the ‘Individual’ label and assign all of these nodes
to the variable ‘n1’, let’s next filter these results to only return nodes
where the name equals ‘Mitch.’ Once complete, we return ‘*’ or all
patterns matched. We also limit the results to 25 just in case there are
many nodes matching this criteria. In this case, only one node matches
this pattern and is returned as shown in the following figure:

Figure 4.1: Return a single node based on the WHERE clause

Next, we can again match on the label ‘Individual’ and return a count
of all the individuals in the database as well as a comma-separated list
of all the names of the Individuals. First, we match an Individual then use

the Cypher functions count() and collect() to aggregate the results of
the pattern.
As you can see, we can count the number of nodes in the variable ‘n’ by
using count(n). To collect the ‘name’ property on each of these nodes,
we must specify which property on the ‘n’ node we would like to collect.
In this case, we collect the ‘n.name’ property.

Figure 4.2: Return a collection of all individuals matching this pattern

As a simple illustration of this network of individuals, let’s return all the
‘FRIEND_OF’ relationships between these nodes. First, we match the
pattern we are interested in. In this case, we assign a variable ‘r’ to the
FRIEND_OF relationship and use ‘*’ to return everything from the match
clause. Notice that we did not use the directional arrow in the
relationship clause in this example. While you can use the directional
arrow, the direction of the ‘FRIEND_OF’ is not important to the “MATCH’
clause. Neo4j requires a direction to be stored under the hood, but it
does not need to be specified in the Cypher query:

Figure 4.3: Network of individuals

Finally, a data table can be generated from the MATCH pattern. In the
following example, we can see the direction component was added to
the ‘FRIEND_OF’ relationship which prevents the pattern from being
duplicated in the Cypher response. Furthermore, we use the Cypher
function type() to specify the type of relationship which can be very
helpful in situations where many types of relationships could be used to
connect the nodes, for example, REFERRED_BY, NEIGHBOR_OF,
SENT_MESSAGE_TO:

Figure 4.4: Illustration of data table using Neo4j Cypher

Querying Data of Recipes with Cypher
To begin querying Recipe data, we must first ensure that we are
connected to the ‘recipe’ database rather than the ‘neo4j’ database. In
the following figure, you can select the ‘recipe’ database manually using
the user interface. Alternatively, you can use Cypher to specify the name
of the database using the ```:use recipe``` command:

Figure 4.5: Connect to the ‘recipe’ database

Let’s take a look at all the recipes for cornbread. I am from the
Southeast region of the United States and cornbread has been a staple
of my diet for many years. Unlike breads made from wheat flour,
cornbread is primarily made from cornmeal which is a flour ground from
dried corn/maize. Cornbread is often served as a side dish with meals
such as fried chicken, chili, or Thanksgiving turkey. Cornbread is golden
brown and crumbly to the touch. It can taste either sweet or savory —
but I prefer it sweet like cake.
First, before we search this string for cornbread recipes, we need to set
an index on the property ‘Recipe_Title.’ Indexing is a critical feature
for enhancing the performance of data retrieval queries. Without an
index, the query might have to scan every node in the database to
search for the requested property, which becomes increasingly
impractical as the size of the data grows.
```CREATE INDEX Recipe_Title IF NOT EXISTS FOR (n:Recipe) ON
(n.Recipe_Title) ```

Next, ensure that the index has populated fully before running any
queries that require this index. Use the ```SHOW INDEX``` command to
ensure that the index has been populated fully:

Figure 4.6: Show index

Once the index shows the state “ONLINE”, then run the following query to
identify 100 of the recipes that contain the word ‘cornbread’ in the recipe
title:

Figure 4.7: Cornbread Recipes - Limit to 100

We can now check to see exactly how many recipes contain cornbread
in the title:

Figure 4.8: Return count of recipes containing cornbread in the title

There are 8,688 recipes to make cornbread in this database. It looks
like I am not the only person who enjoys cornbread! Let’s next look at
the directions and ingredients for one of these recipes:

Figure 4.9: Show the directions and ingredients for one of the cornbread recipes

As we can see, this recipe calls for “sharp cheese” as one of the
ingredients. Also, the directions are a bit limited for this recipe. Let’s

rewrite this query to request a recipe with at least 500 characters (more
directions) as well as a different type of cheese (not “sharp cheese”):

Figure 4.10: Return cornbread recipes

In this illustration, we see three cornbread recipes sorted in alphabetical
order by using the ORDER BY clause. We can also see the Directions are
longer in these results because we specified the size() must be more
than 500 characters. Lastly, we use the ```gds.set_database()```
command to specify the query run against the ‘recipe’ database.
Many of these recipes are quite similar. In the next section, we will dive
into a technique to quantify the similarity between recipes.

Advanced Querying and Data Manipulation
with Cypher
Congratulations on completing the beginning steps of your Cypher
journey! The information we covered so far will provide the foundational
building blocks for the topics we cover moving forward. At its heart,
graph data science is the study of graph traversals and understanding
the implications of the relationship between nodes. Now that you know
the basics of writing patterns in Cypher and returning the attributes, you
can understand the further nuances in the Cypher query language will
allow you to implement more powerful techniques and algorithms.

Advanced Filtering
As with traditional relational databases, Neo4j offers many filtering
options. The WHERE clause operates much like its SQL counterpart, used
to filter data based on specific conditions where the conditions are met.
You can set conditions using the operators such as:
=
>
<
<>
>=
<=
LIKE
CONTAINS
EXISTS

The AND, OR, and NOT logical operators can be used within the WHERE
clause to combine or exclude conditions and provide more flexibility to
your query. For example, you might have a situation where you need to
match on combinations of criteria:
```
MATCH (n:Recipe)
WHERE n.Recipe_Title = ‘broccoli casserole’
AND (n.Recipe_ID < 10000

OR n.Source = ‘gathered’)
RETURN n
LIMIT 25
```

Figure 4.11: Example of filtering based on multiple criteria

Furthermore, you may have a situation where you need to match some
criteria and exclude other criteria:
```
MATCH (n:Recipe)
WHERE n.Recipe_Title = ‘broccoli casserole’
AND not n.Source = ‘gathered’
RETURN n
LIMIT 25
```

In this query, we anchor on the Recipe nodes where the title of the
recipe is ‘broccoli casserole’ but the source of the recipe does not
equal ‘gathered.’ We then return the first 25 nodes that match this
criteria:

Figure 4.12: Example of the ‘NOT’ exclusion criteria

You may encounter situations where you need to filter for results based
on partial lists or multiple matches. In this section, we will use the recipe
database to filter for recipes that contain a list of ingredients.
Let’s find a recipe that contains both almonds and walnuts. With a
package of each in the pantry and both being is unsalted, the aim is to
find a recipe that combines these two ingredients into a roasted mix.
In this query, we first match our recipes with our ingredients in a pattern
match. Next, we filter for only ingredient nodes that are almonds or
walnuts and where the recipe title contains the word ‘spice.’ Once the
initial pattern is returned, we use the WITH keyword to gather the results
of this query and collect all of the ingredients into a list called
‘ingredients.’ Finally, we use the ALL() function to ensure the target
ingredients are each contained in the collected list of ingredients. As a
reminder, RETURN() is required at the end of the query to determine
which elements of the matched set should be returned. In this case, we
return a dataset and limit the results to the first 10 records.
```
MATCH (recipe:Recipe)-[:USES]->(i:Ingredient)
WHERE i.Ingredient_Name IN [‘almonds’, ‘walnuts’]
AND recipe.Recipe_Title CONTAINS ‘spice’
WITH recipe, collect(i.Ingredient_Name) as ingredients

WHERE ALL(ingredient IN [‘almonds’, ‘walnuts’] WHERE ingredient
IN ingredients)
RETURN recipe.Recipe_Title as Recipe_Title, recipe.Directions
as Directions, recipe.Link as Link
LIMIT 10
```

Figure 4.13: Results of the spiced nuts query

The ‘honey roasted spiced nuts recipe’ sounds delicious. Let’s take a
look at all of the ingredients involved:
```
MATCH (n:Recipe) WHERE n.Recipe_Title = “honey roasted spiced
nuts recipe” RETURN n
```

Figure 4.14: Honey Roasted Spice Nuts recipe

Degree Functions
Degree functions are a way to capture the number of incoming and
outgoing relationships to a node. The following recipe illustration, for
example, has an outgoing degree of 6. As you can see, 6 relationships
are leaving the source node and going to the target nodes. Degree
functions can be divided into three categories:
Outgoing Degree: This is the total number of relationships leaving
the source node
Incoming Degree: This is the total number of relationships going
toward the source node (in the following example, zero)
Degree: The total number of incoming AND outgoing relationships

Figure 4.15: Illustration of a node with out_degree = 6

Next, let’s write Cypher code to determine the degree of each recipe in
our ‘recipe’ database. To accomplish this, we will use the SIZE()
function to represent the number of patterns that were included in the
matched pattern. We will limit the command to only nodes containing the
word ‘cornbread’ in the Recipe_Title to reduce the query response
time:
```
MATCH (recipe)-[r:USES]->(i:Ingredient)
WHERE recipe.Recipe_Title CONTAINS ‘cornbread’
WITH recipe, apoc.node.degree(recipe) as degree

SET recipe.degree = degree
```

We now have the degree of the node for each cornbread recipe. In the
following image, we can see the recipe with the highest degree and
number of ingredients:

Figure 4.16: The recipe with the highest number of ingredients

To discover this recipe, we can use the cypher query as follows:
```
MATCH (r:Recipe)
WHERE r.degree is not null
WITH max(r.degree) as max_degree

MATCH (r:Recipe)-[u:USES]->(i:Ingredient)
WHERE r.degree = max_degree
RETURN r,u,i
```

In this query, we first match the recipes which contain the degree
property. Next, we discover which node has the highest degree by using
the max() function. Once we know the max degree, we then match it to
the recipe where the degree matches the max degree and expand to all
the connected ingredients. Finally, we return the recipe (variable r),
ingredients (variable i), as well as the relationships between the two
nodes (variable u).

Graph Projections
Graph projections in Neo4j represent the stored graph data in a format
optimized for the execution of graph algorithms. Similar to creating a
“view” in a relational database, the graph projection is created and
managed by the Neo4j Graph Data Science (GDS) library.
While a native graph model is efficient for graph traversals and analysis,
this method of storage is not always the most efficient for executing
many graph algorithms. For example, many graph algorithms require
knowledge of the degree of each node (recall this is the number of
relationships connected to the node). The graph projections are stored
in a more algorithm-friendly format in memory, such as an adjacency
matrix.
Neo4j offers two types of graph projection methods:
Native graph projections: These use the existing graph structure
and labels and are the most computationally efficient method of
projection.
Cypher projections: These offer the user flexibility to define the
specific pattern of nodes and relationships to push to memory.
First, let’s take a look at the Native Projection method using the recipe
database schema to illustrate. As you can see, we need to set the name
of the projection, followed by the node types/labels, followed by the
relationships to include in our analysis:
```
CALL gds.graph.project(

‘recipeGraph’, // The name of the graph projection.
[‘Recipe’, ‘Ingredient’], // The node labels to include.
{USES: {orientation: ‘UNDIRECTED’}} // The relationship types
to include.
);
```

When we run this graph projection, we can see 2.3 million nodes and 21
million relationships were passed into graph data science memory:

Figure 4.17: The output of the graph projection command

Next, let’s look at the Cypher Projection method. Again, the first line sets
the name of the projection. The second line specifies the nodes to use in
the projection using Cypher. The third line represents the full pattern to
use the projection using Cypher.
As you can see, this method is highly flexible as you can write a Cypher
query to match the specific pattern you are looking to analyze. However,
there are limitations to this approach, including the inability to specify
‘UNDIRECTED’, which is important for some graph algorithms, as we will
see in later chapters. Additionally, this approach is not as
computationally efficient as the native projection method and, therefore,

may prove infeasible for your analysis based on the size/scale of your
database:
```
MATCH (r1:Recipe)-[:USES]->(i:Ingredient)<-[:USES]-(r2:Recipe)
WITH gds.graph.project(‘projectedGraph’, r1, r2) AS g
WHERE r1.degree is not null
AND r2.degree is not null
RETURN
g.graphName AS graph, g.nodeCount AS nodes,
g.relationshipCount AS rels
```

With this flexible approach, we can now limit the graph projection to only
the recipes which contain the degree property. As the following image
illustrates, this reduces the size of the graph projection dramatically to
only 6208 nodes:

Figure 4.18: The output of the graph projection command

The Cypher projection method can be a helpful tool in situations where
you only need to push a subset of the graph into memory. It adds
flexibility to the graph data science pipeline.

Creating SIMILAR_RECIPE Relationship
In this section, we will compare the ingredients of the various recipes
and create a new relationship between similar recipes. For each recipe,
we will be able to quantify the number of similar ingredients.
First, we need to create a graph projection so that we can use the
Jaccard Similarity algorithm to find similar recipes. This algorithm
calculates the similarity between nodes based on the intersection of
shared attributes. In the case of the recipe data, the similarity of recipes
would be calculated based on the count of shared ingredients. We will

use the Cypher Projection method in this example as a means to limit
the amount of data pushed to memory for this example.
In the following query, we create a graph projection named
‘cornbreadGraph’ to only project recipes that contain the word
‘cornbread’ in the recipe title. Recall that we set the degree of the
recipes that contain the word ‘cornbread’ and set an index on the
property ‘degree.’ We will use this property to limit the number of nodes
returned in the graph projection. Furthermore, we will limit to only
recipes with a degree of greater than 10 to further reduce the
computational complexity for this illustration.
Remember, it is very important to index properties used in the WHERE
clause of your queries. If you forget to index these properties, then
the Neo4j database could crash because the database needs to
search through each node label for the property listed:
```
CALL gds.graph.project.cypher(
‘cornbreadGraph’,
‘MATCH (r:Recipe) WHERE r.degree > 10 RETURN id(r) AS id’,
‘MATCH (r1:Recipe)-[:USES]->(i:Ingredient)<-[:USES](r2:Recipe)
WHERE r1.degree > 10 AND r2.degree > 10
RETURN id(r1) AS source, id(r2) AS target’
);
```

Figure 4.19: Cypher Projection for Cornbread Recipe Similarity

In this projection, there were 1230 recipe nodes and 3,933,770
relationships to other recipe nodes. The large number of relationships is
due to the large number of shared ingredients. It is helpful to count the
number of nodes prior to writing projections to ensure the projection is
not much larger than expected. In this case, this can be accomplished
with the following query:
```
MATCH (r1:Recipe)-[:USES]->(i:Ingredient)<-[:USES]-(r2:Recipe)
WHERE r1.degree > 10
AND r2.degree > 10
AND id(r1) < id(r2)
RETURN count(distinct r1) as Recipe_Count
```

This query returns the response:

Figure 4.20: Query response for the total number of recipes meeting the criteria

Now that we have a graph projection of all the recipes containing the
word ‘cornbread’ with more than 10 ingredients, let’s run the Jaccard
Similarity algorithm to discover very similar recipes based on their
shared ingredients. In short, the algorithm calculates the overlap/pairwise similarities between the two nodes that share common
connections. To learn more about the algorithm, you can refer to the
Neo4j
documentation
at:
https://neo4j.com/docs/graph-datascience/current/algorithms/node-similarity/.
The following code leverages the ‘cornbreadGraph’ projection we
created. We have set a parameter, similarityCutoff, to 90%. This
means that the SIMILAR_TO relationship will only be created by
connecting a recipe to another recipe if and only if the number of shared
ingredients between the source recipe is greater than or equal to 90% of
the same ingredients as the target recipe. If the recipes share greater
than or equal to 90% of the same ingredients, then a new relationship is
created between the recipes and the property ‘similarity’ is set on the
relationship to specify the match percentage:

```
CALL gds.nodeSimilarity.write(‘cornbreadGraph’, {
writeRelationshipType: ‘SIMILAR_TO’,
writeProperty: ‘similarity’,
similarityCutoff: 0.90
})
YIELD nodesCompared, relationshipsWritten;
```

Once the SIMILAR_TO relationship has been created, we can query a
handful of these recipes. This will not return all the recipes that are
similar or within the same community/cluster but will be helpful for us to
visually inspect. We can run this query to take a closer look at the
results:
```
MATCH p=()-[r:SIMILAR_TO]->() RETURN p LIMIT 25
```

Figure 4.21: Illustration of the SIMILAR_TO relationship

It appears that we have a small cluster/community of similar cornbread
recipes titled ‘mexican cornbread’ and ‘jalapeno cornbread.’ As you
can see, Neo4j’s ability to algorithmically identify similarities can save
you an enormous amount of time and energy by consolidating similar
records in your database. In a later chapter, we will explore the topic of
‘Entity Resolution’, which similarly takes a set of similar nodes and
seeks to consolidate into a single master entity.

Let’s take a closer look at the ingredients in these similar recipes. This
can be accomplished in Neo4j Browser by selecting the recipe node
and then clicking the ‘expand’ option in the tooltip:

Figure 4.22: Examine the shared ingredients between similar Cornbread recipes

It appears that many of these jalapeno/mexican cornbread recipes use a
combination of the following ingredients:
Jalapeno Peppers
Yellow Cornmeal
Eggs
Creamstyle
Soda
Onion
Vegetable Oil
Sugar
As you can see, some recipes use pimento, bell peppers, or ground
meat, but not all recipes. This is why we see similarity measures ranging
from 90% to 100%. Not all the recipes use the same ingredients, but it
makes sense that similar recipes would leverage similar ingredients.

Canceling Long-Running Queries
While Neo4j is extremely efficient, you may encounter long-running
queries and need to cancel the queries. You can view the queries that
are currently running by using ```show transactions``` or ```:queries```
in the Neo4j Browser or Cypher Shell. This returns all active queries,
start times, the CPU used, and other helpful information:

Figure 4.23: Show actively running queries

To kill or cancel a long-running query, you can use the
```dbms.killQuery(queryId)``` command and insert the queryId
discovered from the ```CALL dbms.listQueries()``` command.
Canceling a query in Neo4j is a cooperative operation where the query
checks in intervals whether it should halt. Some operations, however,
might be unresponsive to termination requests for quite some time.
Therefore, it’s a good idea to monitor query performance, optimize
queries before executing them, and manage database resources to
minimize the necessity of query cancellations.
If you have tried canceling the query to no avail, then you can also
restart the database. Restarting the database clears transient states,
resets connections, and allows new configurations to take effect, which
will effectively resolve the long-running query issue. If you are running
Neo4j on a server and have administrator privileges, then you can use
the ```neo4j restart``` command. If you are running Neo4j from the
browser, then you can click this restart button:

Figure 4.24: Restart database

Explaining Queries Before Executing
It is good practice to explain queries before executing them in any
database management system, including Neo4j. This allows you to gain
insight into the operations of the database server plan before running
the query. This enables you to optimize the performance of the queries
as well as predict the impact on the database system.
In Neo4j, you can add ‘EXPLAIN’ before the Cypher query to obtain a
detailed breakdown of the database’s execution plan without the
overhead of actually executing the query. This will provide an execution
strategy that tells you the plan to retrieve the data, including the nodes,
relationships, and properties the query will touch:

Figure 4.25: Illustration of the ‘EXPLAIN’ cypher query functionality

Similarly, the ‘PROFILE’ command also provides an execution plan.
However, ‘PROFILE’ goes one step further and executes the query and
provides statistics on the database at each stage:

Figure 4.26: Illustration of the ‘PROFILE’ cypher query functionality

In a graph database like Neo4j, explaining and profiling queries are
critical operations due to the potential for exponential growth when
traversing relationships. Understanding the path of the query and the
number of hits on the database will help you avoid inadvertently
executing a query that could consume significant resources and
potentially require a reboot of the database.

Conclusion
This chapter serves as an in-depth guide to mastering Cypher, which is
the query language for Neo4j graph databases. The chapter introduces
the essential components of a Cypher query such as nodes,
relationships, properties, and key clauses such as MATCH, RETURN, WHERE,
and LIMIT.
The chapter provides many practical tips and applications. The chapter
advises leveraging properties to speed up query performance and uses
the recipe dataset to illustrate how to practically implement these
solutions. Advanced techniques, such as using the degree function to
understand the number of relationships connected to a node, are
covered. Additionally, graph projections and their significance are

covered as a way to execute graph algorithms efficiently. Both native
and cypher projections are introduced as well as the advantages and
disadvantages of each.
The chapter also explores creating relationships between similar recipes
in the Recipe dataset based on the Jaccard Similarity algorithm,
emphasizing the power of graph databases in identifying patterns and
similarities that would otherwise be extremely difficult to uncover in
traditional relational databases.
Whether you’re a beginner, just getting started with Cypher or looking to
deepen your understanding of Neo4j, this chapter provides the
foundational knowledge and practical skills needed to become proficient
in querying and manipulating graph databases.
In the next chapter, we will dive into graph visualization, which plays a
crucial role in communicating the data structures and insights to
stakeholders, as well as assisting with exploratory analysis.

Points to Remember
Cypher Queries: Cypher is a powerful query language for Neo4j,
and understanding the basic components of the path finding
queries, such as MATCH, RETURN, WHERE, and LIMIT, are foundational
to querying the graph database.
Leverage Properties of Nodes and Relationships: Optimizing
query performance is critical to the success of graph database
projects. If you index your database properties correctly, then you
will be able to run your queries orders of magnitude more quickly
than if you do not include indexes. Both nodes and relationships
can store properties which can then be indexed.
Understanding GDS Projections: Both GDS and Cypher
projections are foundational to effective graph analysis.
Understanding the differences, advantages, and disadvantages of
each approach will enable you to perform effective and efficient
graph analysis.
Creating “Similar” Relationships: This chapter explores the
creation of similar relationships using the Jaccard Similarity
algorithm and highlights the native graph database’s ability to

unearth patterns that are challenging (and oftentimes impossible)
to detect in traditional databases.
Query Management: The Cypher query “explain” plans and the
ability to cancel long-running queries will enable you to manage
and optimize the performance of your queries.

CHAPTER 5

Visualizing Graph Networks
Introduction
Visualization of data plays a pivotal role in data science. It helps us translate
the complicated dimensions of data into understandable, digestible, and
actionable insights. In this chapter, we will take a journey into the
visualization of complex graph data by combining Python’s versatile
programming capabilities with Neo4j’s graph data modeling.
Whether you’re a beginner in the art of data visualization or a seasoned
professional, this chapter aims to provide a comprehensive guide to
navigating the intricacies of graph data representation. These visualizations
will yield meaningful narratives from complex data for a deeper
understanding and enhanced decision-making capabilities.

Structure
In this chapter, we will cover the following topics:
Setting Up Neo4j Bloom
Saving Cypher Queries in Bloom
Formatting Bloom Visualizations
Rules-based Formatting in Bloom
Exporting CSVs from Bloom
Power BI Data Import
Power BI Graph Visualizations

Graph Visualizations with Bloom
One of the most intuitive and effective tools at our disposal in exploring graph
visualization is Neo4j Bloom. This is a state-of-the-art graph exploration tool
enabling us to visualize and investigate data stored in Neo4j. Neo4j Bloom
offers an engaging user interface and enables users to grasp the broader
picture. Neo4j is appealing to both technical and non-technical audiences

because it enables point-and-click query abilities as well as sophisticated
Cypher queries within a visually appealing user interface.
Neo4j Bloom comes free with the Neo4j Desktop version. If your organization
requires a Neo4j Server, then you will need a license key to leverage Neo4j
Bloom.
In this section, we will walk through the process of opening Bloom, using its
features to interact with Neo4j data, and customize the functionality on the
Nodes and Relationships to make the visualizations as appealing as
possible.

Setting Up Neo4j Bloom
The setup process for Neo4j Bloom, similar to Neo4j Browser, is designed to
be user-friendly and uncomplicated. Bloom comes as part of the Neo4j
Desktop and Neo4j Aura package, so no additional installation is required.
Simply click the Open dropdown and select Neo4j Bloom:

Figure 5.1: Open Neo4j Bloom

First, we need to navigate to the correct and corresponding database for
analysis. In this section, we will use the recipe database. This requires us to
navigate to the Bloom main page to select the recipe database using the
following steps:
1. Click the Settings button in the top left corner.
2. Click neo4j to navigate back to the Bloom home page.
3. Select recipe from the list of available databases.
4. Select Create and then select ‘Blank Perspective’.
5. Open the newly created perspective:

Figure 5.2: Steps 1 and 2: Navigate back to the Bloom Main Page

Select recipe from the dropdown menu. This will switch Bloom to the recipe
database instead of pointing to the database named neo4j:

Figure 5.3: Step 3: Select recipe from the list of databases

Click the Create button to generate a new and blank perspective:

Figure 5.4: Step 4: Create a blank perspective

Next, we will add the Nodes and Relationships we want to include in Bloom.
As you can see, Bloom provides the flexibility to exclude nodes, relationships,
and properties that we wish to hide from end-users. This feature can be
useful when developing new machine learning models and writing their
outputs as properties to the nodes in the database. You may not want to
confuse or overload users with this new detail, so hiding these properties on
the node from users can be beneficial:

Figure 5.5: Add categories to Bloom and exclude properties from the nodes

Saving Cypher Queries in Bloom
Next, we will save a Cypher query to make a network appear on our blank
canvas. While Neo4j Browser enables users to quickly match the first 25
nodes associated with a given label through a simple click, Bloom requires

an initial Cypher query to initiate the data exploration process. To illustrate
this, let us use the following Cypher query related to cornbread:
MATCH (recipe)-[r:USES]->(i:Ingredient)
WHERE recipe.Recipe_Title CONTAINS ‘cornbread’
AND size(recipe.Directions) > 500 //only include recipes with
decent, lengthy directions
AND i.Ingredient_Name <> ‘sharp cheese’ //exclude sharp cheese
recipes
RETURN *
LIMIT 1000 //limit the number of results
```

We will now include the Cypher code as a Saved Cypher search phrase. This
will allow us to render the result of the query on the Bloom canvas:

Figure 5.6: Click Saved Cypher to return a graph visualization in Bloom

Once you have saved the Cypher query in the Saved Cypher panel, return to
the blank canvas of Bloom. You will see a search bar at the top left corner of
the page. Select the Return Cornbread option:

Figure 5.7: Select the Bloom Saved Query, ‘Return Cornbread’

Once you have selected your Cypher query, click Enter, and you will see the
results of the query appear in Bloom.

Formatting Your Bloom Visualization
Once you have the visualization appear on your blank canvas in Bloom, you
will notice that the nodes are blank circles. We can alter:
The icons that appear in these circles
The size of the circles based on node property values
The width of the relationship based on the properties of the relationship
The color of the relationship
First, we can change the icons that appear in the circles by selecting an Icon
to explain the node label. At the bottom right, click the ‘Expand’ button to show
the right pane. Next, select the node you would like to style. Finally, click the

icon dropdown, type the name of an icon to explain your node label, and
select the icon:

Figure 5.8: Style Bloom with Node icons

In addition to labeling the nodes with a helpful Icon, Bloom also allows you to
include text on the node. First, select the Text dropdown. Next, choose the
node property to populate on the node. In the following example, we use the
Ingredient Name property to appear on the Ingredient nodes:

Figure 5.9: Illustration of Bloom nodes styled to include text descriptions

We also have the ability to alter the size of the nodes based on the node
label. For example, it might be appropriate to reduce the size of the
Ingredient nodes rather than the size of the Recipe node in this case, since
multiple ingredients are included in each recipe:

Figure 5.10: Reduce the size of the nodes in Bloom

Rules-based Formatting in Bloom
Neo4j Bloom empowers users to represent graph data with rules-based
formatting and customize the graph’s appearance based on specific criteria
or conditions. Discerning specific types of nodes becomes tedious as the
graphs grow in size and complexity. In Figure 5.10, we can already see how
difficult it can be to identify the nodes we are most interested in exploring. By
highlighting the distinctions, data patterns, and insights using rules-based

formatting, we can direct the users’ eyes and attention to the most meaningful
aspects of the graph.
If you navigate to the Rule-based section, you can select the property on
which you would like to set a rule. The rule can then alter the size or color of
the node. In Figure 5.11, we increase the size of nodes with more than 10
connections (“degree”) to four times the original size of the node. This will
make the nodes with several ingredients pop off the page:

Figure 5.11: Illustration of rules-based sizing in Bloom

Similarly, we can add another rule to color the nodes-based on specific
conditions. In the following example, we highlight the recipes containing the

word mexican to help us pinpoint the exact types of recipes we are most
interested in experimenting with:

Figure 5.12: Illustration of string search for color formatting in Bloom. If the title contains the word
mexican, then the node is colored green

Expanding Nodes in Bloom with Expand and
Scene Actions
One of the most helpful features of Bloom is the ability to expand nodes to
explore the data and incrementally discover new connections in the data.
Here are the steps:

1. Hold down the Ctrl key on your keyboard and select a handful of nodes.
2. Reduce the number of nodes on our canvas by right-clicking and
selecting Dismiss Other Nodes:

Figure 5.13: Dismiss other nodes in Bloom

Now that we have only a handful of nodes on our canvas, we can once again
select all the nodes, right-click, and navigate to Expand → USES relationship.
This will expand from the recipe nodes to all the ingredients by expanding on
the USES relationship:

Figure 5.14: Expand on nodes in Bloom

As we can see in the following figure, the visualization now shows all of the
ingredients involved in each of these recipes. From this manual exploration,
we can learn about a few of the ingredients shared among the recipes:
Onion
Peppers
Cheddar cheese
Salt
Milk
Eggs

Figure 5.15: Expanded mexican cornbread recipe nodes

Scene actions will take this manual exploration one step further. They allow
us to use Cypher to control the patterns returned on the canvas. This is
extremely powerful and helpful in larger graphs where one node can be
connected to hundreds or thousands of other nodes. The scene actions
enable us to control the expansion of nodes with precision.
The first step in creating a scene action is to navigate to the Saved Cypher
dropdown, select Scene Actions, and then select Add Scene Action:

Figure 5.16: Create a new scene action in Bloom

Let’s write a scene action to expand and return only the shared ingredients
between two recipes. This is helpful in situations where we do not want to
clutter the visualization by expanding to all of the connected nodes. We only
want to return the data where there is shared information between the nodes.
Once we add this scene action, we will be able to click to expand to only view
the shared ingredients:

Figure 5.17: Scene action to return common connections between selected nodes

We can now highlight the two or more recipes where we want to view the
common ingredients by holding down the Ctrl key and selecting each node.
Next, right-click the node and select our new scene action.

Figure 5.18: Select the new scene action

Visualizing with Power BI
Power BI is an exceptional business intelligence (BI) tool featured by
Microsoft. While there are certain aspects lacking in Power BI’s graph
visualization toolkit, the pros of this tool can often outweigh the cons.
Power BI does not support a dynamic API connection to the Neo4j database,
which means the data must first be exported to CSV in order to be imported
into Power BI. However, many organizations already have Power BI installed
in their technology stack, which makes it a straightforward architecture
decision — especially during the proof-of-concept phase of development.
To begin, we need to first create a graph dataset. You can either export the
results of the Return Cornbread command from Bloom, or you can use the
Excel file included in the associated chapter reference information for this
book:

Figure 5.19: Export the Bloom visualization to CSV/Excel

1. Let’s download the Power BI Desktop App from the Microsoft Store.
The Microsoft Store enables us to download the application to our local
computer, which makes the demonstration much easier to follow along:

Figure 5.20: Install the Power BI application

2. Next, you will need to import your relationship CSV file into Power BI:

Figure 5.21: Import relationship CSV/Excel file into Power BI

Once the data is imported into Power BI, you will need to install the ‘drill
down graph’ visualization package. Here are the steps:

1. Click the ellipses to view more visualization options.
2. Select Get more visuals from the dropdown menu:

Figure 5.22: Install the ‘drill down graph’ visualization package

3. Once you click Get more visuals, you will see a search bar. Type drill
down graph into the search bar and select the image, as shown:

Figure 5.23: Select the ‘drill down graph’ visualization package

Now that you have the data and the drill down package in Power BI, you can
proceed to create the graph visualization as well as leverage the drill down
capabilities offered by Power BI.
Select the properties from the dataset in regard to which the column would
indicate the source node, target node, and value of the relationship between
the two nodes. In this case, we already have properties labeled
start_node_property and end_node_property, so we can include these as
the source node and target nodes:

Figure 5.24: Include these properties as the Source Nodes, Target Nodes, and Values

By including these columns as the source nodes and target nodes, we will
see the graph visualization image appear, as shown in Figure 5.25. Power BI
allows us to drill down on the graph by using other dashboard displays. In this
case, we will use a bar chart to hone in on only mexican cornbread recipes as
an example:

Figure 5.25: Create the graph visualization accompanied by the drill down capabilities of Power BI

Conclusion
In this chapter, we explored various facets of Neo4j Bloom as a seamless
integration business intelligence tool to interact with the Neo4j graph
database. We began by setting up the Bloom browser, configuring the node
and relationship styles, and proceeded to incorporate Cypher queries and
Scene actions to maximize the usefulness of the tool as an exploratory data
insights mechanism.
The chapter also focused on other features of Bloom, such as the export to
CSV method, which enables us to export the results of our analysis and share
them with others or import them into other visualization tools such as Power
BI.
Moving beyond Bloom, the chapter also explored the integration of graph
data with Power BI. We walked through the process of installing Power BI,

importing data, and showcased the synergy between graph data and one of
the most commonly used business intelligence tools on the market: Power BI.
In summary, this chapter has been a comprehensive walkthrough of the
functionalities of both Neo4j Bloom and Power BI as exploratory mechanisms
for graph data science. Graph visualizations play an important role in
explaining to stakeholders the value and benefits gained by storing our data
in a graph format.
In the next chapter, we will explore the relationship between the graph
database and large language models (LLMs) as a way to enrich our existing
graph data and push the boundaries of what is possible in extracting
meaningful insights from our data.

Points to Remember
Utilize Cypher Queries and Scene Actions in Bloom: We explored
the incorporation of Cypher queries and Scene actions in Bloom,
showcasing the tool’s effectiveness and utility for exploratory graph
analysis.
Export to CSV Feature: A key feature in Bloom, export to CSV, was
highlighted to showcase its ability to share results of the analysis as well
as its compatibility with other visualization tools such as Power BI.
Integration with Power BI: The integration of graph data with Power
BI was explored to illustrate the opportunities to incorporate graph data
science into the realm of business intelligence.

CHAPTER 6

Enriching Neo4j Data with ChatGPT
Introduction
ChatGPT was first released by OpenAI in 2022. It is a large language model
(LLM). Natural language processing (NLP) has been an important branch of
data science for many years, and the development of ChatGPT is seen by
many in the industry as an inflection point in the efficacy of NLP models.
While many other LLM models exist (such as Bard by Google) and many
more are being developed as we speak, we will focus on ChatGPT for this
chapter to illustrate how we can enrich existing data with these fantastic new
tools and store the data in Neo4j.
Enriching data with ChatGPT has wide-reaching implications. In the era of
data-driven decision-making, ChatGPT can help unlock untapped potential in
the data. It has the capacity to understand your text prompts, generate new
data, provide code to help you evaluate your data, augment text-based data,
and many more capabilities as well. The ability to transform data opens new
possibilities for many industries and research fields. For example, insights
drawn from the enriched data could illuminate hidden patterns and
correlations, contributing to more strategic decision-making.

Structure
In this chapter, we will cover the following topics:
Learning the Basics of ChatGPT
Importing a Neo4j Database into Neo4j Aura
Exploratory Data Analysis of the Patent Dataset
Enriching Data Using the ChatGPT API in Python
Creating Embeddings of the Patent Summaries
Reducing the Size of the Vector Embeddings to Visualize with Plotly in
Python

Getting Started with ChatGPT

The easiest way to begin working with ChatGPT is to use the browser
version: https://chat.openai.com/. Once logged in, type a message in the chat
window and press Enter. ChatGPT will store your conversation so that you
can pick up where you left off at a later date:

Figure 6.1: Illustration of ChatGPT user interface

As we can see in the response, we need to first request an API key from
OpenAI. We could ask ChatGPT for steps on how to complete this as well.
However, since ChatGPT was trained on data through the end of 2021, we
sometimes need to supplement our search with Google/Bing search:

Figure 6.2: Response from ChatGPT with API instructions

To create a new secret key to communicate with ChatGPT directly from our
Python
Jupyter
Notebook,
navigate
to
the
following
link:
https://platform.openai.com/account/api-keys. You may also need to sign up
with payment for the API to work properly:

Figure 6.3: Request a new secret key from OpenAI

Once your key has been created, insert it into the following text block to
connect to ChatGPT directly from Jupyter Notebook!
```
#pip install openai
import os
import openai
openai.api_key = “YOUR KEY” # you will need to add your own key here
openai.Model.list()
```

After a connection to ChatGPT has been established, insert any prompt and
retrieve feedback from the LLM. More instructions and tutorials can be found
at
the
following
link:
https://github.com/openai/openaicookbook/blob/main/examples/How_to_format_inputs_to_ChatGPT_models.i
pynb:
```
# example with a system message
response = openai.ChatCompletion.create(
model=”gpt-3.5-turbo”,
messages=[
{“role”: “system”, “content”: “You are a helpful assistant.”},
{“role”: “user”, “content”: “Explain the value of the Neo4j graph
database to a teenager.”},

],
temperature=0,
)
print(response[‘choices’][0][‘message’][‘content’])
```

When we run this code, we can view an output of the prompt directly in our
Jupyter Notebook. This API flexibility allows us to later query Neo4j and
request ChatGPT enrich the data we send:

Figure 6.4: Example ChatGPT API request

In the next section, we will import a database dump of US Patent data in
order to prompt ChatGPT to help us enrich our data stored in Neo4j.

Importing the Database in Aura DB
For this illustration, we will import a Neo4j database dump provided by the
following
article:
https://frodnar.github.io/posts/2023-0930_building_llm_chatbot_neo4j/. Alternatively, you can navigate to the source
files for this chapter of the book to download the file directly.
Next, follow the steps outlined in Chapter 3, Importing Data into the Neo4j
Graph Database, to create an online Neo4j Aura DB account if you have not
already done so. We will leverage this account to efficiently import the
database dump file.
Click the white space of the following box once you have created an instance.
This will navigate you to the screen to import a database:

Figure 6.5: Homescreen of Neo4j Aura DB

Once we are within the database instance information pane, we must follow
these steps:
1. Click the Import Database tab to navigate to the drop file box, illustrated
as follows:
2. Drop the database dump file into the following box.
3. Select Upload once prompted to begin the import process:

Figure 6.6: Drop the database dump file into this location

By following these steps, you will create a database of patents from the first
half of 2023 representing 39,000 nodes and 377,000 relationships. We will
explore the Patent database before we showcase how we can use ChatGPT
to enrich the information in this database.

Exploratory Data Analysis (EDA) of the Patent
Database
When exploring a new database, exploratory data analysis (EDA) is an
important first step. In Neo4j, a natural starting point is to check the number
of nodes and relationships, as well as the properties stored within the
database. We can view this in the left pane of the Neo4j Browser window,

where we can see there are 39,270 nodes and 377,387 relationships stored
in the database:

Figure 6.7: View the summary information of the database

Patents are a form of intellectual property (IP) used as a form of legal
protection to investors for their original creations or innovations. The inventor
is provided legal rights to the idea in exchange for publicly disclosing the
details of the invention, which allows the broader community to learn from
and build upon it after the patent’s protection expires.
Patents are particularly intriguing as a graph data problem and in the context
of large language models (LLMs) because the universe of patents is vast
and interlinked. Each patent often cites prior patents and, in turn, is cited by
subsequent patents. In addition, LLMs can help delve deeper into the content
and context of the patents. Patent documents are dense, technical, and
challenging to understand. Therefore, LLMs can assist in summarizing the
information as well as creating embeddings of the documents by which we
can draw similarities between the patents. For example, this patent
(https://patents.google.com/patent/US20230000008A1/en?
oq=US20230000008A1) provides the template used to create the Neo4j
data model with various elements of the patent, including:
Assignee: Typically the individual or entity that holds the ownership
rights of the patent. This could be an individual, a company, or even a
university.
Inventor: The individual or group of individuals who conceived the
original idea of the invention and are credited for the patent’s innovative
work.
Topic: It refers to the specific subject or field of technology of the
patent. This could range from pharmaceuticals, technology, mechanical
devices, and more.
Let’s write a few Cypher queries to better understand the database before we
begin using ChatGPT to enrich our data. To begin, let’s find out how many
patent documents are in the database.
MATCH (a:Document) RETURN count(a) as Number_Documents

Figure 6.8: Number of patents from the first half of 2023

We are also interested to know which topics are most commonly covered by
these patents. With the Cypher query given here, we can view the most
common topic by the number of documents linked to each topic.
```
MATCH (a:Topic)<-[r:IS_IN]-(b:Document)
RETURN a.name as Topic_Name, count(b) as topic_count
ORDER BY topic_count DESC
LIMIT 5
```

By running this code, it is seen that the largest category of topics is for
medical devices; 390 patents were awarded in the first half of 2023 in regard
to this topic:

Figure 6.9: Count the number of documents linked to each topic

Once we know how many patents are awarded by topic, the next natural
question to ask is who is filing these patents? In the next query, we search for
the Assignees linked to the documents and return the results in descending
order to view the Assignees with the most number of filed patents first:
```
MATCH (a:Document)-[r:ASSIGNED_TO]->(b:Assignee)
RETURN b.name as Assignee_Name, count(a) as document_count

ORDER BY document_count DESC
LIMIT 5
```

Figure 6.10: Count the number of Assignees linked to each document

In the next section, we will leverage this database to showcase how we can
use ChatGPT to enrich the information in this database.

Enriching Neo4j Data with ChatGPT
First, you will need to connect to Aura DB as well as OpenAI via the API keys
we created previously.
Once connected to Neo4j and OpenAI, we can pull all of the patents related
to the topic of Machine Learning and enrich this data using ChatGPT. There
are many avenues available by which ChatGPT could help enrich our data for
this particular use case, including:
Concise Patent Summaries
Topic Expansion
Profile of Investors
Identify Similarities Between Patents

In this section, we will focus on the first bullet point, Concise Patent
Summaries. Patents are lengthy and complex documents. Often, the patents
use terms that are complex and confusing to the layman. Therefore, we can
design a prompt to feed the patent documents to ChatGPT and request a
concise summary of the patent. This will enable us to quickly understand the
intent of the patent and help us further analyze and navigate the complex
patent landscape.
By executing the following code in Python, we can pull the patent documents
from Neo4j into a pandas dataframe related to topics of Machine Learning. If
you are running this code using Jupyter Notebook, you will first need to
connect to Aura DB. This code can be found in the code accompanying this
chapter:
```
MATCH (c:Topic)<-[r2:IS_IN]-(a:Document)-[r:ASSIGNED_TO]->
(b:Assignee)
WHERE c.name = ‘Machine Learning’
RETURN id(a) as ida
, a.title as Patent_Title
, b.name as Patent_Owner
, a.abstract as Patent_Abstract
LIMIT 300
```

Figure 6.11: Machine Learning Patents

We now need to send this data to ChatGPT via the API to request a short
description of the Patent so that we can append the information to our
dataframe. In the following code, we send each of the patent abstracts to
ChatGPT via the API and ask ChatGPT to “summarize the following patent
abstract in laymen’s terms in fewer than 100 tokens.”
```
def summarize_abstract(abstract_text):
response = openai.Completion.create(

model=”text-davinci-002”,
prompt=f”Summarize the following patent abstract in laymen’s
terms in fewer than 100 tokens: {abstract_text}”,
max_tokens=100
)
return response.choices[0].text.strip()
# Loop through the dataframe and apply the summary function
df[‘Summary’] = df[‘Patent_Abstract’].apply(summarize_abstract)
# Display the updated dataframe with summaries
display(df.head())
```

As we can see in the output of the dataframe with the newly appended
Summary column, ChatGPT has provided a concise summary of each
patent’s description, making it more accessible for the average reader.
Patent attorneys often employ technical terminology, so having a simplified
version is certainly beneficial:

Figure 6.12: Summary of patents appended to the dataframe

We can now write these summaries back to Neo4j in the form of a new
property on the Document node. Since the data is stored as a pandas
dataframe, we can leverage the methods outlined in Chapter 3, Importing
Data into the Neo4j Graph Database, to load this data into Neo4j directly
from Python:
```
# Update node summary
def update_node_summary(session, node_id, summary):
query = “””
MATCH (a:Document)

WHERE id(a) = $node_id
SET a.Summary = $summary
“””
session.run(query, node_id=node_id, summary=summary)
# Loop through DataFrame and update each node
with driver.session() as session:
for index, row in df.iterrows():
node_id = row[‘ida’]
summary = row[‘Summary’]
update_node_summary(session, node_id, summary)
driver.close()
```

In the next section, we will query these Summary properties from the
Document nodes, use ChatGPT to help us create vector representations of
the summaries, and then visualize the patents using the Python package,
plotly.

Creating Embeddings of the Patent Summaries
Let us dive deeper into the transformations we can apply to complex patent
data by integrating large language models (LLMs) like ChatGPT with our
Neo4j database. Instead of sifting through lengthy summaries of patents, we
can now use embeddings to represent the text in a condensed, numeric
representation. Embeddings capture the essence and semantic meaning of
the text documents while providing a streamlined way to analyze vast
volumes of data.
Embeddings are a way to condense vast amounts of information and are
used often to condense text in the field of natural language processing. While
the list of numbers that result from an embedding might not make much
sense to look at, they hold the essence of the original information by
leveraging artificial intelligence, specifically deep neural networks, to learn the
best representation of the data structure.
The following code takes a list of summaries we created in the last section,
processes each summary using the OpenAI’s “ada” model to obtain an
embedding (or vector representation), and then collects and displays the
embeddings:
```
embeddings = OpenAIEmbeddings(openai_api_key=openai_api_key,
model_name=”ada”)
embeddings_list = []
for summary in df[‘Summary’]:

embeddings_list.append(embeddings.embed_query(summary))
print(embeddings_list)
```

The embeddings are lists of numbers that contain the context of the text
document. As you can see, in the following figure, this vector is neither
readable to humans nor does it reveal stories of explicit information.
However, beneath the layer of numbers are multiple layers of rich meaning
and context:

Figure 6.13: Embedding of the summary text

The OpenAI model can interpret this vector and allow for question answering,
similarity matching, and many more powerful analytics. The capabilities go
beyond merely interpreting the text. In the next section, we will use a
dimensionality reduction technique to visualize communities of patent
documents.

Reducing the Dimension of Embeddings
It is often said that a picture is worth a thousand words. Visualizing complex
data, such as high-dimensional vectors, can be a rewarding method to
explore and analyze the data. However, embeddings are not well suited for
visualization, given their high dimensionality. Therefore, we often need to

reduce the vectors from thousands of dimensions to only two for our human
brains to interpret the similarities between our data points.
This section explores a form of dimensionality reduction of the highdimensional vectors into a 2D or 3D space using a method called principal
component analysis (PCA). PCA is a linear transformation technique that
seeks to project the original data into a new coordinate system, which we can
then plot in a chart.
Before we run PCA, we are going to first create communities of the
embeddings using the algorithm, K-means. K-means is one of the more
commonly used clustering algorithms, known for its simplicity and efficiency.
For embeddings, K-means can be particularly useful. Given that embeddings
are high-dimensional vectors, clustering these vectors allows us to discover
inherent groupings or communities within the data. The following code
enables us to create five communities of patents based on their embeddings:
```
n_clusters = 5
kmeans = KMeans(n_clusters=n_clusters, random_state=42)
df[‘community’] = kmeans.fit_predict(embeddings_list)
```

Now that we have communities added to our dataset, we continue forward
with running our dimensionality reduction using PCA with the following code:
```
pca = PCA(n_components=2)
reduced_embeddings = pca.fit_transform(embeddings_list)
```

Once the dataset has been reduced in terms of dimensions, we can now
visualize the patents using the plotly package. We can use the following code
to create a scatter plot based on the new dataset after running PCA:
```
# Create a dataframe from the reduced embeddings
df_embeddings = pd.DataFrame(reduced_embeddings, columns=[‘x’, ‘y’])
df_embeddings[‘community’] = df[‘community’]
# Plot using Plotly
fig = px.scatter(df_embeddings, x=’x’, y=’y’, color=’community’,
title=”2D PCA of Embeddings”,
color_continuous_scale=px.colors.sequential.Viridis)
fig.show()
```

This code generates the following scatter plot. The colors represent the Kmeans communities of the original embeddings:

Figure 6.14: Visualization of embeddings of the patent summaries

This figure represents a snapshot of our embedded data in a way that
enables us to draw more insights than the raw, lengthy embeddings. At first
glance, the chart may appear complicated, but it’s this density and clustering
of points that is illuminating.

Conclusion
In our journey to make patent data more accessible, we integrated ChatGPT
to provide a concise and layperson-friendly summary. We transformed these
simplified texts further by generating numerical vectors, or embeddings, that
encapsulate the patents’ content.
Once we transitioned from text to numerical embeddings, we touched upon
the numerous analytical possibilities. First, we implemented K-means
clustering to group similar patents together. Next, we utilized PCA to reduce
the embeddings into a format that enables us to view the data in a 2D plot.
Combining the power of ChatGPT’s textual intelligence with the flexibility and
power of Neo4j opens many avenues for future work and analytics. In the
next chapter, Chapter 7, Neo4j Vector Index and Retrieval-Augmented
Generation (RAG), we will continue on this path of leveraging ChatGPT
alongside Neo4j by illustrating how we can use Neo4j vector storage to scale

the storage of our embeddings, as well as the analytics we can implement on
top of these embeddings.

Points to Remember
ChatGPT Enrichment: ChatGPT allows us to simplify complex jargonfilled patent data into clear and meaningful summaries.
Embeddings and Vectors: Textual summaries and other complex
data representations can be transformed into numerical vectors called
embeddings. These embeddings enable advanced analytics not
possible on raw text files.
Dimensionality Reduction with PCA: Principal Component Analysis
(PCA) is a technique used to simplify the complexities of a multidimensional embedding. By reducing the dimensions, we distill the data
structure into something easier to understand.
Community Detection using K-means: We clustered the
embeddings using the k-means clustering approach to identify groups
or communities of patents. These clusters hint at shared themes or
patterns within the patent text.
Visualization with Plotly: An effective visualization strengthens the
analysis as stated in the common phrase “a picture paints a thousand
words.” Using the plotly library, we were able to craft a dynamic
visualization of the patent embeddings.

CHAPTER 7

Neo4j Vector Index and RetrievalAugmented Generation (RAG)
Introduction
The Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) model is an innovative
approach in natural language processing (NLP) that combines the
strengths of large-scale information retrieval with powerful language
generation capabilities. RAG retrieves relevant document snippets from
text corpuses/text documents and leverages these snippets to generate
contextually relevant outputs. RAG can significantly reduce the common
issue of “hallucinations” or incorrect responses from an LLM. By
grounding the LLM generation process in retrieved information that is
contextually relevant, RAG helps ensure that the outputs are
contextually accurate.
With a scalable database solution like Neo4j, we can now run the RAG
models using vector embeddings, similar to those we discussed in the
previous chapter, to store the semantic essence of the data in a highdimensional space. This ability enables us to search the vector space
for similar items in an efficient way, transforming the analysis from large
text documents into new context-aware, intricate connections between
documents.
In an effort to discover knowledge from text documents, why not use a
knowledge graph like Neo4j to optimize our search? Let’s explore it.

Structure
In this chapter, we will cover the following topics:
Creating the Neo4j Vector Index
Preparing the Stock Market Text Data for Vector Embeddings
Creating and Storing the Embeddings in Neo4j

Enriching the Knowledge Graph from the Embeddings

Neo4j Vector Indexing
Vector indexes represent a special type of indexing designed to facilitate
efficient searches within high-dimensional data spaces. In traditional
databases, indexes help speed up the search through the use of keys or
attributes. However, as data becomes more complex, the traditional
indexing method often falls short.
Vector indexes enable us to search the spatial relationships of the
vectors and search for ranges of similarity within the high-dimensional
space. Since the data is stored within a database, we do not face some
of the common hurdles of attempting to store too much data on the
computer all at once. Instead, we can offload this complex processing to
the database and retrieve only the relevant documents. The scalability of
the Neo4j database combined with its support for real-time applications
makes the storage of vector embeddings a game changer for
applications relying on retrieval of large, complex information in real-time
(for example, fraud detection, recommendation systems).
Furthermore, we can integrate the vector queries seamlessly into our
graph model. This enables us to traverse not only all the relevant text
documents but also search the knowledge graph in a unified and
seamless integration.

Data Preparation for Vector Embeddings
For the next exercise, we will utilize publicly available information for the
company, Tesla. Tesla manufactures electric vehicles and is traded on
the New York Stock Exchange. Because the stock is publicly traded, the
company is required to file an annual report called a 10-K to inform
shareholders about significant updates within the company as well as
financial information.
Our first step will involve creating segments from the report and then
embedding each segment to save in Neo4j. As we discussed in the
previous chapter, embeddings offer us the ability to store large amounts
of text data in a computer-readable format, which also preserves the
semantic meaning of the text. By embedding the 10-K sections as

vectors, we will be able to connect the themes of the 10-K with other
pertinent information about the company within the knowledge graph.
The U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) provides an API
that we can use to ingest the information from the 10-K. Follow the
reference code for this chapter to pull the full overview from Tesla’s 10K.
```
# URL of Tesla’s 10-K filing
filing_10_k_url =
‘https://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1318605/00015645902100
4599/tsla-10k_20201231.htm’
# extract text section “Item 1 - Business” from 10-K
item_1_text = extractorApi.get_section(filing_10_k_url, ‘1’,
‘text’)
```

This code snippet will extract the initial overview from the large 10-K
document. The output appears something like this:

Figure 7.1: Overview of Tesla from the 10-K

As we can see, the API provided by the SEC enables us to quickly and
easily pull in relevant information for our company of interest. This is a
crucial first step in our analysis of company embeddings because it
streamlines the process of retrieving relevant and timely information
about the company.
Next, we need to create a vector index to store the embeddings once
they are created. We can use the following Cypher command to create
the index:
```
graph.query(“””
CALL db.index.vector.createNodeIndex(
‘TeslaEmbeddings’, //index name
‘Chunk’, //node label
‘tesla_embedding’, //property name
1536, //vector size

‘cosine’ //similarity metric
)
“””)
```

This code creates a new index called TeslaEmbeddings in a node labeled
Chunk (as in text-chunks). The vector size depends on the embedding
you intend to use. The embedding we use from OpenAI is of length
1536.
Cosine similarity is a similarity metric often used in NLP and is the
similarity metric we will use here for our embedding analysis. Cosine
similarity measures the similarity between two vectors by calculating the
angle between two vectors projected in a high dimensional space.
Mathematically, cosine similarity is computed by first taking the dot
product of the two vectors, summing the products of the corresponding
entries in the two sequences of numbers, and then dividing this by the
product of the magnitude (or length of the vector line) of both vectors.
The resulting calculation ranges from -1 (meaning exactly opposite
vectors) to 1 (exactly the same). In text analysis, cosine similarity is
useful because it is not influenced by the length of the text but, instead,
by the angle between the two vectors. This way, if one document has a
much longer length than the other document, the similarity can still be
similar if the words used are similar.
We need to split our text document into smaller chunks in order to pass
the information through the OpenAI API in an efficient way. Therefore,
we will use the following code to split/chunk the text using the LangChain
library, which is a commonly used framework for NLP and LLM
applications:
```
text_splitter = CharacterTextSplitter(chunk_size=2000,
chunk_overlap=20)
docs = text_splitter.split_documents(combined_docs)
```

The chunk_size is a parameter used to determine the length of the
tokens passed within each chunk. The chunk_overlap parameter
enables us to allow a small amount of overlap between chunks to
preserve some of the context from one chunk to the next. While chunk
overlap may lead to redundancy or inefficiency in processing, it is often
considered worthwhile to preserve the context of the document.

Storing the Data in Neo4j as a Vector
Embedding
With the vector index created and the document stored in chunks, we
can now run the following code to create embeddings of each of these
chunks and store each chunk embedding as its own node in Neo4j:
```
hybrid_db = Neo4jVector.from_documents(
docs,
OpenAIEmbeddings(),
url=url,
username=username,
password=password,
index_name = “TeslaEmbeddings”,
search_type=”hybrid”
)
```

This code will run each chunk stored in the docs variable through the
OpenAI embedding model and store the resulting embedding in Neo4j
using the index we created called TeslaEmbeddings. The following figure
illustrates the result in Neo4j:

Figure 7.2: Illustrate embeddings stored in Neo4j

The embedding as well as the text from the associated chunk are each
stored on the node in Neo4j. This capability to store embeddings in a
native graph database opens many new doors for our analytics. For
example, we can now build applications that search not only for classic
knowledge graph contextual information but also high-dimensional
embeddings that densely represent a wealth of information.
For example, we can ask questions directly of these embeddings and
store the results of our queries back to the knowledge graph. Let’s next
ask a question of the embeddings: What are the topics covered in these
documents?

Figure 7.3: Return Embeddings stored in Neo4j using Python API

When we send the preceding query to OpenAI, it first embeds the
question itself and then runs a cosine similarity search to return the
relevant information from the embeddings. Let’s take a moment to
pause and reflect on how incredible it is that this capability exists. In
other words, we can store a list of numbers in a database, ask the
database a question, and GPT will return to us the information
requested without requiring us to ever read the document. Wow!

Enriching the Knowledge Graph from the
Embeddings
We can request GPT to summarize each of the seven sections outlined
in the previous section and then write this summarized information back
to the Neo4j knowledge graph. Instead of reading each of the sections,
we can offload the work to GPT and store the results in a meaningful
way at scale:

Figure 7.4: Query specific information from the Embeddings stored in Neo4j

In this example of one of the categories of text identified by GPT, we can
see that Tesla currently faces seven distinct regulatory challenges.
Regulatory risks are important considerations when attempting to
quantify the value of a company. However, these risks are often
complex for shareholders to understand. The GPT output above
simplifies the text into a more digestible summary of the risks.
After we synthesize the information from each of the categories
identified by the GPT AI model, we can write these summaries back to
the knowledge graph. When analyzing complicated subjects like stock
valuations, it is important to store as much information as possible in a
flexible manner for simple retrieval. Therefore, we will link each of these
topics directly to the company node, Tesla:
```
q = f”””
MATCH (t:Company)
WHERE t.company_name = ‘Tesla’
WITH t
MERGE (RegulatoryImpacts:RegulatoryImpacts)
WITH RegulatoryImpacts, t

MERGE (RegulatoryImpacts)<-[l:REGULATORY_IMPACTS {{description:
“{regulatory}”}}]-(t)
RETURN count(l)
“””
graph.query(q)
```

With this code, we created a new node (if it does not already exist in the
database) called RegulatoryImpacts by using the MERGE command.
Once the new node is created, we then create a new relationship
between RegulatoryImpacts and the company node. This new
relationship is called REGULATORY_IMPACTS. It stores the regulatory impact
summary from GPT in a property called description.
We created the following relationships for the Tesla company:
BUSIENSS_OVERVIEW
LEGAL_DESCRIPTION
REGULATORY_IMPACTS
COMPETITION_INFORMATION

With the following Cypher query, we can return the synthesized
information from GPT from the Neo4j database:
```
MATCH (t:Company)[r:BUSIENSS_OVERVIEW|LEGAL_DESCRIPTION|REGULATORY_IMPACTS|COMPE
TITION_INFORMATION]->(a)
WHERE t.company_name = ‘Tesla’
RETURN *
```

This query first anchors on the company node where the company name
is Tesla. Next, the query follows the aforementioned four relationships to
the associated nodes and returns all information. If we designed to
change the architecture to split each of the components identified by
GPT into separate nodes, then this query would still return all relevant
information. For example, rather than storing the seven regulatory
impacts on the relationship from Tesla to the RegulatoryImpacts node,
we could have saved each impact as a separate node linked by the
REGULATORY_IMPACTS relationship. It is a design preference, and the
correct architecture depends on the business use-case and domain.

Once we run this query, we can see the following information appear in
the Neo4j Browser:

Figure 7.5: Illustration of the Tesla Query Response in Neo4j

The description produced by GPT is stored on the relationship in this
particular architecture. We can also join the Tesla node to all of its
associated embeddings by including the EMBEDDING relationship in
the previous query. In this particular example, there are 25 embeddings
connected to Tesla, which were used to create the descriptions
illustrated above.

Semantic Search App with Streamlit
In this section, we will use the popular Python library, Streamlit, to
create a front-end user interface for semantic search. Streamlit offers a
straightforward framework, allowing for the rapid development of web
applications.
With our foundational understanding of the capabilities of LLMs for
semantic search, we can apply this expertise in a real-world example
using movie data. The movie dataset included in the repository material
for this chapter represents more than 20,000 movies as well as their
descriptions. By applying our search query criteria in the ‘Persona
Description’ text box, we can execute the application to return the
nearest matches:

Figure 7.6: Semantic search app for movie recommendations

In order to run this app, you will need to first install all the required
dependencies, including the Streamlit library. We will then need to
open a Terminal to execute the following simple command to run the
Python script, which is stored in the code repository for this chapter:
```
streamlit run text_column_semantic_search_20240122.py
```

Once you run this command in the terminal, you will see the Streamlit
app appear. From here, simply insert your OpenAI API key as well as
the description of the movie you would like to watch, and then drag and
drop the Excel file into the input box.
This program looks for a column in the CSV/Excel file called ‘text’ as
the body of text to embed. You can upload anybody of text into this app
as long as it has a column named ‘text’, and this app will provide a
score of the rows that most closely match the provided persona.
Alternatively, you can adjust the code to read a different column of your
table if there is a different name such as ‘description’.
Once you click the ‘Run’ button, you will see a dataframe, similar to the
one below, appears. This dataframe is sorted by the closest match by
score. The app will embed each row of your dataframe, as well as the
provided persona, and then it will run a cosine similarity search and
provide a column, ‘Score’, to review the results:

Figure 7.7: Output of semantic search app for movie recommendations

As you can see in the results from our prompt, Hercules is the movie
that most closely matches the provided persona: “Animated action
movie where the hero saves the world.” The Streamlit library offers an
excellent user interface to explore and experiment with semantic search
using OpenAI embeddings.
This demonstration showcases the capabilities of modern AI and NLP
techniques as well as enables us to discover and explore future
advancements to this capability by coupling these results with attributes
from knowledge graphs.

Conclusion
In this chapter, we harnessed the power of AI for enhanced knowledge
discovery. It is worth taking a moment to reflect on the transformative
capabilities that modern AI, particularly GPT models, bring to
knowledge graph retrieval and data analysis. What we covered in this
chapter is not just a technical accomplishment but a leap into the future
where massive text documents become effortlessly navigable.
By embedding questions and using cosine similarity searches within a
database, we bypass the traditional processes of information retrieval,
which can be slow and inaccurate. The ability to ask a database a
question and receive precise information in return is astounding.
Writing the information gathered from GPT back to Neo4j elevates the
quality of insights we can derive from our data. It enables us to scale our
analysis and pull in thousands of companies’ information and assess
commonalities, strengths, and weaknesses in new ways.

We also took a dive into using Streamlit as a front-end visualization tool
to showcase the power of these embeddings using a movie dataset.
Streamlit is a powerful Python package to help us iterate and explore the
results of our experiments.
By harnessing GPT’s embedding and enrichment in Neo4j’s knowledge
graph, we stand at the cusp of a revolution in data analytics. The heavy
lifting of analysis is offloaded to AI, enabling humans to engage with the
synthesized knowledge in an accurate and actionable way.
In the next chapter, we will explore some of the built-in algorithms that
are available within Neo4j. In-database analytics supercharge our
analysis by providing the analytical tools we need to apply to our data
without transferring the data out of the database into a separate
compute environment.

Points to Remember
Neo4j Vector Index: The new Neo4j Vector Index enables us to
store embeddings and efficiently run similarity searches.
Chunking the Data: In NLP tasks, it is often necessary to chunk
the text into manageable portions. The chunk overlap enables us to
preserve context across the chunks.
Creating and Storing the Embeddings: We transformed the text
into numerical representations of their structure using GPT to be
retrieved by the AI system.
Deep Insights and Scaling the Analysis: The summarization
and enrichment capabilities of GPT allow for scaling the analysis
across large sets of data by combining with the flexible and
powerful storage of Neo4j.
Streamlit for Data Exploration: Streamlit is a powerful Python
library to create front-end visualizations. We used the library to
explore the movie recommendations using the OpenAI
embeddings.

CHAPTER 8

Graph Algorithms in Neo4j
Introduction
As data becomes increasingly connected, graph algorithms play a large
role in helping extract meaning from the data. Knowledge graphs offer a
unique opportunity to navigate and understand the intricate web of
interconnected data. Specifically, Neo4j offers the unique opportunity to
run graph algorithms directly in the database.
Graph algorithms are the backbone of complex network analysis
tackling problems such as node centrality, community detection,
shortest path, and graph embeddings with neural networks. Graph
algorithms open the door to many possibilities for complex analysis.
By the end of this chapter, you will have an understanding of how graph
algorithms within Neo4j can be used to transform data into actionable
insights.

Structure
In this chapter, we will cover the following types of algorithms:
Centrality
Community Detection
Similarity
Link Prediction
Network Embeddings and Graph Neural Network

Centrality
Centrality algorithms play a pivotal role in graph data science as they are
intended to help unravel the nodes which are most pivotal, influential,
and/or important within the network. As a concrete example, we see
centrality algorithms at work on social media platforms where the most

heavily followed “influencers” are pushed to the top of the news feed.
These influential nodes are discovered using a variety of centrality
measures.

PageRank
The PageRank algorithm was initially developed by Google co-founders
Larry Page and Sergey Brin. It is a centrality measure that revolutionized
web search algorithms. Its premise is elegant yet powerful, which is to
measure the importance of nodes (for example, webpages) in a network
(for example, the World Wide Web) based on the connections between
them.
A relationship from a highly ranked node to another node boosts the
rank of the new node. The algorithm iteratively calculates the scores
between node connections. The algorithm also incorporates a damping
factor to reduce the randomness of connections, as well as to ensure all
pages contain a non-zero rank.
To start, we must first create the cypher projection as follows:
```
MATCH (source:Recipe)-[:USES]->(target:Ingredient)
WHERE source.Recipe_Title CONTAINS ‘cornbread’
WITH gds.graph.project(‘ingredients’, source, target) AS g
RETURN
g.graphName AS graph, g.nodeCount AS nodes,
g.relationshipCount AS rels
```

This projects the Recipe to Ingredient relationship for all the cornbread
recipes. We could remove the cornbread constraint, but this helps limit
the size of our projection. The projection moves the data from the
database to an in-memory location optimized for our graph analysis and
will help us determine which ingredients are most important within the
cornbread recipes.
Next, we can run the pageRank algorithm as follows:
```
CALL gds.pageRank.write(‘ingredients’, { writeProperty:
‘pageRank’ })
```

The syntax in Neo4j graph data science (GDS) is straightforward. We
specify the name of the projection, ‘‘ingredients’, as well as the
algorithm we would like to use. We then write the results of the algorithm
back to the ingredient nodes in a property appropriately named
‘pageRank.’ We can then view the newly written property within the Neo4j
Browser:

Figure 8.1: Illustration of the pageRank property stored in the database

Finally, we can write a cypher query to determine the most influential
ingredients across the cornbread recipes:
```
MATCH (r:Recipe)-[:USES]->(i:Ingredient)
WHERE r.Recipe_Title CONTAINS ‘cornbread’
WITH DISTINCT i
RETURN i.Ingredient_Name AS Ingredient, i.pageRank AS PageRank
ORDER BY i.pageRank DESC
LIMIT 10
```

This query returns the top 10 most influential ingredients in the
cornbread recipes based on the pageRank algorithm. As you can see,
eggs are the most important ingredient to consider when making
cornbread:

Figure 8.2: Top 10 most influential ingredients in the cornbread recipes

As we can see, eggs are the most important ingredient in cornbread
recipes, followed by salt and onion.
Node centrality can be a powerful tool to hone in on the most important
elements of the graph. In tackling graph-related challenges, identifying
key nodes is often a primary objective. This metric guides us to pivotal
elements of the network’s functionality.

Community Detection
Community detection helps us decipher the modular structure of a
graph. Communities are clusters within a network. We can set the
parameters to determine if the clusters should be more or less densely
connected.
Whether we are mapping social interactions, unraveling complex
biological systems, or parsing complex fraud networks, community
detection helps us to identify subgroups with strong internal
connections.

Louvain Hierarchical Clustering
Louvain is a highly efficient and widely used method for community
detection within large networks. Louvain seeks to optimize a metric
called modularity. Modularity is a scale value to measure the strength of
the division of a network into modules or communities. Unlike clustering
methods like k-means clustering, hierarchical clustering creates a tree
of clusters called a dendrogram. This method can be particularly useful
in understanding the data structure and identifying meaningful groupings
within your data.
Louvain works in two phases. First, it assigns nodes to a community.
Next, it aggregates nodes of the same community and builds a new
network of communities until the modularity cannot be further increased.
We will use the same graph projection used in the previous section for
cornbread node centrality. Once we run Louvain on this projection, we
will see communities of cornbread recipes emerge. Let’s run this code to
write the louvain communities to the recipe and ingredient nodes:
```

CALL gds.louvain.write(‘ingredients’, { writeProperty:
‘louvainCommunity’ })
YIELD communityCount, modularity, modularities
```

With this code block, we can capture the structure of the cornbread
graph. Once we have these communities written to each node, we can
simply aggregate the nodes to discover the largest communities using
this approach:
```
MATCH (r:Recipe)
WHERE r.louvainCommunity IS NOT NULL
RETURN r.louvainCommunity as louvainCommunity
, count(*) as communityCount
ORDER BY communityCount DESC
LIMIT 10
```

Once we run this code, we can see that there are a couple of very large
communities where many of the recipes are quite similar. Based on our
exploratory analysis of the cornbread recipes in previous chapters, this
is intuitive. Many of the recipes are duplicative with very similar
ingredients. However, now that we have run community detection, new
patterns have begun to emerge:

Figure 8.3: Top 10 largest communities of the cornbread recipes

For example, we can see that community #5750 contains only six
recipes. This could be a good example for us to explore visually to better
understand why this group was parsed from the largest communities
with over 2000 recipes each:

Figure 8.4: Small community of cornbread recipes

While some of the recipes and ingredients were removed from the
image to enable it to fit on the page, we can see ingredients like “greek
yogurt” and “almond milk” are ingredients used in this small community
of cornbread recipes. These relatively unique ingredients explain why
this community was broken apart from the larger network of cornbread
recipes. These recipes use typical ingredients such as butter and salt,
but their uniqueness helps separate these recipes from the rest.

Similarity
Similarity algorithms are designed to quantify the likeness or
resemblance between nodes in a graph. These algorithms compare
features of the graph, such as age or location between user nodes. The
core idea is to determine how closely related the two nodes are to one
another.

In the previous chapter, we have covered cosine similarity between
node embeddings. Cosine similarity is a powerful, commonly used
algorithm in the field of text analysis and natural language processing
(NLP) because it measures the similarity between two vectors in a
multi-dimensional space.
The different similarity algorithms provide advantages in different types
of data and applications. In the next section, we will explore the Jaccard
Similarity algorithm.

Jaccard Similarity Index
In this section, we will look into the Jaccard Similarity Index which is a
commonly used method for quantifying the similarity between two sets.
This approach will be particularly useful in scenarios where relationships
between nodes define a node’s membership, such as determining the
similarity between recipes based on their shared ingredients.
The algorithm measures the intersection between two nodes and then
divides by the size of the union of the sets. In the following example, we
see two recipes “Southern Cornbread” and “Vegan Cornbread” and we
want to measure the similarity between the two recipes based on their
ingredients.
Southern Cornbread = {cornmeal, flour, buttermilk, eggs,
and butter}
Vegan Cornbread
flaxseeds}

=

{cornmeal,

flour,

almond

milk

and,

To compute the Jaccard Similarity Index, we first calculate the
intersection (or common ingredients) which in this case is 2. Next, we
divide by the union (all the ingredients) which in this case is 7.
Therefore, the similarity index calculated by this algorithm is 2/7 or
28.5%.
Next, let’s explore this algorithm implementation in Neo4j. We will use
the same graph projection as before to project the cornbread recipes
into an in-memory representation of the graph. We will then run the
following code to stream the top 10 most similar recipes:
```
CALL gds.nodeSimilarity.stream(‘ingredients’)
YIELD node1, node2, similarity

WITH gds.util.asNode(node1).Recipe_Title AS Recipe_Title1,
gds.util.asNode(node2).Recipe_Title AS Recipe_Title2,
similarity
WHERE Recipe_Title1 IS NOT NULL
RETURN *
ORDER BY similarity DESC
LIMIT 10;
```

In this example, we use the stream functionality to return the results of
the query rather than write the results back to the database itself. When
we run this query, the results look like this:

Figure 8.5: Similar cornbread recipes

These results indicate that all the recipes shown here share the same
ingredients and are, therefore, quite similar. This approach can be
helpful in deconflicting or resolving entities in your data where there are
multiple duplicate nodes. If there are duplicate nodes as defined by
similar community composition, then the Jaccard Similarity Index will
quantify the similarity and allow you to deduplicate the data.
We can use this Cypher query to return a visual representation of all the
shared ingredients between these two recipes to verify they do, in fact,
share the same ingredients:

```
MATCH (r:Recipe)-[u:USES]->(i:Ingredient)
WHERE r.Recipe_Title IN [‘african-american cornbread’,’basic
cornbread’]
AND r.Recipe_ID IN [156423,1065844]
RETURN *
```

As we can see from the resulting image, all of the ingredients are shared
between the two recipes:

Figure 8.6: Identical ingredients between recipes

In conclusion, the Jaccard Similarity Index is a helpful, straightforward
algorithm for comparing the intersection of sets between nodes to
measure the similarity based on shared membership. However, this
algorithm can be sensitive to size variations. In cases where the recipes
significantly differ in the number of ingredients, for example, this could
affect the similarity index. The simplicity and interpretability of this
algorithm make it a popular choice for exploratory data analysis and
similarity comparisons.

Link Prediction
Link prediction is a powerful approach to understanding potential
connections within complex networks. In this section, we will showcase
the popular algorithm Adamic-Adar Index. This technique goes beyond
simply counting the number of connections shared between neighbors.
Instead, it recognizes the significance of rare connections and weights
these more heavily in the link prediction algorithm. For instance, in the
case of the recipes and ingredients dataset, if two recipes share a
unique spice, then this shared ingredient would be given a higher weight
by the Adamic-Adar Index compared to the weight given to common
ingredients such as milk or salt.
Link prediction can be a powerful tool across many domains, including
social network analysis, recommendation systems, or e-commerce. In
social networks, link prediction can help suggest new friends or
connections by examining current connections and relationships of
those connections to other individuals. In healthcare and drug discovery,
link prediction can identify potential connections between drugs and
diseases, helping pave the way to more effective treatments.

Adamic-Adar Index
The Adamic-Adar Index is a crucial aspect of graph data science, as it
is known for its ability to identify potential connections within a network
by emphasizing the importance of less common links. Conceptually, it is
rooted in the idea that not all shared connections between nodes in a
network are equally significant. If there are rare or uncommon
connections, then these are weighted more heavily.
We can now apply this algorithm to the recipe dataset. The discovery of
new and exciting recipes depends on the complex relationships between

multiple ingredients. Using the Adamic-Adar Index, we can explore
relationships between existing recipes to look for combinations of
ingredients that may be novel and innovative.
To begin, we can use two of the cornbread recipes previously
determined to be similar and calculate the Jaccard Similarity Index and
Adamic-Adar Index between these two recipes:

Figure 8.7: Similar cornbread recipes

In this figure, we can see the two recipes share two ingredients. The
almond milk is a relatively unique ingredient in cornbread recipes.
Therefore, we should expect these two recipes to have a higher
similarity compared to other cornbread recipes.
When we run the following cypher query, we need to specify our anchor
node, which, in this case, is the “cornbread waffle blt’s with garlic
aioli”, as well as the search group to limit the amount of link prediction
calculations required by the database. We will use the louvaincommunity
ID to assist with limiting the search space:

```
MATCH (p1:Recipe)
MATCH (p2:Recipe)
WHERE p1.Recipe_ID = 1278977
AND p2.louvainCommunity = 5750
RETURN p1.Recipe_Title as Recipe_Title1
, p2.Recipe_Title as Recipe_Title2
, ROUND(gds.alpha.linkprediction.adamicAdar(p1, p2,
{relationshipQuery: ‘USES’}),3) AS score
ORDER BY score DESC
LIMIT 3
```

After executing the Adamic-Adar Index, we can see that the highest
recommended recipe to our anchor recipe is indeed the “diabetic mini
cornbread muffins.”

Figure 8.8: Link prediction results to anchor node

This approach to recommending similar nodes to the anchor node is a
highly valuable technique. Not only are we able to navigate complex
networks to parse the connections to our anchor node, but we are also
able to automatically weight the connections based on relative
frequency, which can boost the effectiveness of our analytics
dramatically.

Network Embeddings and Graph Neural
Network
Network embeddings and graph neural networks (GNNs) represent
the cutting edge where artificial intelligence intersects with network
science. This section dives into these advanced techniques, exploring
the capabilities and applications of the algorithms to extract deep
insights from graph-structured data.

The purpose of embedding graph structures is to preserve the structure
of the graph while transforming the graph into a vector, computerreadable representation. This transformation facilitates many forms of
analysis, including node classification and link prediction, as well as
clustering and visualization.

GraphSAGE
GraphSAGE (Graph Sample and AggregatE) introduces a novel
approach to GNNs by generating embeddings by sampling and
aggregating features from a node’s local neighborhood. GraphSAGE
supports predictions on unseen data and is very scalable due to its
sampling of a fixed number of neighbors for each node.
GraphSAGE can be useful in recommendation systems, node
classification, link prediction, fraud detection, drug discovery, and more.
In the following example, we will use the recipes dataset to demonstrate
how GraphSAGE can be leveraged to embed ingredients and recipes
into a vector space and use the embeddings to assess similarities and
differences between recipes based on their ingredient composition.
We will first create a graph projection of all the nodes and recipes
related to cornbread recipes.
```
MATCH (source:Recipe)-[:USES]->(target:Ingredient)
WHERE source.Recipe_Title CONTAINS ‘cornbread’
AND source.pageRank IS NOT NULL
AND target.pageRank IS NOT NULL
WITH gds.graph.project(
‘ingredients’,
source,
target,
{
sourceNodeProperties: source { pageRank:
coalesce(source.pageRank, 0.001)},
targetNodeProperties: target { pageRank:
coalesce(target.pageRank, 0.001)}
},
{undirectedRelationshipTypes: [‘*’]}
) as g

RETURN
g.graphName AS graph, g.nodeCount AS nodes,
g.relationshipCount AS rels
```

In this code, we specify that the source and target nodes must contain
the property “pageRank” because the GraphSAGE algorithm in Neo4j
requires a node property as an input.
Next, we will train the GraphSAGE algorithm to learn the structure of the
projected graph. We will provide the featureProperties, the aggregator
we wish to use, the number of iterations – or epochs – that we want the
algorithm to loop through, and the searchDepth for the sampling of
neighboring nodes required by the algorithm:
```
CALL gds.beta.graphSage.train(
‘ingredients’,
{
modelName: ‘graphSageModel’,
featureProperties: [‘pageRank’],
aggregator: ‘mean’,
epochs: 5,
searchDepth: 5
}
)
YIELD modelInfo
RETURN modelInfo
```

Once we execute this code, we will see model statistics and metrics that
reference the losses in each epoch iteration, as well as whether or not
the model converges within the number of epochs provided.
Now that the GraphSAGE model has been created, we could take our
analysis in multiple directions, including recommendation systems, node
classification, link prediction, or visualization of the high dimensional
space. For now, we will focus on visually representing the data.
For this exercise, we will use the algorithm UMAP, which helps visualize
complex, high-dimensional data such as embeddings generated by
GraphSAGE. In the following code, we use UMAP to reduce the multidimensional representation of recipes and ingredients and reduce them
to a 2D space:

```
import umap
import numpy as np
import pandas as pd
import plotly.express as px
from sklearn.cluster import KMeans
embeddings = np.array(df[‘embedding’].tolist())
reducer = umap.UMAP(n_neighbors=15, # Try different values for
n_neighbors min_dist=0.1, # Try different values for min_dist
random_state=42)
umap_embeddings = reducer.fit_transform(embeddings)
n_clusters = 10
kmeans = KMeans(n_clusters=n_clusters, random_state=42)
cluster_labels = kmeans.fit_predict(umap_embeddings)
umap_df = pd.DataFrame(umap_embeddings, columns=[‘x’, ‘y’])
umap_df[‘cluster’] = cluster_labels # Add cluster labels to the
DataFrame
# Plot using Plotly with cluster colors
fig = px.scatter(umap_df, x=’x’, y=’y’, color=’cluster’,
title=’2D UMAP visualization of Recipe Embeddings with K-Means
Clusters’)
fig.update_traces(marker=dict(size=5))
fig.show()
```

In this code, the ‘n_neighbors’ in UMAP shapes how UMAP balances
the local versus global structure, enabling the algorithm to capture the
broader context of the network embedding. Similarly, the ‘min_dist’
parameter determines how tightly or loosely the points are grouped
together in the reduced space. These parameters help dictate the
granularity and separation of the data clusters.
Also, we use the K-Means clustering algorithm on the reduced
embedding to represent collections of recipes that are similar to one
another in the high-dimensional space of their GraphSAGE embeddings
but can now be represented in 2D.
The Plotly visualization library adds depth to our data analysis by not
only allowing us to visually explore the data but also zoom in and hover
over data points on the scatter plot, which provides an additional,

powerful capability to the visualization. The following image represents
the reduced dimensions of the recipe embeddings using the UMAP
algorithm.

Figure 8.9: Reduced dimensions of recipe embeddings with UMAP

In this image, we can see all the cornbread recipes initially created in a
high-dimensional space by the GraphSAGE algorithm and then reduced
to a 2D representation by the UMAP algorithm. Finally, we use the KMeans algorithm to add a third dimension to the visualization to
represent the cluster ID for each recipe and ingredient.

Conclusion
This chapter illustrated the importance of graph algorithms in
interpreting and engaging with interconnected data. We explored the
core areas of centrality, community detection, similarity, link prediction,
and network embeddings. Each algorithm offers unique, actionable
insights into interconnected data.
The Neo4j database offers these algorithms from within the database,
making it a powerful tool for graph data science. The in-database
analytics simplifies the data pipeline for data engineers and data
scientists, ultimately leading to insights and action more quickly and
effectively for end stakeholders.
While we only scratched the surface of graph algorithms in this chapter,
we covered many of the foundational principles with the intent of
opening the doors of your imagination to explore what other algorithms
may be applicable to your specific use case. The power of graph data

science lies in the ability to reveal huddle patterns in connected data
which empower innovation and discovery. In the next two chapters, we
will implement a few of these algorithms to apply to typical, real-world
data science use cases.

Points to Remember
Graph Algorithms are Essential for Complex Network
Analysis: They play a crucial role in interpreting interconnected
data structures. Graph algorithms help in navigating and
understanding the web of interconnected data, revealing hidden
patterns and relationships.
Types of Graph Algorithms Covered:
Centrality: Identifies the most influential nodes within a
network.
Community Detection: Discovers groups or clusters of
nodes, highlighting the modular structure of the network.
Similarity: Measures the likeness or structural equivalence
between nodes.
Link Prediction: Predicts the likelihood of the formation of a
connection between two nodes.
Network Embeddings and Graph Neural Networks: Utilizes
advanced machine learning techniques to represent graph
structures for deeper analysis.

CHAPTER 9

Recommendation Engines Using
Embeddings
Introduction
A recommendation engine is a tool designed to predict or present items
most likely to be of interest to a user. The importance of the
recommendations lies in the unique personalization of the user and user
engagement in order to best assist with the users’ decision-making
process. If you think about popular streaming services such as Amazon
or Netflix, these use recommendation engines to assist you with
choosing the best movie based on your previous experiences.
Recommendation engines can be categorized into three categories:
Content-Based Filtering: This approach aims to recommend
content based on what the user has liked in the past. In the
example of movie recommendations, this would involve suggesting
movies similar to those the user has watched in the past.
Collaborative Filtering: This method looks at similar users to
guide recommendations for the current user. The idea behind this
is that similar users will agree in the future about item preferences.
Hybrid Systems: This combines both content-based and
collaborative filtering to mitigate the limitations of each approach
and often provide a more comprehensive recommendation.
Knowledge graphs enhance recommendation engines because of their
inherent structure. The mapping of nodes by relationships is well-suited
for enriched contextual analysis, scalability, and flexibility, as well as
real-time recommendations. Finally, the knowledge graph structure
caters well to graph-based algorithms like link prediction, which
improves the overall accuracy of recommendations.

Structure

In this chapter, we will cover the following topics:
Loading the Patent Database Dump into Neo4j Desktop
Recommendation Engine Using the Retrieval-Augmented
Generation (RAG) Approach
Recommendation Engine Leveraging the RetrievalQA Approach

Patent Recommendations
To illustrate the concepts of recommendation engines, we will utilize the
patent database. Patents are critical for innovation and research. They
help provide legal protection for inventors and companies as they
research and develop new innovations. Patents also serve as a valuable
source of information providing insights into the latest advancements.
Patents are highly technical documents often written by lawyers and can
often be complex. In addition to the complexity of reading the
documents, the analysis of patents can be hindered by the sheer volume
of information and the ambiguity of overlapping contexts between
patents.
The Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) process is an ideal
methodology to use for this complex and rich data source. RAG can be
used to retrieve relevant patents, enrich the patents with additional
information, and ultimately generate insights and recommendations for
the user. RAG in patent analysis can overcome some of the typical
challenges faced in patent research.

Loading Patent Data
To begin, we need to load the Patent database to our Neo4j Desktop
database. We can create a new database, called Patents, and utilize the
latest version of Neo4j to ensure we have vector storage installed:

Figure 9.1: Create new Patents database

We are going to import the Patents database dump from the
accompanying file for this chapter. Once your new Patents database
has been created from the previous step, navigate to Open Folder in
Neo4j Desktop and then click DBMS:

Figure 9.2: Navigate to the DBMS folder

Once you click DBMS, a file explorer will appear. This will provide the
path needed to import the Patent database dump file. The file explorer
path should appear something like this:

Figure 9.3: Path to the bin folder

The file explorer will show you the path to the bin folder. Once you have
the bin folder, navigate to the bin directory and then copy the path to the
bin folder. For example, here is the file path provided to a Windows user:
```
C:\Users\TimEa\AppData\Local\Neo4j\Relate\Data\dbmss\dbmsd5a8ee11-5898-4856-85e3-e73a1ca2e226\bin
```

Next, you will need to open a command prompt and add ‘cd’ to the
beginning of the path to your Neo4j Database bin directory from the

previous step. Once you click Enter, you will now access the bin
directory of your new Neo4j database:

Figure 9.4: Access to the bin directory of your new Patent database

Once you see that you are in the bin directory of your new Patent
database, as shown above, run the following command to load the
dump file from your saved location into the Neo4j Database bin folder.
The file needs to be named “neo4j.dump” for this command to function
properly:
```
neo4j-admin database load neo4j --frompath=C:\Users\TimEa\Downloads\Patents patents --overwritedestination=true
```

Figure 9.5: Success message after loading the Patent database dump

Congratulations, you have successfully loaded the database dump of
patent data into your new Patent database! This will enable you to run
GDS and APOC functions that enable us to run graph data science
functions directly on our graph data for free. Go ahead and install these
plugins, if you have not already, so that you can use these functions
later.

RAG Retrieval for Patents
As we mentioned at the beginning of this chapter, recommendation
engines can involve multiple approaches and methodologies. For this
example, we will focus on patent retrieval using content-based filtering
with text analysis. This method involves analyzing the text to extract
meaning and provide relevant and precise recommendations. This way,
we can accurately match patents with user interests and enhance the
search engine with precise recommendations.

The first step in running a Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG)
process with Neo4j as the backend database is to connect to the vector
index. The name of the vector index in our Patent database is
‘embeddingsindex.’ To proceed with this example, you will need to obtain
an OpenAI key:
```
embedding_provider = OpenAIEmbeddings()
patent_abstract_vector = Neo4jVector.from_existing_index(
embedding_provider,
url=uri,
username=user,
password=pw,
index_name=”embeddingsindex”,
embedding_node_property=”embedding”,
text_node_property=”abstract”,
)
```

Once we connect to the vector index, we can use the earlier
patent_abstract_vector variable to run a similarity search of a new
description or persona. For example, we can run the following code to
find the single most similar patent to our given description:
```
r = patent_abstract_vector.similarity_search(“A system for
removing an occlusive clot from a blood vessel.”, k=1)
print(r)
```

We set k=1 in this example to return the single closest description to our
given persona. The result is a patent titled ‘CLOT RETRIEVAL
SYSTEM FOR REMOVING OCCLUSIVE CLOT FROM A BLOOD
VESSEL’ and, unsurprisingly, the abstract description of the patent
matches the persona nicely: “A system for removing an occlusive clot
from a blood vessel comprises a catheter and an apparatus for
generating a pulsatile vacuum force to pulse the pressure gradient at a
distal end of the catheter. The pulse generator may be integral with or
separate from the vacuum pump. The pulse generator may be applied
to a flexible tubing between the vacuum pump and the proximal end of
the catheter.”

We can use this same methodology to filter false positives from a list of
potential matches. For example, imagine you search your database for
any patent related to virtual reality (VR) capabilities. Unfortunately, you
may return thousands of potential hits. Many of these responses may be
incorrect and inaccurate. We can use the RAG methodology to rank the
most similar responses to our persona description and then set a cutoff
to filter out many of the false positives.
In this following code, we now return the first 1000 patents that match
our description. As you will see next, many of the 1000 responses
toward the bottom of the list are false positives:
```
r = patent_abstract_vector.similarity_search(“An immersive VR
system designed for education.”, k=1000)
pd.set_option(‘display.max_columns’, None)
pd.set_option(‘display.width’, None)
pd.set_option(‘display.max_colwidth’, None)
data_list = []
for document in r:
page_content = document.page_content
title = document.metadata[‘title’]
data_list.append({‘Title’: title})
df = pd.DataFrame(data_list)
display(df)
```

After running this code, we will notice that rows 0-4 closely match the
persona provided for virtual reality. On the other hand, rows 995-999
may reference virtual reality in their personas, but it’s evident that virtual
reality is not the primary focus or purpose of those patents:

Figure 9.6: Virtual reality patent responses

To summarize, RAG can be a terrific recommendation engine for textbased searches. In complex domains, such as patents, the RAG
implementation is critical to maintaining the semantic essence of the text
while sifting through false positive matches.

RetrievalQA Chains for Patents
Beyond the semantic similarity search offered by the RAG
implementation, we can also run a Retrieval Questions Answering
(RetrievalQA) chain query. This is used to combine LLM responses with
external, proprietary databases. The Retrieval component queries an
external data source or document collection – in this case, Neo4j. This
information is then passed to an LLM to generate a more informed,
accurate, and relevant response. This can be very useful in a Chatbot
app where the information returned to the user needs to be up-to-date
and relevant.
We can run the following code to provide a prompt to the LLM as well as
request the LLM to query our Neo4j database:
```
retrievalQA = RetrievalQA.from_llm(
llm=chat_llm,
retriever=patent_abstract_vector.as_retriever(),
verbose=True,
return_source_documents=True

)
response = retrievalQA(f”””
You are a patent expert. You provide insights and
recommendations on patents based on their content, technology,
and inventors.
I am researching wearable technology for health monitoring. Can
you recommend some patents that I should look into?
“””)
```

When we run this RetrievalQA against our Neo4j database, we see the
following response:
“Based on your interest in wearable technology for health
monitoring, here are a few patents that you may find relevant:
1. US Patent No. 9,123,345: “Wearable Health Monitoring System”
2. US Patent No. 10,265,482: “Wearable Device for Physiological
Monitoring”
3. US Patent No. 8,946,135: “Wearable Sensor System for
Monitoring Vital Signs”
4. US Patent No. 10,617,492: “Wearable Device for Remote Health
Monitoring”
5. US Patent No. 9,752,837: “Wearable Biometric Monitoring
Device”

Please note that patent numbers and titles are provided for reference
purposes, and you should conduct a thorough search and analysis to
determine the specific patents that best suit your research needs.
This response from the LLM is powerful because it queries the
information directly from our database and simultaneously enriches the
query response using the power of the GPT model.
To summarize, RetrievalQA chains can also be a powerful tool to build
your recommendation engines because they combine the power of
LLMs with the proprietary data stored on your database.

Conclusion
In this chapter, we first reviewed the steps required to import the Neo4j
database dump onto a Neo4j Desktop database. This is a critical step
as it enables us to run GDS and APOC libraries to execute graph data

science algorithms for free, which are required for our embedding
similarity searches.
We also explored the innovative field of patent retrieval and
recommendation by leveraging both the capabilities of RetrievalAugmented Generation (RAG) and RetrievalQA chains. These
advanced techniques can transform the landscape of patent analysis
and search methodologies, offering more precise, relevant, and
insightful recommendations.
The RAG methodology focuses on content-based filtering using text
analysis, which enables nuanced retrieval of complex patent data. By
connecting the vector index in Neo4j and utilizing similarity searches, we
demonstrate how to enhance the precision of patent search engines.
We also covered the RetrievalQA chains, which integrate the responses
of LLMs, such as GPT, with the data stored in our Neo4j database. This
integration enables a sophisticated chatbot capable of providing up-todate and relevant recommendations.
The implications of this technology are profound. They provide us with
the unparalleled ability to sift through massive amounts of data and
identify connections and insights that might have otherwise never been
seen. For professionals in intellectual property (IP), research and
development (R&D), or other cutting-edge fields, these tools can offer
the means to stay ahead of the competition, innovate, and position
yourself with a strategic advantage.
In the next chapter, we will discuss a common use case for graph data
science: fraud detection. We will explore how connections between
clients can indicate fraudulent behavior, as well as discuss methods for
retrieving and exploring this information from the database.

Points to Remember
Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) uses content-based
filtering to extract meaningful information from text.
Neo4j is a terrific backend tool for RAG applications. Python allows
us to easily interact with both OpenAI’s GPT model as well as the
stored embeddings in Neo4j.
RAG methodologies provide similarity scores to help us sort and
filter potential false positives from our initial result sets.

RetrievalQA combines responses from large language models with

data from Neo4j to provide timely and relevant recommendations.
The combination of AI models and Neo4j enhances the ability to
analyze and recommend result sets accurately and efficiently.

CHAPTER 10

Fraud Detection
Introduction
Digital transactions comprise billions of data points each day and
require cutting-edge technology to combat the data challenges in the
fraud landscape. Fraud schemes, such as identity theft, lead to
significant economic losses as well as reputational risk for financial
service companies.
Ultimately, fraud is an action of misrepresentation of facts for personal
gain. It impacts many sectors such as finance, healthcare, online retail,
and government services. With the rise of artificial intelligence, fraud
schemes become increasingly more complicated to decipher and
untangle. This requires a shift toward advanced analytical techniques,
such as knowledge graphs, in order to analyze the interconnected
relationships.
Understanding the different types of fraud is important for effective fraud
detection. Here are some of the common terms and definitions used in
fraud detection:
First-Party Fraud: This occurs when an individual or entity
misrepresents their own identity or provides false information for
financial gain. Common examples include fabricating false
information to obtain loans or credit or falsifying personal
information to obtain benefits or services. In other words, this is the
primary beneficiary of the financial deceit.
Second-Party Fraud: This involves the complicit involvement of a
second party within the fraud scheme. For example, an individual
could willingly give personal information to another person who
then uses it for fraudulent purposes.
Third-Party Fraud: This is the most common type of fraud where
an external individual or entity is stealing or using someone else’s
identity or information without their knowledge. This includes
identity theft, account takeover, and credit card fraud.

Knowledge graphs offer a powerful tool in the fight against fraud by
mapping complex relationships in vast datasets to pinpoint risk both
algorithmically and visually. In this chapter, we will use Neo4j’s graph
data science library to detect patterns that are indicative of fraudulent
activity and provide the foundational understanding of how knowledge
graphs can help identify fraud in a new era of big data.

Structure
In this chapter, we will cover the following topics:
Exploratory Analysis of Fraud Detection Dataset
Connection Identifiers Commonly Used in Fraud Detection
Data Engineering and Enriching the Fraud Dataset
Graph Data Science for Fraud Detection

Exploratory Analysis of the Fraud Detection
Dataset
We will use mock data in this chapter based on the Neo4j database
dump available at: https://github.com/ava-orange-education/GraphData-Science-with-Python-andNeo4j/tree/main/Chapter_10/Fraud_Detection. Neo4j has posted this
dataset on their GitHub repository for training purposes. We will follow
much of the same methodologies and guides that Neo4j outlined in their
GitHub demo, presented in this chapter in a streamlined, easy-to-follow
format.
To get started, we will first need to load the database dump file saved
with the reference material for this chapter. To load the database dump
file, follow the same steps as we walked through in the previous chapter.
Our first step of analysis will be to check the counts of nodes and
relationships by type. With the following code, we can use the APOC
library to concatenate the node label with the count by label:
```
CALL db.labels() YIELD label
CALL apoc.cypher.run(‘MATCH (:`’+label+’`) RETURN count(*) as
count’, {})
YIELD value

RETURN label as Label, value.count AS Count
ORDER BY Count DESC
```

On running this Cypher query, we can see the following result:

Figure 10.1: Count of node labels in fraud detection dataset

The transaction node is the most frequent node. The Client and SSN
nodes are also very important nodes, as they help identify the source of
potential fraud.
Next, we will want to understand the count of relationship types in the
database. Similarly, we can use the APOC library to concatenate the
types:
```
CALL db.relationshipTypes() YIELD relationshipType as type
CALL apoc.cypher.run(‘MATCH ()-[:`’+type+’`]->() RETURN
count(*) as count’, {})
YIELD value
RETURN type AS Relationship, value.count AS Count
ORDER BY Count DESC
```

On running this code, we can see the following results:

Figure 10.2: Count of relationship types in fraud detection dataset

The PERFORMED relationship is the most common relationship, which
represents the entity performing a transaction or action within the data.
The next step in our analysis is to create a relationship between clients
who share the same attributes. In fraud detection, some of the attributes
we could use to link clients together include:
Social Security Number (SSN): In the United States, the
government issues a unique identification to each citizen called the
SSN. If multiple clients are using the same SSN, this could be
suspicious and may indicate identity theft.
Suspicious Activity Report (SAR): In the United States, financial
institutions are required to file SARs on suspicious financial
transactions. These can often reference multiple SSNs, which
create connections between entities and can be used to link
together fraud schemes.
Internet Protocol (IP) Address: IP addresses identify the host or
network and location of the network. Multiple clients sharing the
same IP address could link together potential fraudsters.
Email: Clients using the same email address could be potentially
suspicious.
Phone: Clients using the same phone number could be potentially
suspicious.
Bank Accounts: Shared bank accounts between different clients
could be a red flag, especially if these accounts are used in
suspicious transactions.
Employer: Links can be established between clients based on
shared employers.
Physical Address: Shared residential or mailing addresses can
link clients. Multiple clients linked to the same physical address or
PO box could be potentially suspicious.
As you can imagine, many of these attributes can be used to link
together clients and create a complex, tangled web of relationships
between clients. The analysis of this web using a graph database like
Neo4j can reveal hidden patterns that may not be apparent or obvious

through traditional data analysis methods. In our mock data, we are
limited to connections between clients based solely on:
1. Transaction behavior
2. SSNs
3. Phones
4. Emails
Our challenge for the remainder of this chapter will be to use these four
connection criteria to dynamically map groups of customers. We will
look to pinpoint potentially suspicious in the sections ahead that could
be indicative of fraud.

Data Engineering
The first step towards stitching together potentially suspicious clients is
to flag “Super Nodes” or nodes that have a high number of connections.
Counting the number of relationships to each node serves two
purposes:
Filter Criteria: We can filter out false connections that could be
data quality errors, which would result in false positive connections
between clients. For example, if more than 100 clients say that
their phone number is 999-999-9999, then we would want to have
a property called ‘node_degree’ on the phone node to indicate that
this phone number is potentially false and could be excluded from
community detection.
Stand-Alone “Super Node” Analytics: The degree of a node may
enable a parallel analytics fraud project to dig into the underlying
data to understand why “Super Nodes” exist in the first place.
While the connections between clients may not be valid for
community detection, there may be evidence of fraud based on a
large number of connections.
We can run the following code to add an incoming as well as an
outgoing degree for each node:
```
CALL apoc.periodic.iterate(
‘MATCH (n) RETURN n’,
‘WITH n

CALL {
WITH n
MATCH (n)-->()
RETURN COUNT(*) AS out_degree
}
CALL {
WITH n
MATCH (n)<--()
RETURN COUNT(*) AS in_degree
}
SET n.in_degree = in_degree, n.out_degree = out_degree
RETURN n’,
{batchSize:1000}
)
```

Once we know the degree for each node, we can run a stand-alone
“Super Node” analysis. For example, we can begin with the Email node
to determine the most commonly used email addresses using the
following cypher code:
```
MATCH (n:Email)
WITH n, n.in_degree + n.out_degree AS total_degree, labels(n)
AS labels
ORDER BY total_degree DESC
RETURN n.email as email, labels, total_degree
LIMIT 10
```

This query will result in a list of the most commonly used email
addresses with the highest count as 10:

Figure 10.3: Degree of the Email nodes

While this is mock data, we can easily imagine a real-world dataset with
hundreds of clients using the same email address. Many times, an email
could be fake or auto-generated such as “NONE@NA.com”. These fake
emails can be excluded from the analysis or used to fix data quality
issues at the source.
Next, we will create a new relationship between customers called
‘SHARED_IDENTIFIER’ when two customers share one or more of the
aforementioned identifiers. To accomplish this, we can execute the
following Cypher query:

```
MATCH (c1:Client)-[r:HAS_EMAIL|HAS_PHONE|HAS_SSN]->(n)<[r2:HAS_EMAIL|HAS_PHONE|HAS_SSN]-(c2:Client)
WHERE id(c1) < id(c2)
WITH c1, c2, count(*) as cnt,
SUM(
CASE WHEN type(r) = ‘HAS_EMAIL’ THEN 1
WHEN type(r) = ‘HAS_PHONE’ THEN 1.5
WHEN type(r) = ‘HAS_SSN’ THEN 5
ELSE 0
END
) AS weight
MERGE (c1)-[:SHARED_IDENTIFIERS {count: cnt, weight: weight}]->
(c2);
```

In this command, we anchor between two clients (c1 and c2) and search
for their common identifier that indirectly connects these two nodes. We
search between Email, Phone, and SSN connections, as these
attributes are currently available in our database. We also count the
number of shared connections and add this as a property on the
SHARED_IDENTIFERS relationship, which now directly maps the two
clients. Furthermore, we can include business rules to help determine
the weight or strength of connection between two clients. For example, if
two clients share two of the same emails and four of the same phones,
then the weight of connection on their SHARED_IDENTIFIERS relationship
would be 8 (where 8 = 1.0 * 2 + 1.5 * 4). This weight will be useful when
we run graph algorithms that can leverage weighted relationships in their
calculations.

Graph Data Science for Fraud Detection
Once we have created a weighted link between clients sharing
identifiers, the next step is to create an undirected graph of all these
connections and pass the weight property into the graph projection as
well:
```
CALL gds.graph.project(‘pg1’,
{
Client: {

label: ‘Client’
}
},
{
SHARED_IDENTIFIERS:{
type: ‘SHARED_IDENTIFIERS’,
orientation: ‘UNDIRECTED’,
properties: {
count: {
property: ‘weight’
}
}
}
}
) YIELD graphName,nodeCount,relationshipCount,projectMillis;
```

This code snippet is used to generate a graph projection, which
effectively restructures the data from the knowledge graph into a format
optimized for in-memory storage. This optimized format is particularly
designed to facilitate the efficient execution of graph data science
algorithms, enabling faster and more effective data processing and
analysis.
Now that the data is in a projected graph in-memory, we can create
communities of clients by running the Weakly Connected Components
algorithm. This community detection algorithm assigns a unique ID to
any nodes sharing a link between them. In very large datasets, this
efficient algorithm can identify clients in groups of tens of thousands
based on shared connections:
```
CALL gds.wcc.write(‘pg1’, { writeProperty: ‘WCC_ID’ })
YIELD nodePropertiesWritten, componentCount;
```

Now that each customer has been assigned a unique ID for their
community (called WCC_ID), we can visualize these communities (see
Figure 10.4):

Figure 10.4: Groups of potential fraud rings

In Figure 10.4, we can see nine distinct groups of clients. Each group
consists of clients who share identifiers with one another. For example,
when we zoom in on one of these communities, we can see several
clients linked to each other through various connections such as phone,
email, and SSN:

Figure 10.5: Groups of potential fraud rings

In the preceding figure, we can see nine clients in blue linked to one
another through a combination of connections, including:
3 phone numbers
3 email addresses
3 SSNs
These communities are powerful in fraud detection because they link
together entities that may be otherwise computationally inefficient or
impossible to discover through traditional SQL and relational database
approaches. As the size of the data grows, the need for a knowledge
graph to stitch together disparate connections becomes increasingly
necessary.

For example, in the preceding figure, we can see Lauren Carver is
indirectly connected to Molly Santos because Lauren shares a phone
with Samuel who then shares an SSN with Molly.
Neo4j also offers powerful path-finding algorithms, which can prove
valuable in these situations. As you can imagine, these fraud networks
can become quite large with sometimes thousands of clients connected
to one another. You may find yourself in a situation where you know of
one suspicious person and would like to find the shortest path from this
person to someone else within the community. To accomplish this, we
can use the appropriately named “shortest path” algorithm:
```
MATCH (start:Client {name: “Lauren Carver”}), (end:Client
{name: “Molly Santos”})
MATCH path = shortestPath((start)-[*]-(end))
RETURN path
```

On running this query, we can see the shortest path between Lauren
and Molly is indeed through Samuel:

Figure 10.6: Shortest path between Lauren and Molly

The shortest path algorithm can be helpful in fraud detection for
mapping linkages between potential fraudsters within the same weakly
connected component communities. It can also be a helpful algorithm to
use in industries like Logistics when one needs to analyze the supply
chain and the shortest path between two points.
In large communities, it is helpful to use node centrality measures to
identify which nodes are most important or influential within the network.

One centrality measure that is commonly used in fraud detection is the
Eigenvector Centrality algorithm. This approach helps to uncover
potentially fraudulent nodes that are central in a network of complex
relationships. Eigenvector Centrality provides a deeper insight into the
network structure, highlighting nodes that are central to the connectivity
and flow within the community.
```
CALL gds.eigenvector.write(‘pg1’, {
maxIterations: 20,
writeProperty: ‘eigenvectorCentrality’
})
YIELD nodePropertiesWritten, ranIterations
```

When we run this code on our graph projection, we now have the node
centrality score assigned to each node. With this in mind, we can run the
following code to determine the communities with the clients with the
highest connectivity scores:
```
MATCH (c:Client)
WITH c.WCC_ID as WCC_ID, max(c.eigenvectorCentrality) as
eigenvectorCentrality
RETURN WCC_ID, ROUND(eigenvectorCentrality,2) as
eigenvectorCentrality
ORDER BY eigenvectorCentrality DESC
LIMIT 5
```

On executing this Cypher query, we can see community 1865 has the
client with the highest connectivity score. The following image shows
Lauren Hayden as the client with the highest centrality score of 0.32
within this community:

Figure 10.7: Node centrality using Eigenvector Algorithm

While Lauren Hayden is highly connected within this community,
resulting in a high Eigenvector score, this community remains relatively
small. In large-scale fraud detection, the node centrality algorithms are
extremely important because they help pinpoint the primary bad actor
within the network.
In fraud detection, it is important to identify the initial lead subject to
assist investigation teams. Large-scale criminal networks are
cumbersome and unwieldy. Given the sensitive and often confidential
nature of the data involved, investigators are tasked with meticulously
sifting through the information. This careful analysis is critical as it
ensures the accuracy of the findings and also maintains the integrity of
the investigation, as well as providing protection to the privacy of
individuals. Therefore, implementing precise and efficient data analysis
methods, like those mentioned here, becomes invaluable in isolating the
key subjects and unraveling the broader network of fraudulent activities.

Conclusion
In this chapter, we explored the intricacies of fraud detection and utilized
the power of Neo4j to unravel the web of connections. Utilizing mock
data, we emulated real-world scenarios to illustrate how graph
technology can unmask fraud.
Initially, we loaded the database using a database dump and explored
the relationships between clients based on transactions and shared
indicators such as phone, email, and SSN. We also took the important
step of creating direct connections between clients based on these
shared connections.
An important aspect of working with large networks with potentially
falsified data is to examine and flag the presence of “Super Nodes.”
Super-nodes can act as the starting point for fraud analysis as these are
straightforward counts of the largest number of connections within the
network. However, these can also prove to be problematic if these are
not “real connections” between clients (for example, “NA@NONE.com”
email address). We explore techniques to flag and remove these
connections from our analysis.
Additionally, we implemented graph algorithms such as community
detection, node centrality, and shortest path techniques to illustrate how
we can use the power of knowledge graphs to make the analysis of
large networks more manageable and efficient. These techniques reveal
central figures in potential fraud rings, which offer valuable insights in
fraud detection.
In conclusion, this chapter demonstrated the efficacy of Neo4j in the
unraveling of complex fraud rings. Through a detailed approach, we
took mock data and approached a real-world fraud detection challenge
and highlighted the importance of graph databases in modern data
analytics and criminal investigations.
In the next chapter, we will wrap up our discussion of graph data
science and explore what these analytics may look like in the future.
This technology continues to expand and change each day, and there is
immense opportunity for the future.

Multiple Choice Questions

1. Identifying Connections: In the context of fraud detection using
Neo4j, which of the following attributes is NOT typically used to link
clients together?
a. Social Security Number (SSN)
b. Favorite Color
c. Email Address
d. IP Address
2. Understanding Graph Algorithms: Which graph algorithm is
commonly used in Neo4j for community detection in fraud
analysis?
a. Shortest Path
b. PageRank
c. Weakly Connected Components
d. A* Algorithm
3. Exploring Node Relationships: In our Neo4j fraud detection
dataset, what does a ‘SHARED_IDENTIFIERS’ relationship between
two Client nodes indicate?
a. Both clients have the same bank account
b. Both clients are employed at the same company
c. Both clients share common identifiers like SSN, Email, or
Phone
d. Both clients have conducted transactions at the same time

Answers
1. b
2. c
3. c

CLOSING SUMMARY

The Future of Graph Data Science
Introduction
Let us now reflect on our journey through graph data science thus far.
We have explored how this method of storing data in the form of nodes
and relationships unlocks hidden potential in data to uncover new
patterns and new insights. We showcased how we can unravel a
complex web of connections to highlight the key influencers within a
network, how to create communities of customers, and how to merge
the power of embeddings with the explainable nature of knowledge
graphs.
Just as our brains think of people and interactions as networks, we
should also store our data in a format that represents the true nature of
data. This way, we understand the linkages and interactions. Storing
our data in this format also benefits us because we can run algorithms
designed specifically for graph data structures, such as node centrality,
community detection, and graph neural network algorithms.
In this chapter, we seek to leverage the knowledge of what we have
learned to formulate a reasonable outlook into the future of this
technology. While we have thoroughly explored the current state of
graph data science and its capabilities, we believe that this field is
growing rapidly. Let us explore areas where graph data science may
continue to expand in the future.

The Evolution of Graph Technology
The landscape of “Big Data” is undergoing a major shift driven by the
exponential increase in the volume and complexity of data. The
challenge is no longer in simply handling vast quantities of data but also
in extracting valuable information and actionable insights from it. This
need for deeper understanding is propelling the evolution of graph
technology.

Graph data science has emerged as an essential tool for this new era
of data transformation and knowledge extraction. Its libraries are
expanding rapidly, and new algorithms are being designed to tackle
these increasingly complex data challenges. These new algorithms
represent a paradigm shift in data analysis because they represent
more than rows and columns, offering a holistic approach to solving
complex, interconnected problems.
This paradigm shift to unlock new dimensions of knowledge connects
directly to the advancements in Large Language Models (LLMs).
There is a timely and necessary integration opportunity in storing LLM
embeddings within knowledge graphs. This integration with models like
GPT offers a revolutionary opportunity to understand the contextual
relationships between both structured and unstructured data in a
manner that was previously not possible. These synergies offer a new
frontier in data science.
As we continue to witness the growth of both the size and complexity of
data, the importance of knowledge graphs in conjunction with LLMs will
only become more pronounced. In doing so, we make significant
progress in not only managing our data but also in understanding it and
harnessing its full potential.

Key Takeaways from the Book
This book serves as a comprehensive guide to the interesting realm of
graph data science, offering a blend of foundational theory with handson applications. It is designed to assist those venturing into this field as
well as seasoned practitioners looking to deepen their understanding
and skills in this new era of LLMs and knowledge graphs.
We started by reviewing the fundamentals of graph data science. We
spoke about the distinction between nodes, relationships, and
properties, which serve as the foundational building blocks of our
knowledge graph analysis. We also walked through data modeling and
data import, which serve as the beginnings for the advanced topics.
A significant highlight of the book is the integration between Python and
Neo4j, which offers the versatility of the Python programming language
as well as the toolkits and processing capabilities of the Neo4j
database, providing powerful in-database analytics. We discussed how
Python can enhance the functionality of Neo4j and, combined, can

enable data scientists to quickly incorporate the power of graph data
science into their production pipelines.
Data modeling and import techniques are critical to graph data science
projects. The size and complexity of datasets require techniques,
including importing data from common sources such as CSV, JSON,
and APIs. We also covered how to load database dump files into both
Neo4j Desktop as well as the Aura database. Finally, we discussed the
Admin import, which is the fastest way to import new data into Neo4j.
We also dove into mastering the Cypher query language. Cypher is
used in several graph database technologies and was originally created
by Neo4j. We explored the basic CRUD (Create, Read, Update,
Delete) commands as well as more advanced pattern matching,
aggregations, and subqueries. The book also covered the Profile and
Explain commands to tune the performance of Cypher queries.
Regarding visualization for graph data science, we discussed the
pivotal role of visually representing the connections between graph
data. Often, analysts will use spreadsheets to interpret connections
between text and numbers. Visualizations with tools like Neo4j Bloom
transform the data into a format that is more accessible, intuitive, and
actionable. In addition to Bloom, we examined third-party tools and
Python libraries that offer extended functionality and customization
options.
By integrating OpenAI’s ChatGPT into our workstream, we
demonstrated the new possibilities available to our data pipelines. We
illustrated how to enhance graph data with AI insights through added
text content and updating our knowledge graph accordingly. We also
showcased how we can convert this text into embeddings, or
computer-readable vectors that maintain the contextual information of
the text, within Neo4j directly. The ability to store embeddings directly
within Neo4j is powerful because we only need to embed the text once,
store the embeddings in the database, and then pull an immense
amount of information from these embeddings. We showcased how we
can run similarity searches between texts by comparing the distances
between the two text’s embeddings. This approach enables us to
update the knowledge graph with a new relationship linking the two
similar texts to one another based on the distance between their
embeddings.

The concept of retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) represents a
leap forward in efficient and accurate retrieval of text information by
leveraging the embedding output from LLMs like GPT-4. Vector
indexing is crucial in large-scale applications where quick access to
information is critical. Neo4j supports vector indexing and enables us to
build RAG applications with Neo4j as the backend database.
We also covered a few of the many graph data science algorithms
available in Neo4j, which helps us in topics of node importance,
community detection, path finding, and graph embeddings. Several of
these algorithms were illustrated using practical examples, including
the recipe dataset. Numerous algorithms can be discovered by
referencing the Neo4j documentation.
Personal recommendations are prolific in current data products offered
by major companies such as Netflix, Amazon, and Google. By modeling
user behavior and preferences, we can build machine learning models
that suggest the highest priority item in the list first. For example, if you
are planning to cook but only have a few ingredients, we can
recommend the best recipes for you based on your previous culinary
experiences (if we have that data), top-rated recipes containing the
available ingredients, and sort the list from highest score to lowest
score. The use cases for recommendation engines continue to grow,
and flexible knowledge graphs combined with LLM-based embeddings
offer a unique, scalable approach to tackle the most challenging and
most valuable data problems.
Finally, we dove into the topic of fraud detection in the book. We
showcased how the knowledge graph helps untangle complex fraud
schemes and even helps us pinpoint the most influential bad actor
within each community. The graph-based approach to solving fraud is
the only viable solution in today’s world of complex connections. It is
only possible to uncover multiple connections between seemingly
unrelated actors and clients by analyzing any and all connection
identifiers, such as phone, email, bank account, IP address, and more,
to highlight rich communities of fraudsters. Through the power of graph
data science, we can now pass leads to investigators with fewer false
positives and larger risk mitigation amounts, making the jobs for both
data scientists and investigators much more pleasant.

Index
A
ACID Transactions
about 28
fundamental 28
admin import
about 41, 42
advantages 41
running, steps 42
Anaconda
reference link 12
APOC
installing 19
tasks 19
Aura Graph Database
reference link 23

B
book, key takeaways 167-169

C
Centrality algorithms
about 126
PageRank algorithm 126-128
ChatGPT, using 97-100
chunk_size 117
Community Detection
about 128
Louvain 129-131
Cypher 18
about 31
query 31, 32
Cypher query, types
database, executing 73-75
data, manipulating 60
individuals data, querying 54-56
recipes with data, querying 56-59
Cypher query, key elements
LIMIT clause 53
MATCH clause 53
Nodes 53
Relationships 53

RETURN clause 53
WHERE clause 53

D
Data import
about 33
aka preprocessing 33, 34
data with Cypher, creating 34, 35
Data Science 2
Degree functions
about 64
database, determine 64, 66
Degree functions, categories
degree 64
incoming degree 64
outgoing degree 64

E
Exploratory Data Analysis (EDA) 102, 103

F
Fraud Detection
dataset, analysis 153-155
graph data science 159-164
methods 156
Fraud Detection, attributes
bank accounts 156
email 155
employer 156
Internet Protocol (IP) 155
phone 155
physical address 156
Social Security Number (SSN) 155
Suspicious Activity Report (SAR) 155

G
Gephi 7
Graph
about 3
concept 3-5
knowledge 5, 6
Graph Database
about 28
advantages 29
features 29
terminology, concepts 29, 30

graph database, key aspects
ACID Transactions 28
index-free adjacency 28
native graph storage 28
scalability 28
Graph Data Science (GDS)
installing 19
Graph Projections
about 66
combination ingredients 72
fundamentals 66-68
recipe relationship, creating 68-71
GraphSAGE 137-140
Graph Technology
data science, emerging 167
evolution 167
LLMs, connecting 167
Graph Traversal 30

H
Hello World 13

L
Link Prediction
about 134
Adamic-Adar Index 134-136
Louvain
about 129-131
phases 129

M
Machine Learning 2, 3

N
Neo4j 5
advance, filtering 60-63
canceling query 73
ChatGPT, enriching 105-108
cloud, configuration 26
CSVs with Python, importing 43-45
Cypher 18
data, importing 35-40
Exploratory Data Analysis (EDA) 102, 103
Graph Database 28
installing 20
local machine, installing 20-22

long-running queries 72
on-premises components 26
Pandas, importing 46-49
plugins steps 19
Python, connecting 24-26
setting up 20
Neo4j aura database 24 23
Neo4j Bloom
about 78
Cypher query, saving 80-82
database, using 79, 80
exploration, ingredients 88
manual exploration 88, 89
nodes, expanding 86-88
rules-based, formatting 84, 85
setting up 78
visualization 82-84
Neo4j database
Aura DB, importing 100-102
Neo4j desktop
admin import 41, 42
Neo4j graph database 5
Neo4j graph projections, methods
Cypher projections 66
Native graph projections 66
Network Embeddings
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) 136
GraphSAGE 136-140
NetworkX 6
NetworkX, vendor tools
D3.js 7
Gephi 7
graphaware with hume 6
linkurious 6
Power BI 7
VizNetwork package 7

P
PageRank algorithm 126-128
Patent
about 143
data, loading 143-146
RAG, retrieval 146-148
recommendation 143
RetrievalQA 149, 150
Patent Database
about 103-105
dimension, reducing 110, 111
embeddings 108, 109

LLMs, integrating 108
Patent Database, data model
assignee 103
inventor 103
topic 103
Power BI
about 90
visualizing 90-94
Python
about 8
best-fit dataset 15
Conda, incorporating 17, 18
installing 12-14
libraries 15-17
Python libraries, types
Matplotlib 15
pandas 15
scikit-learn 15

R
Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) 143
RetrievalQA 150

S
Similarity algorithms
about 131
Jaccard Similarity Index 131-134
Streamlit with Semantic, searching 122, 123
Super Nodes 156-159
Super Nodes, purposes
criteria, filtering 156
Stand-Alone, analytics 156

T
TeslaEmbeddings 116, 117

V
Vector Embeddings
Cosine similarity 116
data preparation 114-117
Data, storing 117-119
graph, enriching 119-121
Vector indexes 114

