Feae

ae

*

=a

—

mosS wi S.a * wi = >

?

9

Prog i

ae
§

ee
ae
i

Pow e rful Techn iques To. afey uard Your

ie

es
-

H acker Disassembl ing Uncovered

LIMITED WARRANTY AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY
A-LIST, LLC, AND/OR ANYONE WHO HAS BEEN INVOLVED IN THE
WRITING, CREATION, OR PRODUCTION OF THE ACCOMPANYING CODE
("THE SOFTWARE") OR TEXTUAL MATERIAL IN THE BOOK, CANNOT AND
DO NOT WARRANT THE PERFORMANCE OR RESULTS THAT MAY BE
OBTAINED BY USING THE CODE OR CONTENTS OF THE BOOK. THE
AUTHORS AND PUBLISHERS HAVE USED THEIR BEST EFFORTS TO
ENSURE THE ACCURACY AND FUNCTIONALITY OF THE TEXTUAL
MATERIAL AND PROGRAMS CONTAINED HEREIN; WE HOWEVER MAKE
NO WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED, REGARDING THE
PERFORMANCE OF THESE PROGRAMS OR CONTENTS.
THE AUTHORS, THE PUBLISHER, DEVELOPERS OF THIRD PARTY
SOFTWARE, AND ANYONE INVOLVED IN THE PRODUCTION AND
MANUFACTURING OF THIS WORK SHALL NOT BE LIABLE FOR DAMAGES
OF ANY KIND ARISING OUT OF THE USE OF (OR THE INABILITY TO USE)
THE PROGRAMS, SOURCE CODE, OR TEXTUAL MATERIAL CONTAINED IN
THIS PUBLICATION. THIS INCLUDES, BUT IS NOT LIMITED TO, LOSS OF
REVENUE OR PROFIT, OR OTHER INCIDENTAL OR CONSEQUENTIAL
DAMAGES ARISING OUT OF THE USE OF THE PRODUCT.

THE USE OF "IMPLIED WARRANTY" AND CERTAIN "EXCLUSIONS" VARY
FROM STATE TO STATE, AND MAY NOT APPLY TO THE PURCHASER OF
THIS PRODUCT.

Copyright (c) 2003 by A-LIST, LLC
All rights reserved.

No part of this publication may be reproduced in any way, stored in a retrieval system
of any type, or transmitted by any means or media, electronic or mechanical, including,
but not limited to, photocopy, recording, or scanning, without prior permission in writing
from the publisher.

A-LIST, LLC
295 East Swedesford Rd.
PMB #285
Wayne, PA 19087
702-977-5377 (FAX)
mail@alistpublishing.com
http://www.alistpublishing.com
This book is printed on acid-free paper.
All brand names and product names mentioned in this book are trademarks or service
marks of their respective companies. Any omission or misuse (of any kind) of service marks
or trademarks should not be regarded as intent to infringe on the property of others.
The publisher recognizes and respects all marks used by companies, manufacturers, and
developers as a means to distinguish their products.

Hacker Disassembling Uncovered
By Kris Kaspersky

ISBN 1-931769-22-2
Printed in the United States of America

03047654321

|

A-LIST, LLC titles are available for site license or bulk purchase by institutions, user
groups, corporations, etc.
Executive Editor: Natalia Tarkova
Book Editor: Julie Laing

C ont en ts

Preface

PART I: GETTING ACQUAINTED WITH BASIC HACKING
TECHNIQUES
Introduction

Protection Classifications

Protection Strength
Step One: Warming up

Step Two: Getting Acquainted with the Disassembler

Step Three: Surgery

Step Four: Getting Acquainted with the Debugger
Method 0: Cracking the Original Password
Method 1: Searching Directly for the Entered Password in Memory
Method 2: Setting a Breakpoint at the Password Input Function
Method 3: Setting a Breakpoint on Messages

Vi

Contents

Step Five: IDA Emerges onto the Scene

63

Step Six: Using a Disassembler with a Debugger

93

Step Seven: Identifying Key Structures of High-Level Languages

a7

Functions
Start-up Functions

98
114

Virtual Functions
Constructors and Destructors
Objects, Structures, and Arrays
The this Pointer
The new and delete Operators
Library Functions
Function Arguments
Values Returned by Functions
Local Stack Variables
Register and Temporary Variables
Global Variables
Constants and Offsets
Literals and Strings
Conditional IF—THEN—ELSE Statements
The SWITCH—CASE—BREAK Statements
Loops
Mathematical Operators

118
152
163
181
182
185
191
276
330
348
361
367
381
400
445
463
506

PART II: WAYS OF MAKING SOFTWARE ANALYSIS DIFFICULT

531

Introduction

533

Counteracting Debuggers

535

A Brief History
How the Debugger Works

535
536

Contents

Vil

Processing Exceptions in Real and Protected Modes
How Hackers Break Programs
Protecting Programs

538
B39
239

How to Counteract Tracing

540

Counteracting Breakpoints
How to Reveal Debugging Using Windows

545
Se

Counteracting Disassemblers

553

Self-Modifying Code in Contemporary Operating Systems
The Architecture of Windows Memory.
5
Using the WriteProcessMemory Function

553
554
aoe)

Executing Code in the Stack

,

557

The Pitfalls of Relocatable Code
teas
Chewrosand-Gons of Optimizing GCompilerss ===
559

558

Using Self-Modifying Codeto Protect Applications iS
Summary
iw
a!
=.
’
bariscta:

_

565

An Invitation to the Discussion, or New Protection Tips ere teats ees fy)
Bs

Howto...

wae

ie

as

=

Sa

Se

a

=

Pa ee.A eee? —— Races versal #25 FI
vac

-4

in

fecagin
feet

=

Preface
QD

This book opens the door to the wonderful world of security mechanisms, showing
you how protection is created, and then bypassed. It is addressed to anyone
who likes captivating puzzles, and to anyone who spends their spare (or office)
time rummaging in the depths of programs and operating systems. Lastly, it is
for anyone who is engaged constantly or incidentally in writing protections,
and who wants to know how to counteract ubiquitous hackers competently and
reliably.
This book is devotedto hacking basics — to the skills needed for working with
a debugger and a disassembler. The methods of identifying and reconstructing the
key structures of the source language — functions (including virtual ones), local
and global variables, branches, cycles, objects and their hierarchies, mathematical
operators, etc. — are described in detail.

Choosing the tools you will need to use this book is essentially a matter of your
personal preferences. Tastes differ. Therefore, don't take everything that I mention
below to be carved in stone, but rather as advice. To use this book, you'll need the

following:

O

A debugger— SoftlIce, version 3.25 or higher

© A disassembler— IDA version 3.7x (I recommend 3.8; 4.x is even better)

O
O

A HEX editor— any version of HIEW
Development kits — SDK and DDK (the last one isn't mandatory, but is really
good to have)
O An operating system — any Windows, but Windows 2000 or later is strongly
recommended
© A compiler — whichever C/C++ or Pascal caplet you like most (in the book,
you'll find a detailed description of the particular features of the Microsoft
Visual C++, Borland C++, Watcom C, GNU

C, and Free Pascal compilers,

although we will mostly work with Microsoft Visual C++ 6.0)

Hacker Disassembling Uncovered

Now, let's talk about all this in more detail:

SoftIce. The SoftIce debugger is the hacker's main weapon. There are also free
programs — WINDEB from Microsoft, and TRW from LiuTaoTao — but
SoftIce is much better, and handier, than all these taken together. Almost any
version of Ice will suit our purposes; I use version 3.26 — it's time-tested,
maintains its stability, and gets along wonderfully with Windows 2000. The
modern 4.x version isn't very friendly with my video adapter (Matrox Millennium G450), and in general goes belly up from time to time. Apart from this,
among all the new capabilities of the fourth version, only the support of Frame
Point Omission (FPO) (see the "Local Stack Variables" section) is particularly

useful for working with the local variables directly addressed through the Esp
register. This is an undoubtedly practical feature, but we can do without it if we
must. Buy it; you won't regret it. (Hacking isn't the same as piracy, and nobody
has yet cancelled honesty.)
IDA Pro. The most powerful disassembler in the world is undoubtedly IDA.
It's certainly possible to live without it, but it's much better to live with it.
IDA provides convenient facilities for navigating the investigated text; automatically recognizes library functions and local variables, including those addressed through EsP; and supports many processors and file formats.
In a word, a hacker without IDA isn't a hacker. But I suppose advertising it
really isn't necessary. The only problem is, how do you get this IDA? Pirated
discs containing it are extremely rare (the latest version I've seen was 3.74,
and it was unstable); Internet sites offer it even less often. IDA's developer
quickly stops any attempt at unauthorized distribution of the product.
The only reliable wayto obtain it is to purchase it from the developer
(http//www.idapro.com) or from an official distributor. Unfortunately, no
documentation

comes

with the disassembler

(except for the built-in help,

which is very terse and unsystematic).
HIEW. HIEW is not only a HEX editor; it is a disassembler, an assembler, and

an encrypter all in one. It won't save you from having to buy IDA, but it will
more than compensate for IDA in certain cases. (IDA works very slowly, and
it's vexing to waste a whole bunch of time if all we need is to take a quick glance
at the file under preparation.) However, the main purpose of HIEW isn't disassembling, but bit hacking— small surgical interference in a binary file, usually
with the aim of cutting off part of the protection mechanism without which it
can't function.

Preface

O

3

SDK (Software Development Kit — a package for the application developer).
The main thing that we need from the SDK package is documentation on the
Win32 API and the DUMPBIN utility for working with PE files. Neither hackers nor developers can do without documentation. At the minimum, you need
to know the prototypes and the purpose of the main system functions. This information can be gathered from numerous books on programming, but no
book can boast of completeness and depth of presentation. Therefore, sooner
or later, you'll have to use an SDK. How can you get an SDK? SDK is a part of
MSDN, and MSDN is issued quarterly on compact discs, and is distributed by
subscription. (You can learn more about subscription conditions on the official
site http//msdn.microsoft.com.) MSDN also comes with the Microsoft Visual
C++ 6.0 compiler. (It's not a particularly new one, but it will suffice for going
through this book.)

O

DDK (Driver Development Kit — a package for a developer of drivers). What is
the use of a DDK package for a hacker? It'll help to clear up how the driver is
made, how it works, and how can it be cracked. Apart from the basic documentation and plenty of samples, it includes a very valuable file — NTDDK.h. This
file contains definitions for most of the undocumented structures, and is liter-

ally loaded with comments revealing certain curious details of the system's operation. The tools that come with the DDK will also be of use. Among other
things, you'll find the WINDEB debugger included in the DDK. This is a rather
good debugger, but nowhere near as good as Softlce; therefore, it is not considered in this book. (If you can't find Ice, WINDEB will do.) The MASM assem-

bler in which drivers are written will be useful, as will certain little programs
that make the hacker's life a bit easier. The latest DDK version can be
downloaded for free from Microsoft's site; just keep in mind that the size of the
complete DDK for NT is over 40 MB (packed), and even more space is required on the disk.
O Operating system. I'm not going to force my own tastes and predilections on the
reader; nevertheless, I strongly recommend that you install Windows 2000 or
a later version. My motivation here is that it's a very stable and steadily working
operating system, which courageously withstands severe application errors.
One thing about a hacker's work is that this surgical interference in the depths
of programs quite often makes them go crazy, which results in the unpredictable behavior of the cracked application. Windows 9x operating systems, showing their corporative solidarity, frequently "go on strike" alongside the frozen
program. Occasionally, the computer will require rebooting dozens of times
a day! You should consider yourself lucky if rebooting suffices, and you don't

Hacker Disassembling Uncovered

need to restore disks that were destroyed by failure. (This also happens, although seldom.) It's much more difficult to freeze Windows 2000. I "succeed"
in doing this no more than twice a month when I haven't had enough sleep, or
am negligent. What's more, Windows 2000 allows you to load SoftIce at any
moment, without rebooting the system, which is very convenient! Lastly, all the
material in this book implies the use of Windows 2000 or a later version, and I
rarely mention how it differs from other systems.

_

[assume that you are already familiar with the assembler.Ifyou don't write
programs in this language, you should at least understand what registers, segments,
machine instructions, and the like are. Otherwise, this book will likely be too com-

plex and difficult to understand. I suggest that you first find a tutorial on the assembler and thoroughly study it.
ss
Apart from assembler, you should have at feast a general notion as the operating system.

And it might be useful if you download all the documentation onprocessors
available from the Intel and AMD sites.
ity

_I guess that's enough organizational stuff. Let's get going.

>,
i

dt

af

x2

S

S70 is

ae ie ly SES De)
;

snr. ora
3
ay

aes
ee

od

<atet! iy be
|

_

_

ee
Pees See

Introduction

Protection Classifications
Checking authenticity is the "heart" of the overwhelming majority of protection
mechanisms. In all cases, we have to make sure that the person working with our
program is who he or she claims to be, and that this person is authorized to work
with the program. The word "person" might mean not only a user, but the user's
computer or the medium that stores a licensed copy of the program. Thus, all protection mechanisms can be divided into two main categories:
©

Protection based on knowledge (of a password, serial number, etc.)

OF

Protection based on possession (of a key disc, documentation, etc.)

Knowledge-based protection is useless if a legitimate owner isn't interested in
keeping the secret. An owner can give the password (and/or serial number) to
whomever he or she likes, and thus anyone can use a program with such protection
on his or her computer.
Therefore, password protection against illegal copying is not effective. Why,
then, do practically all prominent software manufacturers use serial numbers? The
answer is simple — to protect their intellectual property with the threat (however
unlikely) of brute force. The idea goes approximately as follows: The quiet, work-aday environment of a certain company is suddenly broken into by a squad of agents
dressed in camouflage, comparing the Windows license numbers (Microsoft
Office, Microsoft Visual Studio) to license agreements. If they find even one illegal
copy, some official pops’up seemingly from out of nowhere and starts to joyfully

8

Part I: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

rub his or her hands in anticipation of the expected windfall. At best, they'll force
the company to buy all the illegal copies. At worst...
Naturally, nobody is barging in on users in their homes, and nobody is even considering it (yet) — your house is still your castle. Besides, what can you get from
a domestic user? A wide distribution of products is good for manufacturers, and who
can distribute better than pirates? Even in that case, serial numbers aren't superfluous —
unregistered users cannot use technical support, which may push them to purchase
legal versions.

Such protection is ideal for giant corporations, but it isn't suitable for small
groups of programmers or individual developers, especially if they earn their bread
by writing highly specialized programs for a limited market (say, star spectra analysis, or modeling nuclear reactions). Since they cannot apply sufficient pressure, it's
unreal for them to ask users to check their licenses, and it's hardly possible to "beat"
the payment out of illegal users. All that can be done is through threat and
eloquence.

In this case, protection based on the possession of some unique subject that is
extremely difficult to copy, or impossible to copy in general (the ideal case), is
more appropriate. The first of this kind were key floppies with information written
on them in such a manner that copying the floppy disk was impossible.
The simplest way (but not the best) to prepare such a floppy was to gently damage
the disk with a nail (an awl, a penknife), and then, having determined the sector in
which the defect was located (by writing and reading any test information — up
until a certain point, reading will proceed normally, followed by "garbage"), register

it in the program. Then, each time the program started, it checked whether the defect was located in the same place or not. When floppy disks became less popular,
the same technique was used with compact discs. The more affluent cripple their

discs with a laser, while ordinary folk still use an awl or nail.
Thus, the program is rigidly bound to a disc, and requires its presence to run.
Since copying such a disc is impossible (just try making identical defects on
a copy), pirates have to give up.
Other possession-based protection mechanisms frequently modify the subject
of possession, limiting the number of program starts or the duration of its
use. Such a mechanism

is often used in installers. So as to not irritate users,

the key is only requested once, when the program is installed, and it's possible
to work without the key. If the number of installations is limited, the damage
arising from unauthorized installation of one copy on several computers can be
slight.
The problem is that all of this deprives a legal user of his or her rights.
Who wants to limit the number of installations? (Some people reinstall the operating

Introduction

9

system and software each month or even several times a day). In addition, key discs
are not recognized by all types of drives, and are frequently "invisible" devices on
the network. If the protection mechanism accesses the equipment directly, bypassing drivers in order to thwart hackers’ attacks more effectively, such a program
definitely won't run under Windows NT/2000, and will probably fail under
Windows 9x. (This is, of course, if it wasn't designed appropriately beforehand.
But such a case is even worse, since protection executing with the highest privileges
can cause considerable damage to the system.) Apart from that, the key item can
be lost, stolen, or just stop working correctly. (Floppy disks are inclined to demagnetize and develop bad clusters, CDs can get scratched, and electronic keys can
"burn out".)

Protection types

Possession-based

Knowledge-based

Pair of associated

Static key

keys

uae
Key diskette

Password

|

Registration number

Key disc

Serial number

|

Key computer

Limitation of program

Nag screen

starts

Electronic key

Fig. 1. The main types of protection

10

Part I: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

Naturally, these considerations concern the effectiveness of keys in thwarting

hackers, and not the concept of keys in general. End users are none the better for
this! If protection causes inconveniences, users would rather visit the nearest pirate
and buy illegal software. Speeches on morals, ethics, respectability, and so on won't

have any effect. Shame on you, developers! Why make users' lives even more complicated? Users are human beings too!
That

said, protections

based

on

registration numbers

have been

gaining

popularity: Once run for the first time, the program binds itself to the computer,
turns on a "counter," and sometimes blocks certain functionalities. To make
the program fully functional, you have to enter a password from the developer
in exchange for monetary compensation. To prevent pirate copying, the password
is often a derivative of key parameters of the user's computer (or a derivative of
their user name, in an elementary case).
Certainly, this brief overview of protection types has left many of them out, but
a detailed discussion of protection classifications is beyond the scope of this book.
We'll leave it for a second volume.

Protection Strength
If protection is based on the assumption that its code won't be investigated and/or
changed, it's poor protection. Concealing the source code isn't an insurmountable
obstacle to studying and modifying the application. Modern reverse engineering
techniques automatically recognize library functions, local variables, stack
arguments, data types, branches, loops, etc. And, in the near future, disassemblers
will probably be able to generate code similar in appearance to that of high-level
languages.

But, even today, analyzing machine code isn't so complex as to stop hackers for
long. The overwhelming number of constant cracks is the best testament to this.
Ideally, knowing the protection algorithm shouldn't influence the protection's
strength, but this is not always possible to achieve. For example, if a server application
has a limitation on the number of simultaneous connections in a demo version
(which frequently happens), all a hacker needs to do is find the instruction of the
process carrying out this check and delete it. Modification of a program can be detected and prevented by testing the checksum regularly; however, the code that calculates the checksum and compares it to a particular value can be found and deleted.
However many protection levels there are — one or one million — the program can be cracked! It's only a matter of time and effort. But, when there are

no

effective laws protecting intellectual property,

developers

must

rely on

wre

Introduction

11

protection more than law-enforcement bodies. There's a common opinion that if
the expense of neutralizing protection isn't lower than the cost of a legal copy,
nobody will crack it. This is wrong! Material gain isn't the only motivation for
a hacker. Much stronger motivation appears to lie in the intellectual struggle (who's
more clever: the protection developer or me?), the competition (which hacker can
crack more programs?), curiosity (what makes it tick?), advancing one's own skills
(to create protections, you first need to learn how to crack them), and simply as an
interesting way to spend one's time. Many young hackers spend weeks removing the
protection from a program that only costs a few dollars, or even one distributed
free of charge.
The usefulness of protection is limited to its competition — other things being
equal, clients always select unprotected products, even if the protection doesn't
restrain the client's rights. Nowadays, the demand for programmers considerably
exceeds supply, but, in the distant future, developers should either come to an
agreement or completely refuse to offer protection. Thus, protection experts will be
forced to look for other work.
This doesn't mean that this book is ‘useless; on the contrary, ite knowledge

that it provides should be
applied as soon as possible, while the need for protection
hasn't disappeared yet.

POs

te tad

re

Step One: Warming up

The algorithm of simplest authentication consists of a character-by-character comparison of the password entered by a user to the reference value stored either
in the program (which frequently happens), or outside of it — for example, in a
configuration file or the registry (which happens less often).
The advantage of such protection is its extremely simple software implementation. Its core is actually only one line of code that, in the C language, could be written

as

{/*

Password

follows:

is

if

(stremp

incorrect

*/}

(password

else

{/*

.entered,

Password

is

reference

password) )

OK*/}.

Let's supplement this code with procedures to prompt for a password and
display the comparison, and then examine the program for its vulnerability to
cracking.
Listing 1. The Simplest System of Authentication
// Matching

the

password

#include

<stdio.h>

#include

<string.h>

character

by character

#define PASSWORD SIZE 100
#define PASSWORD
"myGOODpassword\n"
// The CR above is needed
} {n80° aS" Hot “tor cut. CFF

14

Part I: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

//

the

aiae:

aqgketeliayl(})

{
// The
int

user-entered

counter

CR.

for

authentication

failures

for

the

password

count=0;

// The
char

buffer

user-entered

buff[PASSWORD_ SIZE];

// The main
for (77)

authentication

loop

{
//

Prompting

// and

the

reading

printf ("Enter

user

for

a password

it
password:") ;

fgets
(&buff[0],
PASSWORD
SIZE, stdin) ;

// Matching

reference

value

// Incrementing the counter of authentication failures
// and terminating the program if 3 attempts have been

used

if

the

entered

password

against

// "“Scolding"
printf ("Wrong

if the passwords
password\n") ;

don't

// otherwise

(if the

are

// getting
else

if

the

(stremp (&buff [0], PASSWORD) )

out

of the

passwords

authentication

match;

identical),

loop

break;

(++count>3).

return

-1;

}
// Once we're here, the user
printf ("Password OK\n") ;

has

entered

the

right

password.

}

In popular movies, cool hackers easily penetrate heavily protected systems by
guessing the required password in just a few attempts. Can we do this in the real
world?
Passwords can be common words, like "Ferrari," "QWERTY," or names of pet
hamsters, geographical locations, etc. However, guessing the password is like looking for a needle in a haystack, and there's no guarantee of success — we can only
hope that we get lucky. And lady luck, as we all know, can't be trifled with. Is there
a more reliable way to crack this code?

Step One: Warming up

15

Let's think. If the reference password is stored in the program, and isn't ciphered in some artful manner, it can be found by simply looking at the binary
code. Looking at all the text strings, especially those that look like a password, we'll
quickly find the required key and easily "open" the program!
The area in which we need to look can be narrowed down _ using
the fact that, in the overwhelming majority of cases, compilers put initialized variables in the data segment (in PE files, in the .data section). The only exception is,
perhaps, early Borland compilers, with their maniacal passion for putting text
strings in the code segment — directly where they're used. This simplifies the compiler, but creates a lot of problems. Modern operating systems, as opposed to our
old friend MS-DOS, prohibit modifying the code segment. Therefore, all variables
allocated in it are read-only. Apart from this, on processors with a separate caching
system (Pentiums, for example), these string "litter" the code cache, loaded during
read ahead and, when they're called for the first time, loaded again from the slow

RAM (L2 cache) into the data cache. The result is slower operation and a drop in
performance.
So, let's assume it's in the data section. Now, we just need a handy instrument

to view the binary file. You can press <F3> in your favorite shell (FAR, DOS Navigator) and, by pressing the <Page Down> key admire the digits scrolling down until it bores you. You can also use a hex-editor (QVIEW, HIEW, etc.) but, in this

book, for presentation purposes, I'll use the DUMPBIN utility supplied with
Microsoft Visual Studio.
Let's print out the data section (the key is /SECTION: .data) as raw data (the key
is /RAWDATA:BYTES), having specified the ">" character for redirecting
the output to a file. (The response occupies a lot of space, and only its "tail" would
find room on the screen.)
> dumpbin

/RAWDATA:BYTES

RAW

#3

DATA

00406000:

/SECTION:.data

00) 00: 00 00 0000-00

00 00°00

simple.exe

>filename

00 00 3B Ll 40 00

2...

a.

Polek

00406010:

64 40 40 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 70 11 40 00

d@@......... p.@.

00406020:

0000

00 00 00 00

.. 2.20. .......

00406030:

45 6E 74 65 72 20 70 61 73 73 77 6F 72 64 3A 00

Enter password:.

00406040:

6D 79 47 4F 4F 44 70 61 73 73 77 6F 72 640A

00

myGOODpassword..

00406050:

57 72 6F 6E 67 20 70 61 73 73 77 6F 72 64 OA 00

Wrong password..

00406060:

50 61 73 73 77 6F 72 64 20 4F 4B 0A 00 00 00 00

Password

00406070:

40 6E 40 00 00 00 00 00 40 6E 40 00 01 01 00 00

€@n®@..... @n@.....

00 00 00 00 00°00

00 00 00:00

OK.....

Part |: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

16

Look! In the middle of the other stuff, there's a string that is similar to
a reference password (it's printed in bold). Shall we try it? It seems likely we need
not even bother: Judging from the source code, it really is the password. The compiler has selected too prominent of a place in which to store it — it wouldn't be
such a bad idea to hide the reference password better.
One of the ways to do this is to manually place the reference password value in
a section that we choose ourselves. The ability to define the location isn't standard,
and, consequently, each compiler (strictly speaking, not actually the compiler, but
the linker — but that isn't really important) is free to implement it in any way (or not
implement it at all). In Microsoft Visual C++, a special pragma — data_seg —
is used for this, and indicates in which section the initialized variables following it
should be placed. By default, unassigned variables are placed in the .bbs section,
and are controlled by the bss_seg pragma.
Let's add the following lines to Listing 1, and see how they run.
int

count=0;

//

From

now

// located

on,

all

in the

the

.kpne

#pragma

data_seg(."kpne")

// Note

that

// isn't

mandatory,

char

the

period

just

initialized

variables

will

be

section.
before

the

name

customary.

passwd[]=PASSWORD ;

#pragma data_seg()
// Now all
// be
char

if

the

located

initialized
in the

buff[PASSWORD

variables

section

will

by default

again
(ixe.,

."data").

SIZE]="";

(strcmp
(&buff[0]
,
spasswd[0]) )

> dumpbin
RAW

DATA

/RAWDATA:BYTES

/SECTION:.data

simple2.exe

>filename

#3

00406000:

............ E.@.

00406010:

.ae......... @.@.

00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 45 11 40 00
04 41 40 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 40 12 40 00
00406020:00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00.00 00 00
00406030: 45 6B 74 65-72 20 70 61 73 73 77 6F 72 64 3A 00
00406040: 57 72 6F 6E 67 20 70 61 73 73 77 6F 72 64 0A 00

00406050:
00406060:

50 61 73 73 77 6F 72 64 20 4F 4B 0A 00 00 00 00
20 6E 40 00 00 00 00 00 20 6& 40 00 01 01 00 00

00406070:

00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 10 00 00 00 00 00 00

................
Enter

password:.

Wrong password..
Password

OK.....

n@.....

PCS aes

Step One: Warming up

17

Aha! Now, there's no password in the data section and hackers' attack has been

retarded. But don't jump to conclusions. Simply display the list of sections in
the file:
> dumpbin

simple2.exe

Summary

2000

.data

1000

.kpne

1000

.rdata

4000

.text

The nonstandard section .kpne attracts our attention right away. Well, shall we
check to see what's in it?
dumpbin

/SECTION:.kpnc

/RAWDATA

simple2.exe

RAW DATA #4
00408000: 6D 79 47 4F 4F 44 70 61 73 73 77 6F 72 64 OA 00

myGOODpassword. .

There's the password! And we thought we hid it. It's certainly possible to put
confidential data into a section of noninitialized data (.bss), the service RTL section (.rdata), or even into the code section (.text) — not everyone will look

there for the password, and such allocation won't disturb the functioning of the
program. But you shouldn't forget about the possibility of an automated search for
text strings in a binary file. Wherever the reference password may be, such a filter
will easily find it. (The only problem is determining which text string holds the required key; most likely, a dozen or so possible "candidates" will need to be tried.)
If the password is written in Unicode, the search is somewhat more complicated, since not all such utilities support this encoding. But it'd be rather naive to
hope that this obstacle will stop a hacker for long.

et
i

AD
on
Paes

Te

Litre
i

Vere ORs

Step Two: Getting Acquainted
with the Disassembler

In the previous step, we found the password. But how tiresome it is to enter the
password each time you start the program! It wouldn't be a bad idea to hack the
program so that no password is requested, or so that any password is accepted.
Hack?! It's not difficult. It's tougher to know what to hack with. A huge variety
of hacker tools exists: disassemblers, debuggers, spyware such as API and message
loggers, file (port, registry) call monitors, decompressors, and so on. How can a
novice code digger grasp all of these facilities?
Spies, monitors, and decompressors are auxiliary, "Plan B" utilities.
The main hacker weapons are the disassembler and the debugger.
The purpose of a disassembler is clear from its name. Whereas assembling is
the translation of assembly instructions into machine code, disassembling is the
translation of machine code into assembly instructions.
However, a disassembler can be used to study more than programs written in
the assembler. Its range of application is wide, but not boundless. You may wonder
where that boundary lies.
All implementations of programming languages can be divided roughly into
the following categories:

©

Interpreters execute a program in the order it was typed by the programmer.
In other words, interpreters "chew up" the source code, which can be accessed

directly, without using additional resources. To start most BASIC and Perl

Part |: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

implementations, you need an interpreter in addition to the source code of the
program. This is inconvenient both for users (who, to execute a program of 10

KB, need to install an interpreter of 10 MB) and for developers (who likely
don't want to give everyone the entire source code of the program). In addition, syntactic parsing takes a lot of time, which means no interpreter can claim

©

great performance.
Compilers behave differently. They "grind" the program into machine code that
can be executed directly by the processor, without using the source code or an
accessory program such as an interpreter. From a user's point of view,
a compiled program is a mash of hexadecimal bytes impossible for nonexperts
to understand. This facilitates the development of protection mechanisms: You
can only crack the simplest algorithms without deciphering them.
Is it possible to obtain the source code of a program from its machine code?
No! Compilation is a unidirectional process. Labels and comments aren't included. (However, we can get the gist of the source code without comments —
we are hackers, aren't we?) The main stumbling block is the ambiguous corre-

©

spondence of machine instructions to constructions in high-level languages. Moreover, assembling also is a unidirectional process, and automatic disassembling
is impossible in principle. However, we will not cram such details into the
heads of novice code diggers; we'll leave this problem for later consideration.
Several software development systems lie between compilers and interpreters.
The source code is transformed not to machine code, but rather to code in

another interpreted language. To execute this code, the "compiled" file needs its
own interpreter. FoxPro, Clipper, numerous

dialects of BASIC, and certain

other languages are examples.

In this last category, program code is still executed via an interpreter, but all
extraneous

information

—

labels, variable names,

comments

—

is removed,

and meaningful operator names are replaced with digital codes. This "stone"
kills two birds: The intermediate language is tweaked for fast interpretation
and is optimized for size beforehand, and the program code becomes unavailable
for direct investigation (and/or modification).

Disassembling such programs is impossible — disassemblers only work with
machine code, and can't "digest" code in an interpreted language (also known
as m code) that they don't understand. The processor can't digest = code either.

It can only be executed with an interpreter. But the interpreter is just what the dis-

assembler can digest! By investigating how it works, you can "understand" = code
and the purpose of its instructions. It's a laborious process! Interpreters can be so

Step Two: Getting Acquainted with the Disassembler

21

complex, and can occupy so many megabytes, that their analysis can take several
months or years. Fortunately, there's no need to analyze each program. Many interpreters are identical, and m code does not tend to vary significantly from one
version to another — at least, the main parts don't change daily. Therefore, it's pos-

sible to create a program to translate m code back to source code. It's not possible to
restore names of variables; nevertheless, the listing will be readable.

So, disassemblers are used to investigate compiled programs, and can be
applied when analyzing "pseudo-compiled" code. If that's the case, they should
be suitable for cracking simple.exe. The only question is which disassembler to use.
Not all disassemblers are identical. There are "intellectuals" that automatically
recognize constructions (i.e., prologs and epilogs of functions, local variables,
cross-references, etc.). There are also "simpletons" that merely translate machine
code into assembly instructions.
Intellectual disassemblers are the most helpful, but don't hurry to these: Begin
with a manual analysis. Disassembler tools are not always on hand; therefore, it
wouldn't be a bad idea to master working "in field conditions" first. Besides, work-

ing with a poor disassembler will emphasize "the taste" of good things.
Let's use the familiar DUMPBIN utility — a true "Swiss Army knife" that has
plenty of useful functions, including a disassembler. Let's disassemble the code section (bearing the name .text). Redirect the output to a file, since we certainly
won't find room for it on the screen.
> dumpbin

/SECTION:.text

/DISASM

simple.exe

>.code

In less than a second, the .code file is created. It has a size of as much
as 300 KB. But the source program was shorter by hundreds of times! How much
time will it take to clear up this "Greek?" The overwhelming bulk of it has no relation to the protection mechanism; it represents the compiler's standard library
functions, which are of no use to us. How can we distinguish these from the "useful" code?
Let's think a bit. We don't know where the procedure to match passwords is located, and we don't know how it works. But we can assert with confidence that one
of its arguments is a pointer to the reference password. We just need to find where
this password is located in memory. Its address will be stored by the pointer.
Let's have a look at the data section once again (or wherever the password
is stored).
> dumpbin
RAW

DATA

/SECTION:.data
#3

00406000:

/RAWDATA

simple.exe

>.data

:

00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 7B 11 40 00

............ {.@.

22
>

Part I: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques
il

00406010:

6£ 40 40 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 20

00406020:

00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 OO

12 40 00

n@@.........

Bere

................

00406030:

45 6E 74

65 72 20 70

61 73 73 77

6F 72

64 3A 00

Enter

00406040:

6D 79 47

4F 4F 44 70

61 73 73 77

6F 72

64 OA 00

myGOODpassword. .

00406050:

57 72

6F 6E 67 20 70

61 73 73 77

6F 72

64 OA 00

Wrong

00406060:

50 61 73 73 77

6F 72 64 20

4F 4B 0A 00 00 00 00

password:.
password..

Password

OK.....

Aha! The password is located at the offset ox406040 (the left column
of numbers), so the pointer to it also must equal 0x406040. Let's try to find
this number in the disassembled listing by searching with any text editor.
Have you found it? Here it is (printed in bold in the text):
00401045:

68

40

60

0040104A:

8D 55

98

0040104D:

52

0040104E:

E8

4D

00

00401053:

83

C4

08

OO40L0562

65

00401058:

74

40

00

00

00

push

406040h

lea

edx,

push

edx

[ebp-68h]

call

004010A0

add

esp,

8

CO

test

eax,

eax

OF

je

00401069

This is one of two arguments of the 0x04010a0 function placed on the stack by
the push machine instruction. The second argument is a pointer to a local buffer,
probably containing the user-entered password.
Here, we have to deviate from our subject to consider passing parameters in
detail. The following ways of passing function arguments are the most common:
via registers and via the stack.
Passing parameters via registers is the fastest way, but it's not free from disadvantages: The number of registers is very limited, and it complicates implementing recur-

sion — calling a function from within its own body. Furthermore, before writing new
arguments into registers, we need to save the old values in RAM. In this case, isn't it
easier to pass arguments through RAM without being tormented by registers?
Most compilers pass arguments via the stack. Compilers have standard way of

passing arguments. There are at least two different mechanisms:
O

The C convention pushes arguments onto the stack from right to left (i.e., the
first argument of the function is placed on the stack last, and thus appears on
top). Deleting arguments from the stack is entrusted not to the function, but to
the code calling the function. This is wasteful because each function call makes
the program heavier by several bytes. However, it allows us to create functions
with a variable number of arguments because the calling code knows the exact
number of arguments passed.

Step Two: Getting Acquainted with the Disassembler

23

The stack usually is cleared by the instruction ADD ESP,xxx, where xxx is the
number of bytes to be deleted. Since, in 32-bit mode, each argument as a rule
occupies 4 bytes, the number of function arguments is calculated
in this way: n args = =. Optimizing compilers can be more eloquent.

O

To clear a stack of several arguments, they often pop them into unused registers
with the Pop instruction. Alternatively, an optimizing compiler clears at the time
it deems most convenient, rather than immediately after exiting a function.
The Pascal convention pushes arguments on the stack from left to right (i.e.,
the first argument of the function is placed on the stack first, and thus appears
on the bottom). The deletion of function arguments is entrusted to the function itself, and is usually performed by the RET xxx instruction (i.e.,
return from the subroutine and pop xxx bytes from the stack).
The value returned by the function is passed through the EAX

register

(or EDX:EAX when returning 64-bit variables) in both conventions.

Since our program was written in C, and pushes arguments from right to left,
its source code may look like this:
(*0x4010A0)

(ebp-68,

"myGOODpassword")

We can be convinced that there are two arguments, not six or ten, by looking at
the ADD ESP, 8 instruction that immediately follows the CALL:

0040104E:

E8 4D 00 00 00

call

004010A0

00401053:

83 C4

add

esp,

08

8

Now, we only need to understand the goal of the 0x4010A0 function —
although, if we used our brains, we'd see this is unnecessary! It's clear that this func-

tion checks the password; otherwise, why would the password be passed to it? How
the function does this is a question of minor importance. What we're really interested in is the return value of the function. So, let's proceed to the following line: .
00401056:

85

CO

test

eax,

00401058:

74

OF

je

00401069

eax

What do we see? The TEST EAX,EAX instruction checks if value returned by
the function equals zero. If it does, the JE instruction following it jumps to line
0x401096. Otherwise (i.e., if EAX !=0):
0040105A:

68 50

60 40 00

push

406050h

—

It seems to be a pointer, doesn't it? Let's verify that assumption by looking at
;
¥
the data segment:
00406050:

57 72 6F 6E 67 20 70 61 73 73 77

6F 72

64 OA 00

Wrong password..

24

Part |: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

We are almost there. The pointer has led us to the "Wrong password" string,
which the next function outputs to the screen. Therefore, a nonzero EAXx value
indicates a wrong password, and a zero value indicates a correct one.

OK, let's look at the branch of the program that handles a valid password.
0040105F: E8 DO 01 00 00
00401064: 83 C4 04
00401067: EB 02.
00401069: FB 16

call
add
jmp
jmp

00401234
esp, 4
0040106B
00401081

00401081: 68 60 60 40 00
00401086: E8 A9 01 00 00

push
call

~ 406060h —
00401234

Well, we see one more pointer. The 0x401234 function was already encountered; it's (presumably) used for string output. We can find the strings in the data
segment. This time, "Password OK" is referenced.

The following are some working suggestions: If we replace the JE instruction
with JNE, the program will reject the real password as incorrect, and all incorrect
passwords will be accepted. If we replace TEST EAX,EAX with XOR EAX,EAX, upon
executing this instruction, the EAX register will SNORE:contain zero, no matter what

password is entered.
Just a trifle remains: to find these bytes in the Lene file and correct them.

Step Three: Surgery

Direct modification of an executable file is a serious task. We are restricted by
the existing code in that we can't move instructions apart or "push" them
together, having thrown away "superfluous parts" of the protection. The offsets of
all other instructions would shift, while the values of pointers and jump addresses
would remain the same, and thus would point to the wrong spot.
It's rather simple to cope with the elimination of "spare parts." Just stuff
the code with Nop instructions (whose opcode is 0x90, not 0x0, as many novice code
diggers seem to think), that is, with an empty operation (since, generally, Nop is
simply another form of the xcHG EAX,EAX instruction). Things are much more
complicated when we move instructions apart! Fortunately, in PE files, "holes" al-

ways remain after alignment, which we can fill with our code or data.
But isn't it easier to simply compile the assembled file after we make the required changes? No, it isn't: If an assembler can't recognize pointers passed to a
function (as we saw, our disassembler can't distinguish them from constants), it

can't correct them properly, and the program won't run.
Therefore, we have to "dissect" the "live" program. The easiest way to do this is
to use the HIEW utility that "digests" PE files, and thus simplifies the search for the
necessary fragment. Launch it with the executable file name in the command line
(hiew simple.exe). Then, press the <Enter> key two times, switch to assembler
mode, and press the <F5> key to proceed to the required address. As you may recall, the Test instruction that checks the string-comparison result returned by the
function is located at 0x401056.

Part I: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

E8 4D 00 00 00
83 C4 08

call
add

004010A0
esp, 8

00401056:

85

test

eax,

00401058:

74 OF

je

00401069

0040104E:
00401053:

CO

eax

So that HIEW is able to distinguish the address from the offset in the file itself,
precede this address with a dot: . 401056.
00401056:

85CO

test

eax,

00401058:

740F

je

OOACTOGS

eax
Sa =e

(1)

Now, press the <F3> key to switch HIEW to edit mode. Place the cursor at the

TEST EAX, EAX instruction, press the <Enter> key, and replace it with xoR BAX, EAX.
00001056:

33C0

xor

eax,

00001058:

740F

je

00401069

eax

Because the new instruction fits exactly in the place of the previous one, press
the <F9> key to save the changes to disk, and quit HIEW. Start the program and
enter the first password that comes to mind.
> simple.exe
Enter

password:Hi,

Password

blockhead!

OK

The protection has fallen! But what would we do if HIEW did not know how to
"digest" PE files? We'd have to use a context search. Look at the hex dump that the
disassembler displays to the left of the assembly instructions. If you try to find the
85 CO sequence — the TEST EAX,EAX instruction — you won't come up with anything useful: There can be hundreds or more of these TEsT instructions in a program. The ADD

ESP,8\TEST

sents

typical

many

(!func(argl,arg2))...,

EAX,EAX combination also is common, since it repre-

constructions

in

C:

if

(func(argl,arg2))...,

if

while (func(argl,arg2), etc. The jump address likely will

be different at various branches in the program; therefore, the ADD ESP,8/TEST
EAX,EAX/JE 00401069 substring has a good chance of being unique. Let's try to find

the code that corresponds to it: 83 C4 08 85 CO 74 OF. (To do this, just press the
<F7> key in HIEW.)
Yippee! Only one entry is found, and that's just what we need. Now, let's try to
modify the file directly in hex mode, without using the assembler. Note that inverting the lower bit of the instruction code results in inverting the condition for
branching (ie.,74 JE > 75 JUNE).
It works, doesn't it? (Has the protection gone mad? It doesn't recognize valid
passwords, but it welcomes all others.) It's wonderful!

Step Three: Surgery

27
>

ai

Now, we need to clear up which bytes have changed. For this, we need an original
copy of the file we modified (which we prudently saved before editing), and any file
"comparer." Today, the most popular ones are c2u by Professor Nimnull and MakeCrk

from Doctor Stein's Labs. The first is the better of the two; it more precisely meets the
most popular "standard," and it knows how to generate the extended XCK format. At
worst, we can use the utility that comes with MS-DOS/Windows — fc.exe (an abbreviation of File Compare).
Start your favorite comparer, and look at the differences between the original
and modified executables.
>

fc

simple.exe

simple.ex_

> simple.dif

t_____ differences file
hacked file
original file
> type

simple.dif

Comparing

files

00001058:

74

simple.exe

and

SIMPLE.EX_

75

The left column shows the offset of a byte from the beginning of the file,
the second column shows the contents of the byte in the original file, and the third
column contains the byte's value after modification. Let's compare that to the report generated by the c2u utility.
> c2u

simple.exe

simple.ex_

Corrections are written to the *.crx file, where

"*" is the name of the original

wow

file. Let's consider the result more closely.
>type

simple.crx

[BeginXCK]

HM Description

: $) 1996

@ Crack

:

subject

by Professor

Nimnul

H Used

packer

: None/UnKn0OwN/WWPACK/PKLITE/AINEXE/DIET /EXEPACK/PRO-PACK/LZEXE

M@ Used

unpacker

: None/UNP /X-TRACT /iNTRUDER/AUTOHack/CUP/TRON

H Comments
H@ Target

OS

: DOS/WiN/WNT/W95/0S"/UNX

™@ Protection

: EE

HM Type of hack

: Bit hack/JMP

HM Language

: UnKnOwN/Turbo/Borland/Quick/MS/Visual

— Size

Pe2eo72

@ Price

: $000

:
Correction

ea
C/Ct++/Pascal/Assembler

28

Part I: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

™@ Used

tools

@ Time

for

M Crack

made

M Under

Music

: TD386

hack

at

v3.2,

HiEW

5.13,

C2U/486

v0.10

: 00:00:00

: 21-07-2001

12:34:21

: i1RON MAIDEN

[BeginCRA]

Difference(s)

between

simple.exe

& simple.ex_

SIMPLE. EXE

00001058:

74

75

[EndCRA]

[EndXCK]

The result is the same; there simply is an additional text-file header explaining
what kind of a beast this is. The collection of fields differs from one hacker to another. If you want, you can add your own fields or delete someone else's. However,
I don't recommend doing that without a good reason. Besides, it's better to adhere
to one template. Let's use the one just shown.
Description is simply an explanation. In our case, this may look like this: "Test
cracking No. 1."
Crack subject is what we've just cracked. Let's write: "Password protection of
simple.exe."
Used packer is the type of packer. In the days of good old MS-DOS, packers were
widely used to automatically decompress executable files into memory when they
were launched. Thus, disk space was economized (recall the ridiculously small hard
disks at the end of the 1980s and the beginning of the 1990s), while protection was
strengthened. A packed file cannot be directly investigated nor edited. Before you do
anything with the file, you have to unpack it. Both the hacker and users of the CRK

file have to do the same. Since our file wasn't packed, we'll leave this field empty or
write "None" in it.
Used unpacker is the recommended unpacker. Not all unpackers are identical;
many packers provide advanced protection and skillfully resist attempts to remove
it. Therefore, unpackers are not simple things. An "intelligent" unpacker easily
deals with "tough" packers, but it often has difficulty with simple protection, or vice
versa. If an unpacker isn't required, leave this field blank or write "None."

Comments is used to list additional tasks the user should perform
before cracking (for example, removing the "system" attribute from the file, or,
conversely, setting it). However, additional operations are only required in extreme
cases; therefore, this field is usually filled with boasts. (Sometimes you'll even find

obscenities concerning the mental abilities of the protection developer.)

Step Three: Surgery

29

Target OS is the operating system for which the cracked product is intended,
and in which the hacker tested it. The program won't necessarily run under all of the
same systems after cracking. For example, Windows 9x always ignores the checksum
field, but Windows NT doesn't; therefore, if you haven't corrected it, you won't be

able to run the cracked program using Windows NT. In our case, the checksum of
the PE file header is equal to zero. (This depends on the compiler.) This means the
file integrity isn't checked, and the hack will work in Windows NT/9x.
Protection is a "respectability level" evaluated as a percentage. Generally, 100%
corresponds to the upper limit of the mental abilities of a hacker, but who would
ever admit that? It's not surprising that the "respectability level" is usually underestimated, occasionally ten times or more. ("Look everybody! What a cool hacker

I am; cracking whatever I like is as easy as A-B-C1")
Type of hack is more useful for other hackers than for users who don't understand protection and hack types. There's no universal classification. The most
commonly used term, bit-hack, means cracking by changing one or more bits in
one or more bytes. A particular case of a bit-hack is the ump correction — changing
the address or condition of a jump (as we've just done). Another term, NoP-ing, refers to a bit-hack that replaces certain instructions with the Nop instruction, or in-

serts insignificant instructions. For example, to erase a two-byte JZ xxx instruction,
a combination of two one-byte INC EAX/DEC EAX instructions can be used.
Language or, to be more accurate, the compiler, is the programming environment
in which

the program

was written. In our case, it was Microsoft Visual C++.

(We know this because we compiled the program.) How do we know the environment of someone else's program? The first thing that comes to mind is to look in the
file for copyrights: They are left by many compilers, including Visual C++. Look for
"000053d9:Microsoft Visual C++ Runtime Library." If compilers aren't specified, run
the file through IDA. It automatically recognizes most standard libraries, and even
indicates particular versions. As a last resort, try to determine the language in which
the code was written, taking into account C and Pascal conventions and familiar
compiler features. (Each compiler has its own "handwriting." An experienced hacker
can figure out how a program was compiled and even discover the optimization key.
Size refers to the size of the cracked program, which is useful for controlling the
version. (Different versions of the program often differ in size.) It is determined
automatically by the c2u utility; you don't need to specify it manually.
Price refers to the price of a licensed copy of the program. (The user should
know how much money the crack has saved him or her.)
Used tools are the instruments used. Not filling in this field is considered bad
form — it's interesting to know what instruments were used to hack the program.

30

Part I: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

This is especially true for users who believe that if they get a hold of these
DUMPBIN and HIEW thingies, the protection will fall by itself.
Time for hack is the time spent hacking, including breaks for having a smoke and
getting a drink. What percentage of people fills in this field accurately, without trying
to look "cool?" It can be given little credence.
Crack made at is the timestamp for the completion of the crack. It's generated
automatically, and you don't need to correct it (unless you get up with the sun,
want to pretend you are a night owl, and set the time of completion to 3 a.m.).
Under Music is the music that you were listening to when hacking. (It's a pity
that there's no field for the name of your pet hamster.) Were you listening to music
while hacking? If you were, write it down — let everyone know your inspiration.
Now, we should have the following:
[BeginXCK]

B@ Description

: Test

M Crack

: Password

subject

HM Used

packer

: None

M Used

unpacker

: None

cracking

H@ Comments

: Hello,

M@ Target

: WNT/W95

OS

No.

protection

sailor!

Been

M@ Protection
M Type

1
of

simple.exe

at

sea

a bit

: JMP

Correction

HM Language

weVvasualiC/ Grr

@ Size

Be PAO

MM Price

: $000

M@ Used tools

: DUMPBIN,

M Time

for hack

: 00:10:00

M Crack

made

: 21-07-2001

at

M@ Under Music

: Paul

HiEW

6.05,

C2U/486 v0.10

12:34:21

Mauriat

L'Ete

Indien

"Africa"

[BeginCRA]
between

SIMPLE .EXE
00001058:
[EndCRA]
[EndXCK]-

long?

$1

of hack

Difference(s)

too

simple.exe

& simple.ex

:
74 75

& Brain

Step Three: Surgery

31

To change the same bytes in the original program, we need another utility to do
what the CRK (XCRK) file specifies. There are a lot of such utilities nowadays,
which adversely affects their compatibility with various CRK formats. The most
popular are cra386 by Professor Nimnull and pcracker by Doctor Stein's Labs.
Of the products for Windows, Patch Maker has an advanced user interface
(Fig. 2). It includes a file comparer,

crk editor, hex editor (for manual

correc-

tions?), and crk compiler to generate executable files and save users the trouble of
figuring out the crack and how to do it.
Patch Maker ¥.0.99a.

Project BytePatch |About |
EPH

{PLE EX

AFH

F:\.PHCK\SRC\X.EXE -->> DirectData

Fig. 2. The Patch Maker at work

Some users may find such an interface convenient, but most hackers can't stand
the mouse; they prefer console applications and the keyboard.

eer

Rae ee

Step Four: Getting Acquainted
with the Debugger

Debugging was initially the step-by-step execution of code, which is also called tracing. Today, programs have become so inflated that tracing them is senseless —
you'll sink into a whirlpool of nested procedures, and you won't even understand
what they do. A debugger isn't the best way to understand a program; an interactive
disassembler (IDA, for example) copes better with this task.
We'll defer a detailed consideration of the debugger for a while. (See the section
"Counteracting Debuggers.") For now, we will focus on the main functions. Using
debuggers efficiently is impossible without understanding the following:
OF

Tracing write/read/execute addresses, also called breakpoints

O

Tracing write/read calls to input/output ports (which can no longer be used for
protection with modern operating systems because they forbid applications
such low-level hardware access — that is now the prerogative of drivers, where
protection is seldom implemented)

©

Tracing the loading of the dynamic link library (DLL) and the calling of certain
functions, including system components (which, as we'll see later, is the main
weapon of the present-day hacker)
Tracing program/hardware interrupts (which is not particularly relevant, since
protection rarely plays with interrupts)
Tracing messages sent to windows and context searches in memory

O

O

34

Part I: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

So far, you don't need to know how the debugger works; you only need to
realize that a debugger can do all of these things. However, it is important to know
which debugger to use. Turbo Debugger, although widely known, is primitive, and
few hackers use it.
The most powerful and universal tool is SoftIce, now available for all Windows
platforms. (Some time ago, it only supported Windows 95, not Windows NT.) The
fourth version, the latest available when I was writing this, did not work well with

my video adapter. Therefore, I had to confine myself to the earlier 3.25 version,
which is more reliable.

Method 0: Cracking the Original Password
Using the wldr utility delivered with SoftIce, load the file to be cracked by specifying its name on the command line, for example, as follows:
> wldr

simple.exe

Yes, wldr is a 16-bit loader, and NuMega recommends that you use its 32-bit
version, loader32, developed for Windows NT/9x. They have a point, but loader32
often malfunctions. (In particular, it does not always stop at the first line of the
program.) However, wldr works with 32-bit applications, and the only disadvantage is that it doesn't support long file names.
If the debugger is configured correctly, a black textbox appears — a surprise to
beginners. Command.com in the era of graphical interfaces! Why not? It's faster to
type a command than to search for it in a long chain of nested submenus, trying to
recollect where you saw it last. Besides, language is the natural means to express
thoughts; a menu is best suited for listing dishes at a cafe. As an example, try to

print the list of files in a directory using Windows Explorer. Have you succeeded?
In MS-DOS, it was simple: dir > PRN.

If you only see INVALID in the text box (this will probably be the case), don't get
confused: Windows simply hasn't yet allocated the executable file in memory.
You just need to press the <F10> key (an analog of the Pp command that traces
without entering, or stepping over, the function) or the <F8> key (an analog of the

T command that traces and enters, or steps into, the function). Everything will fall

into place.

001B:00401277
001B:00401279
001B:0040127B

INVALID
INVALID
INVALID

Step Four: Getting Acquainted with the Debugger

35
is aa

001B:0040127D

INVALID

001b:00401285

push

ebx

001b:00401286

push

esi

001b:00401287

push

edi

001b:00401288

mov

[ebp-18],

esp

001B:0040128B

call

[KERNEL32

!GetVersion]

001b:00401291

xor

edx,

001b:00401293

mov

al,

edx

001b:00401295

mov

[0040692c],

ahi
edx

Pay attention: Unlike the DUMPBIN disassembler, SoftIce recognizes system
function names, thus significantly simplifying analysis. However, there's no need to
analyze the entire program. Let's quickly try to find the protection mechanism and,
without going into detail, chop it off altogether. This is easy to say — and even easier to do! Just recall where the reference password is located in memory. Umm...
Is your memory failing? Can you remember the exact address? We'll have to find it!
We'll ask the map32 command for help. It displays the memory map of a selected module. (Our module has the name "simple," the name of the executable file
without its extension.)
:map32

simple

Owner

Obj

Obj#

Address

Size

Type

simple

. text

0001

001B:00401000

O0O0003F66

CODE

RO

simple

.rdata

0002

0023:00405000

0000081E

IDATA

RO

simple

.data

0003

0023:00406000

00001E44

IDATA

RW

Name

Here is the address of the beginning of the .data section. (Hopefully you remember that the password is in the .data section.) Now, create the data window
using the wc command.

Then, issue the a 23:406000

command,

and press the

<ALT>+<D> key combination to get to the desired window. Scroll using the <>
key, or put a brick on the <Page Down> key. We won't need to search long.
0023:00406040

6D 79 47 4F 4F 44 70 61-73 73 77 6F 72 64 OA 00

myGOODpassword...

0023:00406050

57 72 6F 6E 67 20 70 61-73

73 77 6F 72 64 OA 00

Wrong password..

0023:00406060

50 61 73 73 77 6F 72 64-20

4F 4B OA 00 00 00 00

Password OK.....

0023:00406070

47 6£ 40 00 00 00 00 00-40

6E 40 00 01 01 00 00

Gné@..... @n@.....

0023:00406080

00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00-00

10 00 00 00 00 00 00

..............-.

0023:00406090

00 00 00 00 00 00 00-00=00.,00

00.00, 00:-

-...c..2.........

00°:00.02

36

Part |: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

0023:004060A0

01 00 00 00 00 00 00 00-00

00 00 00 00 00 00 00

.......-.--eeees

0023:004060B0

00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00-00

00 00 00 02 00 00 00

....eeeeeeeeeees

We've got it! Remember that to be checked, the user-entered password needs to
be compared to the model value. By setting a breakpoint at the instruction for

reading address 0x406040, we will catch the comparison "by its tail." No sooner said
than done.
:bpm

406040

Now, press the <Ctrl>+<D> key combination (or issue the x command) to exit

the debugger. Enter any password that comes to mind — Kpnc++, for example. The
debugger pops up immediately:
001B:004010B0

mov

eax,

[edx]

001B:004010B2

cmp

al,

001B:004010B4

jnz

004010E4

[ecx]

001B:004010B6

or

ull

001B:004010B8

jz

004010E0

001B:004010BA

cmp

ah,

welll

[ECX+01]

001B:004010BD

jnz

004010E4

001B:004010BF

or

ah,

Break

MSR

due

to

BPMB

(JUMP +)

ah

#0023:00406040

RW

DR3

(ET=752.27

milliseconds)

LastBranchFromIp=0040104E

MSR

LastBranchToIp=004010A0

Because of certain architectural features of Intel processors, the break is acti-

vated after the instruction has been executed (i.e., cs:EIP points to the following
executable instruction —

to JNZ

00401054, in our case). Therefore, the memory

location with our breakpoint was addressed by the cmp at, [ECX] instruction. What
is in At? Let's look at the line above: Mov EAX, [EDX]. We can assume that Ecx contains a pointer to the string with the reference password (because it caused the
break in execution). This means EDx must be a pointer to the password entered by
the user. Let's verify our assumption.
Oued

0023:00406040

6D 79 47 4F 4F 44 70 61-73

73 77 6F 72 64 0A 00

myGOODpassword..

4B 50 4E 43 2B 2B 0A 00-00

00 00 00 00 00 00 00

KPNCHt

id edx
0023:0012FF18

We were right. Now, the only question is how to crack this. We might replace
gnz with Jz, or more elegantly replace 2px with Ecx — then the reference password

Step Four: Getting Acquainted with the Debugger

37

will be compared to itself! Wait a minute... We shouldn't hurry. What if we aren't
in the protection routine, but in the library function (actually, in strcmp)? Changing it will result in the program perceiving any strings as identical, not just the
reference and entered passwords. It won't hurt our example, in which strcmp was
only called once, but it would cause normal, fully functional applications to fail.
What can be done?
Let's exit stromp and change the iF that determines whether or not the password is right. For this purpose, P RET is used (to trace until the RET instruction
occurs — returning from the function).
22

REL

001B:0040104E

call

004010A0

001B:00401053

add

esp,

08
eax

001B:00401056

test

eax,

001B:00401058

jz

00401069

001B:0040105A

push

00406050

001B:0040105F

call

00401234

001B:00401064

add

esp,

001B:00401067

jmp

0040106B

04

This is familiar. We were previously here with the disassembler. We can take
the same steps now: Replace the TEST instruction with xor, or write the sequence of
bytes that identifies... Just a moment. Where are our bytes, the hexadecimal in-

structions? SoftIce doesn't display them by default, but the cop—E oN command
forces it to do so.
code

on

001B:0040104E

E84D000000

call

004010A0

001B:00401053

83C408

add

esp,

08

001B:00401056

85C0

test

eax,

eax

001B:00401058

740F

4z

00401069

001B:0040105A

6850604000

push

00406050

001B:0040105F

E8D0010000

call

00401234

001B:00401064

83c404

add

esp,

001B:00401067

EBO2

jmp

0040106B

04

That's better. But how can we be sure that these bytes will be in the executable
file at the same addresses? The question isn't as silly as it may seem. Try to crack the
example crackme0x03 using the method just given. At first, it seems similar to sim-

ple.exe — even the reference password is located at the same address. Let's set

Part I: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

38
So

a breakpoint on it, wait for the debugger to pop up, exit the comparing procedure,

and look at the code identical to the one we previously came across.
001B:0042104E

E87D000000

001B:00421053

call

004210D0

g

001B:00421056

85C0

test

eax,

001B:00421058

740F

az

00421069

eax

Start HIEW, jump to address 0x421053, and... Oops; HIEW is upset with us. It
says there's no such address in the file! The last byte ends at 0x407FFF. How can we
be at 0x421053 in the debugger but not in the file? Perhaps we're in the body of a
Windows system function. But Windows system functions are located much higher —
beginning at 0x80000000.
The PE file could be loaded at a different address than the one for which it was
created. (This property is called relocatability.) The system automatically corrects
references to absolute addresses, replacing them with new values. As a result, the

file image in memory doesn't correspond to the one written on disk. How can we
find the place that needs to be corrected now?
This task is partly facilitated by the system loader, which only can relocate DLLs
and always tries to load executable files at their "native" addresses. If this is impossible, loading is interrupted and an error message is sent. Likely, we are dealing
with a DLL loaded by the protection we are investigating. Why are DLLs here, and
where did they come from?
We'll have to study Listing 2 to find out.
Listing 2. The Source Code of crackme0x03
#include

<stdio.h>

#include

<windows.h>

__declspec(dllexport)

void

Demo ()

{
#define

PASSWORD

#define

PASSWORD

SIZE

100

"myGOODpassword\n"

int count=0;
char buff[PASSWORD_SIZE]="";
for(;7)

Step Four: Getting Acquainted with the Debugger

39

{
printf ("Enter

password:") ;

fgets (&buff[0],

PASSWORD

if

(strcmp

(&buff[0],

printf ("Wrong
else

break;

Af

(++count>2)

SIZE-1,

stdin) ;

PASSWORD) )

password\n") ;

return’

-1;

}

printf ("Password

main

OK\n") ;

()

{
HMODULE

void

hmod;

(*zzz)();

if

((hmod=LoadLibrary

&&

(zzz=(void

("crack0~1.exe")

)

(*) ())GetProcAddress
(h, "Demo") ) )

AZZ ay

What

a way to call a function!

This technique exports it directly from

the executable file and loads the same file as a DLL. (Yes, the same file can be both

the executable application and the DLL.)
"It doesn't make a difference," a naive programmer might object. "Everyone
knows that Windows isn't so silly as to load the same file twice.
LoadLibrary

will

return

the

base

address

of

the

crackme0x03

module,

but won't allocate memory for it." Nothing of the sort! An artful protection scheme
accesses the file by its alternate short name, leaving the system loader in a deep
delusion.
The system allocates memory and returns the base address of the loaded module to the hmod variable. The code and data of this module are displaced by the hmod
value — the base address of the module with which HIEW and the disassembler
work. We can easily figure out the base address: Just call DUMPBIN with the
/HEADERS key. (Only a fragment of its response is given.)

Part |: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

40

>dumpbin

/HEADERS

OPTIONAL

HEADER

VALUES

crack0x03

400000

image

base

Hence, the base address is 0x400000 (in bytes). We can determine the load ad-

dress using the mod -u command in the debugger. (The -u key allows us to display
only application modules, not system ones.)
smod

=U

hMod

Base

PEHeader

Module

00400000

O004000D8

crack0x0

\. PHCK\sre\crack0x03.exe

00420000

004200D8

crack0x0

\.PHCK\sre\crack0x03.exe

77E80000

77E800D0

kernel32

\WINNT\system32\kernel132.d11

77F80000

77F800CO

ntdl1l

\WINNT\system32\ntd11.d11

Name

File

Name

Two copies of crackOx03 are loaded at once, and the last one is located at
0x420000 — just what we need! Now, it's easy to calculate that the address 0x421056
(the one we tried to find in the cracked file) "on disk" corresponds to the address
0x421056
- (0x42000

-

0x400000)

=

0x421056

-

0x20000

=

0x401056.
Let's take a

look at that location:
00401056:

85C0

test

eax,

00401058:

740F

je

-000401069

eax

—--------

(1)

Everything is as expected — see how well it matches the dump produced by the
debugger:
001B:00421056

85c0

test

eax,

001B:00421058

740F

jz

00421069

eax

This calculation technique is applicable to any DLL, not just to those representing executable files.
If, instead of tracing the addresses, we used the debugger on the program being
cracked to look for the sequence of bytes taken from the debugger, including the
one in CALL 00422040, would we find the sequence?
001B:0042104E

E87D000000

Gedy

004210D0

001B:00421053

83C408

add

esp,

08

001B:00421056

85C0

test

eax,

eax

001B:00421058

740F
in memory

4z

00421069

:File

image

Step Four: Getting Acquainted with the Debugger

-0040104E:

E87D000000

call

-0004010D0

-00401053:

83C408

add

esp,

U0Sh

test

eax,

eax

je

OOOACIOGE)

-00401056:

85C0

-00401058:

740F

:File

on

image

41

--------

(ab),

— =aSoe Sse

(2)

a

disk

The same machine code — E8 7D 00 00 00 — corresponds to the caALL
0x4210D0 and CALL 0x4010D0 instructions. How can this be? Here's how: The operand of the 0xE8 processor instruction does not represent the offset of a subroutine;
it represents the difference between the offsets of the subroutine and the instruction
next to the CALL instruction. Therefore, in the first case, 0x421053 (the offset of the

instruction next to CALL) + 0x0000007D (don't forget about the reverse byte order in
double words) = 0x4210D0 — the required address. Thus, when the load address is
changed, we don't need to correct the CALL instruction.
In the crackOx03 example, the following line is also in another location (which
can be found using HIEW):
004012C5:

89154C694000

mov

[00040694C],

edx

The mov instruction uses absolute addressing, rather than indirect. What will

happen if you change the load address of the module? Will the file image on disk
and that in memory be identical in this case?
Looking at the address 0x4212C5 (0x4012C5 + 0x2000) using the debugger, we
see that the call does not go to 0x42694c, but to 0x40694c! Our module intrudes in

another's domain, modifying it as it likes. This can quickly lead to a system crash!
In this case, it doesn't crash, but only because the line being accessed is located in
the Startup procedure (in start code), has already been executed (when the application started), and isn't called from the loaded module. It would be another matter

altogether if the Demo() function accessed a static variable; the compiler, having substituted its offset, would make the module unrelocatable! It's hard to imagine how
DLLs, whose load address isn't known beforehand, manage to work. But there are at
least two solutions.
The

first is to

use

indirect

addressing

instead

of direct

(for example,

[regt+offset val], where reg is a register containing the base load address,
and offset val is the offset of the memory location from the beginning of
the module). This will allow the module to be loaded at any address, but the loss of

just one register will appreciably lower the program's performance.

The second is to instruct the loader to correct direct offsets according to a selected base load address. This will slightly slow loading, but it won't affect the speed
of the program. This doesn't mean that load time can be neglected; this method
simply is preferred by Microsoft.

Part I: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

The problem is distinguishing actual direct offsets from constants that have the
same value. It'd be silly to decompile a DLL just to clear up which locations we
need to tweak. It's much easier to list the addresses in a special table, bearing the
name Relocation [Fix Up] table, directly in the loaded file. The linker is responsible for creating it. Each DLL contains such a table.
To get acquainted with the table, compile and study the following listing.
Listing 3. The Source Code of fixupdemo.c
::fixupdemo.c

__declspec(dllexport)

void

meme(int

x)

{
static

int

a=0x666;

a = x;

}
> cl

fixupdemo.c

/LD

Compile the code, then decompile it right away using "DUMPBIN/DISASM
fixupdemo.d11l" and "DUMPBIN/SECTION: .data/RAWDATA".
LOOOLOO0s

55

push

ebp

10001001:

8B EC

10001003:

8B

45

mov

ebp,

esp

mov

eax,

10001006:

A3

30 50

dword

ptr

mov

[10005030],

eax

1000100B:

5D

pop

ebp

TOOOLOOE ss C3

ret

RAW

DATA

08

00 10

[ebp+8]

#3

LOPOSOCOR®

DOMOO

CON COMO

LOOOS070%

0000

00 O0400"'00-00=00

O 00

COS00

COR DOF 00

00" SS*245

200030203

00 00°00

00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00.00

Seite
tert ee

10005030:

66 06 00 00 64 11 00 10 FF FF FF FF 00 00 00 00

f...d...........

100 "00! 00-00"

00-00

0010"

See.
oe. oe ace

00 00

Sere. 2.

t . ce

Judging by the code, the contents of EAx are always written to 0x10005030.
Nevertheless, don't jump to conclusions! Try "DUMPBIN/RELOCATIONS fixupdemo.d11".

BASE RELOCATIONS #4
1000

RVA,

7 HIGHLOW
1C HIGHLOW

154

SizeOfBlock

Step Four: Getting Acquainted with the Debugger

23

HIGHLOW

32

HIGHLOW

43

a

3A HIGHLOW

The

relocation

table isn't empty!

Its first entry points to the location

0x100001007, obtained by adding the offset 0x7 with the RVA address 0x1000 and

the base load address 0x10000000 (found using DUMPBIN). The location
0x100001007 belongs to the Mov [0x10005030], EAX instruction, and it points to
the highest byte of the direct offset. This offset is corrected by the loader while linking the DLL (if required).
Want to check? Let's create two copies of one DLL (such as fixupdemo.dl1 and
fixupdemo2.d11) and load them one by one using the following program:
Listing 4. The Source Code of fixupload.c
::fixupload.c
#include

<windows.h>

main ()

{
void

(*demo)

HMODULE

if

(int

a);

h;

((h=LoadLibrary ("fixupdemo.dll"))

(h=LoadLibrary
(demo=(void

("fixupdemo2.d11"))

(*) (int

&&

&&

a) )GetProcAddress
(h, "meme") ) )

demo (0x777) ;

}
> cl

fixupload

Since we

can't load two

different DLLs

at the same

address

(how will

the system know it's the same DLL?), the loader has to relocate one. Let's load
the compiled program in the debugger, and set a breakpoint at the LoadLibraryaA
function. This is necessary to skip the startup code and get into the main function
body. (Program execution doesn't start from the main function; instead, it starts
from the auxiliary code, in which you can easily "drown.") Where did the a character at the end of the function name come from? Its roots are closely related to the
introduction

of Unicode in Windows.

(Unicode encodes

each character with

Aa

Part |: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

2 bytes. Therefore, 2! = 65,536 symbols, enough to represent practically all of the
alphabets of the world.) The LoadLibrary name may be written in any language or
in many languages simultaneously — in Russian-French-Chinese, for example.
This seems tempting, but doesn't it decrease performance? It certainly does, and
substantially. There's a price to be paid for Unicode! ASCII encoding suffices in
most cases. Why waste precious processor clock ticks? To save performance, size
was disregarded, and separate functions were created for Unicode and ASCII characters. The former received the w suffix (Wide); the latter received a (ASCII). This

subtlety is hidden from programmers: Which function to call — w or A — is decided by the compiler. However, when you work with the debugger, you should
specify the function name — it cannot determine the suffix independently.
The stumbling block is that certain functions, such as ShowWindows, have no suf-

fixes; their library names are the same as the canonical one. How do we know?
The simplest way is to look up the import table of the file being analyzed, and
find your function there. For example, in our case:
> DUMPBIN
> type

/IMPORTS

fixupload.exe

> filename

filename
19D

HeapDestroy

1C2

LoadLibraryA

CA

GetCommandLineA

174

GetVersion

7D

ExitProcess

29E

TerminateProcess

From this fragment, you can see that LoadLibrary has the a suffix. The ExitProcess and TerminateProcess functions have no because they don't work with
strings.
The other way is to look in the SDK. You won't find library names in it, but the
Quick Info subsections give brief information on Unicode support (if such support
is implemented). If Unicode is supported, the w or A suffix is indicated; if not, there

are no suffixes. Shall we check this?

Here's Quick Info on LoadLibrary:
QuickInfo
Windows

NT:

Windows:

Requires

Requires

Windows

CE:

version

Windows

Requires

3.1

95 or

version

1.0

or

later.

later.

or

later.

Step Four: Getting Acquainted with the Debugger

45
ee

Header:

Declared

Import

Library:

Unicode:

in winbase.h.
Use

kernel32.lib.

Implemented

as

Unicode

and

ANSI

versions

on

Windows

NT.

We now understand the situation for Windows NT, but what about the one for
the more common Windows 95/98? A glance at the KERNEL32.DLL export table
shows there is such a function. However, looking more closely, we see something
surprising: Its entry point coincides with the entry points of ten other functions!
ordinal

hint

556

1B3

RVA

name

00039031

LoadLibrarywW

The third column in the DUMPBIN report is the RVA address — the virtual
address of the beginning of the function minus the file-loading base address.
A simple search shows that it occurs more than once. Using the srcln programfilter to obtain the list of functions, we get the following:
Zac

118

1 00039031

AddAtomw

ales

217

60 00039031

DeleteFilew

AOS

220

63

00039031

DisconnectNamedPipe

00039031

LS:

PSN)

9E

204:

305

B8_00039031

FreeEnvironmentStringsW

FindAtomw

260:

361

FO

00039031

GetDriveTypew

2972

398

115

00039031

GetModuleHandlew

SAa-s

442

141

00039031

GetStartupiInfow

Sifale

478

165

00039031

GetVersionExW

384:

485

16C

00039031

GlobalAddAtomW

389:

490

171

00039031

GlobalFindAtomw

413:

514

189

00039031

HeapLock

As

518

18D

00039031

HeapUnlock

440:

541

1A4

00039031

IsProcessorFeaturePresent

455:

556

1B3

00039031

LoadLibraryW

508:

611

158

00039031

OutputDebugStringW

547:

648

20F

00039031

RemoveDirectoryW

590:

691

23A

00039031

SetComputerNameW

Doze

693

23C

00039031

SetConsoleCP

HD hs

698

241

00039031

SetConsoleOutputCP

601:

702

245

00039031

SetConsoleTitlew

605:

706

249

00039031

SetCurrentDirectoryW

645:

746

271

00039031

SetThreadLocale

678:

779

292

00039031

TryEnterCriticalSection

2

Part |: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

46

What a surprise: All Unicode functions live under the same roof. Since it's hard
to believe that LoadLibraryw

and, say, DeleteFilew are identical, we have to as-

sume that we are dealing with a "stub," which only returns an error. Therefore, the
LoadLibraryW function isn't implemented in Windows 9x.
However, let's get back to the subject at hand. Let's open the debugger, set a
breakpoint on LoadLibraryA, then quit the debugger and wait for it to pop up. Fortunately, we won't have to wait long.
KERNEL32!LoadLibraryA

001B:77E98023

push

ebp

001B:77E98024

mov

ebp,

001B:77E98026

push

ebx

001B:77E98027

push

esi

001B:77E98028

push

edi

001B:77E98029

push

77E98054

001B:77E9802E

push

dword

esp

ptr

[ebpt+08]

Let's issue the P RET command to exit LoadLibraryA (we really don't need to
analyze it), and return to the easily recognizable main function.
001B:0040100B
JO

VR
1B:

call

0040101]L]

[KERNEL32
!
LoadLibraryA]
|
[ebp-O8},

eax<t

[ebp-08],

001B:00401014

cmp

dword

001B:00401018

jz

00401051

ptr

001B:0040101A

push

00405040

001B:0040101F

call

[KERNEL32
!
LoadLibraryA]

001B:00401025

mov

{ebp-08],

eax

001B:00401028

cmp

adword

[ebp-08],

ptr

00

00

Note the value of the Eax register — the function has returned the load address
to it (on my computer, 0x10000000). Continuing to trace (using the <F10> key),

wait for the second execution of LoadLibraryA. This time, the load address has
changed. (On my computer, it now equals 0x0530000.)
We are getting closer to the demo function call. (In the debugger, it looks like

PUSH 00000777\ CALL [EBP-04]. The EBP-04 tells us nothing, but the 0x777 argument definitely reminds us of something in Listing 4.) Don't forget to move your
finger from the <F10> key to the <F8> key to enter the function.
001B:00531000 55
push — ebp
001B:00531001

8BEC

mov

ebp,

esp

001B:00531003

8B4508

mov

eax,

[ebpt+08]

Step Four: Getting Acquainted with the Debugger

001B:00531006

A330505300

mov

[00535030],

001B:0053100B

5D

pop

ebp

001B:0053100C

C3

ret

47

eax

That's it! The system loader corrected the address according to the base address
of loading the DLL itself. This is how it should work. However, there's one problem —
neither that location, nor the sequence A3 30 50 53 00, is in the original DLL,
which we can easily see via a context search. How can we find this instruction in the
original DLL? Perhaps we'd like to replace it with NOPs.
Let's look a little bit higher — at instructions that don't contain relocatable
elements: PUSH EBP/MOV EBP, ESP/MOV EAX, [EBP+08]. Why not look for the sequence 55 8B EC xxx A3? In this case, it'll work but, if the relocatable elements
were densely packed with "normal" ones, we wouldn't find it. The short sequence

would produce many false hits.
A more reliable way to find the contents of relocatable elements is to subtract
the difference between the actual and recommended load address from them:
0x535030 (the address modified by the loader) - (0x530000 (the base loading address) - 0x10000000 (the recommended loading address)) = 0x10005030. Taking

into account the reverse sequence of bytes, the machine code of the mov
[10005030], EAX instruction should look like this: a3 30 50 00 10. If we search for
it using HIEW, miracle of miracles, there it is!

Method 1: Searching Directly for
the Entered Password in Memory
Storing a password as plain text in the program's body is more of an exception than
rule. Hackers are hardly needed if the password can be seen with the naked eye.
Therefore, protection developers try to hide it in every possible way. (We'll discuss
how they do this later.) Taking into account the size of modern applications, a programmer may place the password in an unremarkable file stuffed with "dummies" —
strings that look like a password, but are not. It's unclear what is fake and what isn't, especially because in a project of average size, there may be several hundreds, or
even thousands, of suitable strings.

Let's approach the problem from the opposite side — let's not search for
the original password, which is unknown to us, but rather for the string that we've
fed to the program as the password. Then, let's set a breakpoint on it, and proceed
in the same manner as before. The break will follow the watching call. We'll quit
the matching procedure, correct sp, and...

Part |: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

48

Let's take another look at the simple.c source code that we're cracking.
for (77)
{
printf ("Enter

password:");

fgets (&buff[0],

PASSWORD

if

(strcmp (&buf£[0],

printf ("Wrong
else
id

SIZE,

stdin);

PASSWORD) )

password\n") ;

break;
—(Grareejohmeey.) a iaeieuiagy

Salle

}

Notice that the user-supplied password is read into buff, and compared to
the reference password. If no match is made, the password again is requested from
the user —

but buf¢ isn't cleared before the next attempt. From this, we can see

that, if, upon receiving the message Wrong password, we open the debugger and
walk through it with a context search, we may find buff.
So, let's begin. Let's start simple.exe, enter any password that comes to mind
(KPNC Kaspersky ++, for example), ignore the wrong cry and press <Ctrl>+<D> —
the key combination for calling SoftIce. We needn't search blindly: Windows
NT/9x isn't Windows 3.x or MS-DOS, with a common

address space for all proc-

esses. Now, to keep one process from inadvertently intruding on another, each is
allotted address space for its exclusive use. For example, process A may have
the number 0x66 written at address 23:0146660, process B may have 0x0 written
at the same address, 23:0146660, and process C may have a third value. Each process — A, B, or

C — won't even suspect the existence of the others (unless it uses

special resources for interprocessor communication).
You can find a more detailed consideration of all these issues in books by Helen
Custer and Jeffrey Richter. Here, we're more worried about another problem: The
debugger called by pressing the <Ctrl>+<D> key combination emerges in another
process (most likely in Idle), and a context search over memory gives no results.
We need to manually switch the debugger to the necessary address space.
From the documentation that comes with SoftIce, you may know that switching contexts is performed by the appR command, with either the process name
truncated to eight characters or its PID. You can get that with another command —
Proc. In cases where the process name is syntactically indistinguishable from
a PID — "123," for example — we have to use the PID (the second column of digits
in the PROC report).
:addr

simple

Step Four: Getting Acquainted with the Debugger

49
al

Now, let's try the addr
simple command. Nothing happens. Even
the registers remain the same! Don't worry; the word "simple" is in the lower-right
corner, identifying the current process. Keeping the same register values is just
a bug in Softlce. It ignores them, and only switches addresses. This is why tracing
a switched program is impossible. Searching, however, is another matter.
2S,

2320)

LI

"KPNC

The

first

argument

selector:offset.

thaspersky"

after

In Windows

s

is the

2000,

search

selector

23

start

address,

is used

address

written

as

data

and

the stack. In other operating systems, the selector may differ. We can find it by
loading any program, and then read the contents of the ps register.
In general, starting a search from a zero offset is silly. According to the memory
map, the auxiliary code is located there, and will unlikely contain the required
password. However, this will do no harm, and will be much faster than trying to
figure out the program load address and where to start the search. The third argument — L-1 — is the length of the area to search, where -1 means search until successful. Note that we are not searching for the entire string, but only for part of it
(KPNC

Kaspersky, not KPNC

Kaspersky++). This allows us to get rid of false results.

SoftIce likes to display references to its own buffers containing the search template.
They are always located above 0x80000000, where no normal password ever lives.
Nevertheless, it'll be more demonstrative if just the string we need is found using an
incomplete substring.
Pattern

found

at

0023:00016E40

(00016E40)

We found at least one occurrence. But what if there are more of
them in memory? Let's check this by issuing s commands until the message
Pattern not found is received, or until the upper search address of 0x80000000
is exceeded.
7S

Pattern

found

at

0023:0013FF18

(0013FF18)

found

at

0023:0024069C

(0024069C)

found

at 0023:80B83F18

(80B83F18)

7S

Pattern
ae)

Pattern

We have three! Isn't this too much? It would be silly to set all three breakpoints.
In this case, four debug-processor registers will suffice, but even three breakpoints

are enough to get us lost! What would we do if we found ten matches?
Let's think: Some matches likely result from reading the input via the keyboard
and putting characters into the system buffers. This seems plausible. How can we
filter out the "interference?"

Part I: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

50

The memory map will help: Knowing the owner of an area that possesses
a buffer, we can say a lot about that buffer. By typing in map32 simple, we obtain approximately the following:
:map32

simple

Owner

Obj

simple

. text

simple

.rdata

0002

0023:00015000

simple

.data

0003

0023:00016000

Name

Obj#

Address

Size

Type

0001

001B:00011000

O0003F66

CODE

RO

0000081E

IDATA

RO

00001E44

IDATA RW

Hurrah! One of the matches belongs to our process. The buffer at address 0x16E40
belongs to the data segment and is probably what we need. But we shouldn't
be hasty; everything may not be as simple as it seems. Let's look for the address 0x16E40
in the simple.exe file. (Taking into account the reverse sequence of bytes, it'll
be 40 6E 01 00.)
> dumpbin

/SECTION:.data

RAW

#3

DATA

00016030:

/RAWDATA

simple.exe

45 6E 74 65 72 20 70 61 73 73 77 6F 72 64 3A 00

Enter

00016040:

6D 79 47 4F 4F 44 70 61 73 73 77 6F 72 64 OA 00

myGOODpassword..

00016050:

57 72 6F 6E 67 20 70 61 73 73 77 6F 72 64 OA 00

Wrong password..

00016060:

50 61 73 73 77 6F 72 64 20 4F 4B 0A 00 00 00 00

Password

00016070:

40 6B 01 00 00 00 00 00 40 6E 01 00 01 01 00 00

G@n...... Gals Gots on

OOOTEO80 FO

0700 00800"

GOR OOS 00003005

10500s

00F O0N00

68 70 60 01 00

push

00011037:

6A 64

push

64h

; Max.

00011039:

8D 4D 98

lea

ecx,

[ebp-68h]

should

be written

; The

pointer

to the

OK.....

00" O00) ewe tvs coun. Sere

We
found
two
of
them
there.
Let's
see
what
the first one by looking for the substring 16070 in the decompiled code.
00011032:

password:.

references

16070h
Password

length

(= 100 dec)

buffer

; in which

the

password

0001103C:

51

push

ecx

0001103D:
00011042:

E8 E2 00 00 00
83 C4 0C

call

00011124

; fgets

add

esp,

; Popping up three arguments

OCh

It should be clear where we are in the code, except for a mysterious pointer to
0x16070. In MSDN, where the prototype of the fgets function is described, we'll

discover "the mysterious stranger" is a pointer to the FILE structure. (According to
C convention, arguments are pushed onto the stack from right to left.) The first
member of the FILE structure is the pointer to the buffer. (In the standard C
library, the file input/output is buffered with a size of 4 KB by default.) Thus,

Step Four: Getting Acquainted with the Debugger

51

the address 0x16£40 is a pointer to an auxiliary buffer, and we can cross it off the
list of candidates.
Candidate No. 2 is 0x24069¢. It falls outside the data segment. In general, it's
not clear to whom it belongs. Remember the heap? Let's see what's there.
:heap

32

simple

Base

Id

Cmmt/Psnt/Rsvd

Flags

Process

00140000

O01

0003/0003/00FD

Segments

1

00000002

simple

00240000

02

0004/0003/000C

1

00008000

simple

00300000

03

0008/0007/0008

1

00001003

simple

That's it. We just need to clarify who allocated the memory — the system,
or the programmer. The first thing that jumps out is the suspicious and strangely
undocumented 0x8000 flag. We can find its definition in WINNT.H, but this won't
be helpful unless it shows the system using the flag.
#define HEAP PSEUDO
TAG FLAG
0x8000
To be convinced, load any application into the debugger and give the command heap 32 proc_name. The system automatically allocates three areas from the
heap — exactly like those in our case. This means that this candidate also has led
nowhere.
One address remains: 0x13FF18. Does it remind you of anything? What was the Esp
value while loading? It seems that it was 0x13FFC4. (Note that in Windows 9x, the stack
is located in another place. Nevertheless, this reasoning also works for it: Just remember
the stack location in your own operating system and know how to recognize it.)
Since the stack grows from the bottom up (i.e., from higher addresses to lower
ones), the address 0x13FF18 is located on the stack. That's why it's similar to buffers. In addition, most programmers allocate buffers in local variables that, in turn,

are allocated on the stack by the compiler.
Shall we try to set a breakpoint here?
sbpm. 232137818
7x

Break

due

MSR

to BPMB

#0023:0013FF18

LastBranchFromIp

MSR

LastBranchToIp

001B:000110BO0
e

°

001B:000110B4

mov
“INY

f

jnz

=

0001144F

=

00011156

eax,
Aly

[edx]
|

000110E4

RW DR3

(ET = 369.65

microseconds)

Part I: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

52

001B:000110B6

or

aly,

001B:000110B8.

jz

000110E0

weal

001B:000110BA

cmp

ah,

[ecx+01]

001B:000110BD

jnz

000110E4

COLE

or

ah,

OOUMOBES

ah

We're in the body of the comparing procedure, which should be familiar. Let's
display the values of the 2px and Ecx pointers to find out what is being compared.
:d edx
0023:0013FF18

4B

50

4E

43

2D

2D

OA

00-70

65

72

73

6B

79

2B

2B

KPNC

Wet ste>.4
0023:00016040

6D

79

47

4F

4F

44

70

61-73

73

77

6F

72

64

OA

00

myGOODpassword..

Kaspersky++

We've already discussed everything else that needs to be done. Let's quit the
comparing procedure using the P RET command. Then, we need to find a branch,
note its address, and correct the executable file. We're done.

You now are acquainted with one common way of cracking protection based
on matching passwords. (Later, you'll see that this method is also suitable for
cracking protection based on registration numbers.) Its main advantage is its simplicity. There are at least two drawbacks:
OF Ifthe programmer clears the buffer after making a comparison, a search for the
entered password will give nothing unless the system buffers remain. These are
difficult to erase. However, it's also difficult to trace the password from system
to local buffers!
O With the abundance of auxiliary buffers, it can be difficult to find the "right"
one. A programmer may allocate the password buffer in the data segment
(a static buffer), on the stack (a local buffer), or on the heap. The programmer
may even allocate memory using low-level VirtualAlloc calls. As a result, it
sometimes appears necessary to go through all obtained occurrences.

Let's analyze another example: crackme01. It's the same as simple.exe except for
its graphic user interface (GUI). Its key procedure looks like this:
Listing 5. The Source Code of the Key Procedure of crackme01
te
eee esas
anactesspasssenen-seuspmsessnpiepensnee ese
void CCrackme_01D1lg::OnOK()
{
char

buff[PASSWORD

SIZE];

Step Four: Getting Acquainted with the Debugger

m_password.GetWindowText
if

(strcmp

(&buff[0],PASSWORD

(é&buff£f[0], PASSWORD)

SIZE

53

:

~

)

{

MessageBox ("Wrong
m

password") ;

password. SetSel(0,-1,0);

return;

else

MessageBox

("Password

OK") ;

}
CDialog:

sOn0K() 7

}

Everything seems straightforward. Enter the password KPNC Kaspersky++
as usual, but before you press the OK button in response to the wrong password
dialog, call the debugger and switch the context.
23:0

L -1

'KPNC

Pattern

:S

found

at

OU23;00IZF9IFC

Kaspersky'

(O0L2ZF9ORC)

found

at

0023:00139C78

(00139C78)

7s

Pattern

There are two occurrences, and both are on the stack. Let's begin with the first

one. Set a breakpoint and wait for the debugger to emerge. The debugger's window
does not make us wait long, but it shows some strange code. Press the <x> key to
quit. A cascade of windows follows, each less intelligible than the previous one.
We can speculate that the cCrackme_01D1lg::OnoK function is called directly
when the OK button is pressed: It's allotted part of the stack for local variables,
which is deallocated automatically when the function is exited. Thus, the local
buffer with the password that we've entered exists only when it is checked, and then
it is erased automatically. Our only bit of luck is the modal dialog, which tells us
that we entered the wrong password. While it remains on the screen, the buffer still

contains the entered password, which can be found in memory. But this does little
to help us trace when this buffer will be accessed. We have to sort through the false
windows one by one. At last, we see the string we seek in the data window and
some intelligent code in the code window.

Part |: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

54

0023:0012F9FC

4B 50

4E

43

20

4B

61

73-70

65

72

73

6B

79

2B

2B

00

01

00

00

OD

00

00

00-01

00

1C

CO

A8

AF

47

00

9B

13

00

78

01

01

OO-FO

3E

2F

00

00

00

00

00

01

01

00

83

63 El

77-FO

AD

47

00

78

01

O1

00

KPNC

Kaspersky+t+

0023:0012FA0C

eater emote a Chewenere G.
0023:0012FA1C

x

10

Sod sarniohs

0023:0012FA2C
ei

01

sh C.W..G.x

001B:004013E3

8A10

mov

dl,

[eax]

001B:004013E7

S8ACA

001B:004013E9

3AD3

mov

oli

dolk

cmp

diijpebil

001B:004013EB

7515

jnz

0040140B

001B:004013ED

84C9

test

ely

001B:004013EF

7416

rz

00401407

001B:004013F1

8A5001

mov

dl,

er
[eax+01]

Let's see where ESI points.
:d esi

0023:0040303C

4D 79 47 6F 6F 64 50 61-73

73 77 6F 72 64 00 00

MyGoodPassword..

All that remains is to patch the executable file. Here, more difficulties are waiting for us. First, the compiler has optimized the code, inserting the strcmp code in-

stead of calling it. Second, it's swarming with conditional jumps! It will take a lot of
work to find what we need. Let's approach the problem in a scientific way by viewing the disassembled code, or, to be more exact, its key fragment that compares the
passwords:
>dumpbin /DISASM crackme 01.exe
004013DA: BE 3C 30 40 00
mov
esi, 40303Ch
0040303C: 4D 79 47 6F 6F 64 50 61 73 73 77 6F 72 64 00 MyGoodPassword

A pointer to the reference password was placed in the EsI register.
004013DF:

8D

44

24

10

lea

eax,

[esp+10h]

A pointer to the user-supplied password was placed in the Eax register.
004013E3:

8A 16

mov

dl,

byte

ptr

[esi]

004013E5:

8A 15

mov

bl,

byte

ptr

[esi]

004013E7:

8A CA

mov

elpral

004013E9:

3A D3

cmp

dl,

bl

Step Four: Getting Acquainted with the Debugger

55
ae

A comparison was made to the first character.

004013EB:

75 1E

jne

0040140B €---(3)

--->

(1)

If the first character didn't match, a jump was made. Further checking would be
pointless.
004013ED:

84

C9

test

Ghee

teal

Did the first character equal zero?
004013EF:

74

16

je

00401407

-- > (2)

If so, we reached the end of line and the passwords would be identical.
004013F1:

8A

50

01

mov

dl,

byte

ptr

[eax+1]

O01

ptr

[esi+1]

004013F4:

8A

5E

mov

bl,

byte

004013F7:

8A

CA

mov

ohilyenxe

ih

004013F9:

3A D3

cmp

Glik7 lou

The next pair of characters were checked.

004013FB:

75 OE

jne

0040140B --->

(1)

If they were not equal, the check was stopped.
004013FD:

83

CO

02

add

eax,

2

00401400:

83

Co

02

add

esi,

2

The next two characters were examined

00401403:

84 C9

test

Jol, Sed

jne

004013E3

->

Did we reach the end of line?
00401405):

i7.5:-DC

(3)

No, we didn't. Matching was continued.
00401407:

33 CO

xor

eax,

eax

€---

(2)

00401409:

EB

jmp

00401410

-->

(4)

05

This shows EAX was cleared (strcmp returns zero if successful) and quit.
0040140B:

1B CO

0040140D:

83

D8

FF

sbb

eax,

eax

sbb

eax,

OFFFFFFFFh

€---

(3)

This branch is executed when the passwords don't match. EAX was set to a
nonzero value. (Guess why.)
00401410:

85 CO

i

test

eax,

eax

Waobee

(4)

56

a”

Part I: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

If sax equaled zero, a check was made.
00401412:

6A

00

push

0

00401414:

6A

00

push

0

Something was placed on the stack.
00401416:

74

38

je

00401450

<<<<

--->(5)

64

.Wrong

A jump was made somewhere.
00401418:

68

2C

30

40

00

0040302C:

57

72

6F

6E

67

push
20

70

61

40302Ch
73

73

77

6F

72

00

password

Aha! "Wrong password." (The code that follows isn't of interest; it's just
displaying error messages.)
Now that we understand the algorithm, we can crack it (for example, by replacing the conditional jump in line 0x401416 with an short unconditional jump, such
as OxEB).

Method 2: Setting a Breakpoint at
the Password Input Function
We can't call the previous method of directly searching for the entered password
elegant or practical. Why should we search for the password, stumbling over irregularly scattered buffers, when we can place a breakpoint directly on the function
that reads it? Will it be easier to guess which function the developer used?
The operation can be performed with one of just a few functions. Looking
them up won't take a lot of time. In particular, editable field contents often are read
with GetWindowTexta or, less frequently, with GetD1lgItemTexta.

Since we're talking about windows, let's start our GUI crackme01 example and
set a breakpoint at the GetWindowTexta function ("bpx GetWindowTextA"). Since
this is a system function, the breakpoint will be global (i.e., it will affect all running
applications). Therefore, close all unneeded programs. If you set the breakpoint before starting crackme01, you'll get several false windows because the system reads
the window contents when displaying the dialog.
Let's enter KPNC Kaspersky++ as usual, then press the <Enter> key. The debug-

ger will show up instantly.

001B:77E1A4E3

8BEC

mov

ebp,

esp

Step Four: Getting Acquainted with the Debugger

O01B:77E1A4E5

6AFF

push

FEF

001B:77E1A4E7

6870A5E177

push

77E1A570

001B:77E1A4EC

68491DE677

push

77E61D49

001B:77E1A4F1

64A100000000

mov

eax,

001B:77E1A4F7

50

push

eax

57

fs: [00000000]

Many hacking manuals recommend that we immediately quit the function with
P RET, Saying there's no need to analyze it. But, we needn't hurry! We should clarify
where the entered string is located and set a breakpoint at it. Let's look at the arguments the function accepts and the sequence in which it accepts them. (If you don't
remember, view the SDK documentation.)
int

GetWindowText (

HWND

hWnd,

BELSTR

int

// Handle

pstrang,

nMaxCount

to window

or

9// Address

(on bubtereror

// Maximum

number

control

with

text

to

copy

text

of characters

Ie

If a program is written in C, it may seem that the arguments are written on
the stack according to the C convention. Nothing of the kind! All Windows API
functions are called according to the Pascal convention, regardless of the language
in which the program is written. Thus, arguments are pushed on the stack from left
to right, and the last argument onto the stack is the return address. In 32-bit Win-

dows, all arguments and the return address occupy a double word (4 bytes). Therefore, to reach the pointer to the string, you need to add 8 bytes to the stack's top
pointer register, or ESP (one double word for nMaxCount, and another one for
lpString). This is represented more clearly in Fig. 3.
In SoftIce, you can display the contents of a specified address using the * operator. (See the debugger documentation for more details.)
:d *(esp+s)
0023:0012F9FC

1C FA 12 00 3B 5A El 77-EC

4D El 77 06 02 05 00

....;Z.w.M.w....

0023:0012FA0C

01 01 00 00 10 00 00 00-01

00 2A CO 10 AB 48 00

........... A eielte

0023:0012FAIC

10 9B-13

0023:0012FA2C

01 02 04 00 83 63 El 77-08

000A

02 04 00-B8-3h

00 00.00"

........% SD stcetenes

DE 48 00 OA 02 04 DO

2F 00.00

en ss Gewese

The buffer is filled with garbage because the string hasn't been read yet. Let's
quit the function with Pp RET and see what happens. (Note that it will be impossible
to use d *esp+8; after we exit the function, its arguments will be pushed off the
stack.)
be

Get

SA 00I2F9EC

gaa

Part I: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

0023:0012F9FC

4B 50 4E 43 20 4B 61 73-70

65 72 73 6B 79 2B 2B

KPNC Kaspersky++
............-. He

0023:0012FA0C

00 01 00 00 OD 00 00 00-01

00 1C 80 10 AB 48 00

0023:0012FA1C

10 9B 13 00 OA 02 04 O0-E8

3E 2F 00 00 00 00 00

0023:0012FA2C

01 02 04 00 83 63 El 77-08

DE 48 00

0A 02 04 00

......... 3 Se plic
..... Clits olelie

aes

7
Free
WA

Pointer to the top of the stack

ESP -4—

Return address

ES?

Otis

fe
E

ESP +4

ESP +8 7-

hWnd

Es

s

IpString

J RE
MATS et ff

Ke}

a

String buffer

i

nMaxCount

ESP +0C —=-

Fig. 3. The stack when calling GetWindowText

This is the buffer we need. Set a breakpoint and wait for the debugger window
to show up. Look! (Do you recognize the comparing procedure?) After the first try,
we are where we want to be.
001B :004013E3

8A10

mov

001B :004013E7
001B :004013E9
001B :004013EB
001B :004013ED
001B :004013EF
001B :004013F1

8ACA

mov

3AD3

dl,

[eax]

ole

douk

751E

cmp
jnz

84C9

test

ely

7416

4z

00401407

8A5001

mov

dl,

dl
0040140B
-e

[eax+01]

This is wonderful! Elegantly, quickly, beautifully — and without any false hits — we
defeated the protection.
This method is universal; we'll take advantage of it many times. It simply re-

quires us to determine the key function and set a breakpoint at it. In Windows, all

Step Four: Getting Acquainted with the Debugger

59

attempts to read a password (calls to a key file, to the registry, etc.) are reduced to calls
of API functions. There are many, but the number is finite and known beforehand.

Method 3: Setting a Breakpoint on Messages
Anyone who has had a chance to program in Windows knows that interaction with the
operating system is based on messages. Practically all Windows API functions are high-level
"wrappers" that send messages to Windows. The GetwindowTexta function, an analog of
the WM_GETTEXT message, is not an exception.
Consequently, a developer doesn't need to call GetwindowTexta to get the text
from an edit window; SendMessageA (hWnd, WMGETTEXT,
(LPARAM) ébuff [0])
can be used. crack02 does just that. Try to load it and set a breakpoint at GetwindowTextA (GetDlgItemTexta). What happened? It didn't work. Developers use such
tricks to lead novice hackers astray.
In this case, you could set a breakpoint at SendMessageA. However, setting a
breakpoint at the wM_GETTEXT message is a more universal solution, which works
regardless of how the window's contents are read.
In SoftIce, a special command sets a breakpoint on messages: BMSc. But isn't it
more interesting to do it yourself?
As you probably know, each window has a special window procedure associated
with it (i.e., for receiving and processing messages). You could find it and set
a breakpoint. The HwND command gives information on the windows of the specified process.
<Ctrl-D>
saddr

crack02

:hwnd

crack02

Handle

Class

WinProc

TED)

6C291B81

2DC

Button

77EB18721

2DC

Edit

6C291B81

2DC

Stabe

77E186D9

2DC

Module

050140

#32770

(Dialog)

crack02

05013E
crack02

05013C
crack02

05013A
crack02

You can locate quickly the edit window with the window procedure address
0x6C291B81. Should you set a breakpoint? No, it's not time yet. Remember that the
window procedure is called on more occasions than when the text is read. It would

Part |: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

60

be better to set a breakpoint after you have filtered out all other messages. To begin,
study the prototype of this function:
LRESULT

CALLBACK

WindowProc(

HWND

hwnd,

// Handle

UINT

uMsg,

// Message

to

window

identifier

WPARAM

wParam,

// First

message

parameter

LPARAM

1Param

// Second

message

parameter

)e

It's easy to calculate that, when calling the function, the uMsg argument (the message identifier) is offset by 8 bytes relative to the stack-top pointer, Esp. If the value at
that position equals wM_GETTEXT (0xD), that is when you want to break!
Here, mention must be made of conditional breaks. Their syntax is considered
in detail in the debugger documentation. Programmers familiar with C, however,
should find the syntax concise and intuitive.
:bpx

6C291B81

IF

(esp->8)——WM_GETTEXT

2x

Now, quit the debugger. Enter any text as a password, such as Hello, and press
the <Enter> key. The debugger will show up right away.
Break

due

to

BPX

#0008:6C291B81

IF

((ESP->8)==0xD)

(ET=2.52

seconds)

You need to determine the address with the read string. The pointer to the
buffer is transferred to the buffer through the 1Param argument (see SDK for the
description of WM_GETTEXT), and 1Param itself is placed on the stack at an offset of
0x10 relative to ESP.
Return

address

€ ESP

hwnd

€ ESP

+ 0x4

uMsg

€ ESP

+ 0x8

wParam

€ ESP

+ OxC

1Param

€ ESP

+ 0x10

Now, output this buffer to the data window, quit the window procedure with
P RET, and... see the text Hello, which you just entered.
:d

* (esp+10)

Gio) mache

0023:0012EB28
0023:0012FB38
0023:0012EB48

0023:0012EB58

48 65 6C 6C 6F 00 05 00-0D 00 00 00 FF
1C ED 12 00 01 00 00 00-OD 00 00 00 FD
70 3C 13 00 00 00 00 00-00 00 00 00 00
00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00-98 EB 12 00 1

:bpm 23:12EB28

03 00 00

Hello

86 E1 77
00 00 00

87 Fl 77

p<

Step Four: Getting Acquainted with the Debugger

61

Set the breakpoint given above. The debugger will show up at one
"spontaneous" point. (It is obviously "nonuser" code because cs has a value of
0008.) Prepare to press the <x> key to continue tracking the break. You'll suddenly
catch sight of the following:
0008:A00B017C

S8A0A

mov

OO008:AQDOBO17E

8808

cl,

[edx]

mov

0008:A00B0180

40

inc

eax

0008:A00B0181

42

inc

edx

0008:A00B0182

84Cc9

test

ella.

0008:A00B0184

7406

Zz

AOOBO18C

0008:A00B0186

FF4C2410

dec

dword

0008:A00B018A

75F0

jnz

AOOBO17C

@lk

ptr

[esp+10]

Aha! The buffer is passed by value, not by reference. The system doesn't
allow you to access the buffer directly; it only provides a copy. A character in this
buffer, pointed to by the EDx register is copied to CL. (It is clear that EDx contains
a pointer to this buffer; it caused the debugger to appear.) Then it's copied from cL to
the [EAx] location, where EAx is some pointer (about which we can't yet say anything
definite). Both pointers are incremented by one, and cu (the last character read) is

checked for equality to zero. If the end of the string isn't reached, the procedure is repeated. If you have to watch two buffers at once, set one more breakpoint.
:bpm EAX
7X

The debugger soon pops up at the other breakpoint. You should recognize the
comparing procedure. The rest is trivial.
001B:004013F2

S8A1E

101B:004013F4

7

001B:004013F6

3AD3

001B:004013F8

751E

mov

bl,

[esi]

el,

dil

cmp

dij

abil

jnz

00401418

001B:004013FA

84C9

test

cule

001B:004013FC

7416

jz

00401414

ht

001B:004013FE

8A5001

mov

dl,

[eax+01]

001B:00401401

8A5E01

mov

bl,

[esi+01]

9 In Windows 9x, messages are processed somewhat differently than in
Windows NT. In particular, the window procedure of the edit window is imple-

62

Part I: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

mented in 16-bit code, with a nasty segment memory model: segment: offset.
Addresses also are passed differently. What parameter contains the segment? To
answer that question, look at SoftIce's breakpoint report:
Break

due

hWnd=0428

to

BMSG

0428

wParam=0666

Window descriptor

WM_GETTEXT

(ET=513.11

1Param=28D70000

|

msg=000D

milliseconds)

WM_GETTEXT

i Offset

Maximum quantity of characters to read

Segment

The entire address fitsin the 1Param 32- resigue—a 16-bitsegment and 16bit offset. Therefore, the breakpoint should look likethis: bpm 28D7:0000.

—e
5S
ares

et

ae

Sree

Ee 2

*s¢

verre

eae

See

te

em TB

iz

:

’

ie

Fe

+

Sth

es

:

F

+

erry

ee

i aie HST

was wae

x

i

Pe

LF

Step Five: IDA Emerges onto
the Scene

Following Dennis Ritchie's example, it has become typical to begin learning a new
programming language by creating the simple "Hello, World!" program. We aren't
going to sidestep this tradition. Let's evaluate the capabilities of IDA Pro using the
following example. (I recommend that you compile it using Microsoft Visual C++
6.0. Call "cl.exe first.cpp" from the command line to obtain results consistent
with those in this book.)
Listing 6. The Source Code of the first.cpp Program
#include
void

<iostream.h>

main ()

{

cout<<"Hello,

Sailor! \n";

}

The compiler will generate an executable file that is almost 40 KB, the majority
of which will be occupied with auxiliary, start, or library code! Attempts to disassemble the code using a disassembler such as W32Dasm won't be successful; the

listing will be more than 500 KB! You can imagine how much time will be eaten up,
especially if serious problems occupy dozens of megabytes of disassembled code.

Part I: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

64

a"

Let's try to disassemble this program using IDA. If the default settings are used,

the screen should look as follows upon completion of the analysis (although variations are possible depending on the version):

rs
HHANIBST

db

HGAVTBZE

db

SESPER2S

dh
ab
db

Sth

:

3

:
F026

¢

:
8

assume

proc

ds:

near

push

mov
push
push
push
mov

subsyste

fa

is

BR

initiali

art

;

reambuf
reambuf

LOUUBE

rooonoo12
LOODGOOSC
rogoaoo2s
rogoouan4

sub_0_401

suh_0_

rreambuf :
f
7]

ot

ag

|

§

a
, ios

Clong.i

streambuf ::sphackfailCin
streambuf =i sputhacke Cc
start. PRESS KEYPAD “+"

:

int>. PRESS
eek_dir.i

PRESS KE

ISS KEYP
B
ESS K
TO EXPAND]

C00

401006

COUOHOU25

BYTE

>

i
)

COGOHHOSC

ub_O

2D

UNCTION
FUNCTION
FUNCTION

.
coff

401 CEB

BYTES:

C

proc

) FUNCTION
>) FUNCTION
» FUNCTION
SED FUNCTION

__amsg_exit.
sub_@_401C
_f flush.
PRES
flush.
PRESS

KEYPAD "+" TO EXPAND]
KEYPAD “+"'
TO EXPAND]
4
AD "+" TO
EXPAND
KEYPAD
"+" TO EXPAND

near

finished

Fig. 5. The IDA Pro 4.0 command

line interface

Ali
KE
i

Step Five: IDA Emerges onto the Scene

65
al

aig

|-| gy ol ret[ | re

=(

ee -re >ar wl KIfo}

IDA ViewA |

is
eee

> [96666636
> [88686606

BYTES:
BYTES:

COLLAPSED
COLLAPSED

FUNCTION
FUNCTION

> [868660012

BYTES:

COLLAPSED

FUNCTION

> [8680005C

BYTES:

COLLAPSED

FUNCTION

>; [986666025

BYTES:

COLLAPSED

FUNCTION

> [868666D4

BYTES:

COLLAPSED

FUNCTION

streambuf::seekpos(long,int).
streambuf::pbackfail(int).

PRESS

KEYPAD

“+”

TO

PRESS

KEYPAD

“+”

TO EXP

streambu
:
:sputbackc(char).
f

PRESS

KEYPAD

“+"

T0

start.

EXPAND]

PRESS

KEYPAD

"+"

TO

EX

HHasicss

-text: 064010668.
88461688
G10 8B

5

SUB

-----+==--------

sub_6

461068

proc

86

ROU

T I NE

near

mou
push

esp,
i

-+----------52-45-L-

f

REF:

= et

.ydata: 8848717 8j0

[ebp- 138]
c
~26h]

call

$

sub_6
>
>
>
>

461066

[66666625
[86666024
[86666638
[8888665C

endp
BYTES:
BYTES:
BYTES:
BYTES:

—--

679936

streambuf ::setb(char *,char *,int). PRESS KEYPAD “
streambuf: :seekoff(long,ios::seek_dir,int).
PRESS

COLLAPSED
COLLAPSED
COLLAPSED
COLLAPSED

FUNCTION
FUNCTION
FUNCTION
FUNCTION

$UBR OUT

_amsg exit. PRESS KEYPAD “+” TO EXPAND]
sub_@ 461036. PRESS KEYPAD “+" TO EXPAND ]
_fflush. PRESS KEYPAD “+" TO EXPAND]
flush.
_
PRESS KEYPAD "+" TO EXPAND]

EN E -----4-------~+~--------=

total memory allocated

Loading IDP module C: \IDA41 O\PC.W32 for processor metapc...

Autoanalysis subsyste
§ Database

(AU: idle

itialized.

for file 'firstexe' isloaded

[Down (Disk: 337M 0040182C: start

Fig. 6. The IDA Pro 4.0 GUI interface

Beginning with version 3.8x (possibly earlier), collapsing support appeared in
IDA. This feature considerably simplifies code navigation, allowing us to remove
lines from screen that aren't of interest at the moment. By default, all library functions are collapsed.
You can expand a function by positioning the cursor on it and pressing the
<+> key on the numeric keypad. The <-> key is used to collapse the function.
After finishing analysis of the first.exe file, IDA places the cursor on the line
. text :00401B2c — the program's entry point. Many novice programmers mistakenly believe that programs written in C start executing from the main function. Ac-

tually, immediately after the file is loaded, control is passed to the start function
inserted by the compiler. It prepares the following global variables:_osver (the operating system build number), winmajor (the major version number of the operating system), winminor (the minor version number of the operating system), winver (the complete version of the operating system incorporating
winmajor and winminor), argc (the number of arguments on the command line),

argv (an array of pointers to the argument strings), and environ (an array of pointers to environment variable strings). The start function also initializes the heap and

Part |: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

66

calls the main function. After returning control, it completes the process using the
Exit function. The following program allows us to clearly demonstrate the process
of initializing variables performed by the start code:
Listing 7. The Source Code of the CRt0.demo.c Program
#include

<stdio.h>

#include

<stdlib.h>

void

main ()

{
smaks, ele

printf (">OS

Version: \t\t\t%d.%d\n\

>Build: \t\t\t%d\n\

>Number

of arguments: \t%d\n,"\

_winmajor,

_winminor,

fOrs

sarge;

(a=O;a<

osver,

__argc);

eat)

printf (">\tArgument

%02d:\t\t%s\n",

atl,

__argv[a]);

a=!a-1;

while(_environ[++a])
printf (">Number

while(a)

of

;
environment

printf(">\tVariable

ay

variables:%d\n",

a);

%d:\t\t%s\n",

env Lomi
sail) i.

The main function looks as though the application doesn't accept any arguments from the command line, but running the program proves the opposite. On
my computer, its (abridged) output looks like this:
Listing 8. The Result of Running the CRt0.demo.c Program (Abridged)
> OS Version:

rae)

>Build:

AOS

>Number

of arguments:

>Argument
>Number

01:

of environment

>Variable

it

29:

CRtO.demo
variables:

30

windir=C:

\WINNT

Step Five: IDA Emerges onto the Scene

67

There's no need to analyze the standard start code. The first task is to find
where control is passed to the main function. Unfortunately, a guaranteed solution
requires the complete analysis of the start function. Investigators have plenty of
tricks, but all of them are based on the implementations of particular compilers’;
these tricks can't be considered universal.
I recommend that you study the source code of the start functions of popular
compilers, contained in the CRt0.c file (Microsoft Visual C++) and in the cOw.asm

file (Borland C++). This will simplify analysis of the listing obtained from the disassembler. As an illustration, the start code of the first.exe program is shown in the
following listing as a result of W32Dasm disassembly:
Listing 9. The Start Code of first.exe Obtained Using W32Dasm
[ [RRR

RK KRKKK KKK

KK KK KKK

Program

Entry

Point

:00401B2C

55

push

ebp

:00401B2D

8BEC

mov

ebp,

:00401B2F

6AFF

push

FPREEEFEE

:00401B31

6870714000

push

00407170

:00401B36

68A8374000

push

004037A8

KK KKK

esp

:00401B3B

64A100000000

mov

eax,

:00401B41

50

push

eax

:00401B42

64892500000000

mov

:00401B49

83EC10

sub

:00401B4C

53

push

ebx

:00401B4D

56

push

esi

:00401B4E

57

push

edi

:00401B4F

8965E8

mov

dword

Reference

To:

:00401B52

FF1504704000

call

dword

ptr

:00401B58

33D2

ow

edx,

edx

:00401B5A

8AD4

mov

dl,

ah

:00401B5C

8915B0874000

mov

dword

KERNEL32.GetVersion,

KKK

Gword

ptr

dword

ptr

fs:[00000000],

esp,

00000010

ptr

fs: [00000000]

[ebp-18],

esp

esp

Ord:0174h

ptr

[00407004]

[004087B0],

edx

i For example, Microsoft Visual C, regardless of the main function prototype, always passes
three arguments to it: a pointer to the array of pointers to environment variables, a pointer
to the array of pointers to command line arguments, and the number of command line
arguments. All other functions Of the start code take a smaller number of arguments.

68

Part I: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

:00401B62

8BC8

mov

ecx,

:00401B64
:00401B6A

81E1FF000000
890DAC874000

and
mOvV

ecx, QQOO00FF
dword ptr [004087AC],

:00401B70

C1E108

shl

ecx,

08

:00401B73

O3CA

add

ecx,

edx

:00401B75

890DA8874000

mov

dword

ptr

:00401B7B

C1E810

shr

eax,

10

:00401B7E

A3A4874000

mov

dword

ptr

push

00000000

:00401B83 6A00

eax

:00401B85

E8D91B0000

Call

00403763

:00401B8A

59

pop

ecx

:00401B8B

85C0

test

eax,

:00401B8D

7508

jne

00401B97

:00401B8F

6A1C

push

OO000001C

:00401B91

E89A000000

call

00401C30

:00401B96

59

pop

CX

Referenced

by a

(U)nconditional

or

ecx

[004087A8],

ecx

[004087A4],

eax

\

eax
-

(C)onditional

Jump at Address: ©

:00401B8D(C)
:00401B97

8365FCO00

:00401B9B E8D70C0000

and

dword

call

00402877

ptr

[ebp-04],

00000000

x

Reference To: KERNELG2.GetConmandLineh, ‘Ord: 00CAh

:00401BA0 FF1560704000

call dword
ptr [00407060]
"mov.

ae

FE cok

aoeWD Ty

a ee
—

Se

.
ae

Step Five: IDA Emerges onto the Scene

:00401BE6

50

push

:00401BE7

E8E6140000

call

004030D2

:00401BEC

8B45EC

mov

eax,

GAword

ptr

[ebp-14]

:00401BEF

8B08

Mov

ecx,

dword

ptr

[eax]

:00401BF1

8B09

Mov

ecx,

Qword

ptr

[ecx]

:00401BF3

894DE0

mov

adword

ptr

:00401BF6

50

push

eax
eCx

69
=

eax

:00401BF7

Sal

push

:00401BF8

E8AA150000

Gall

004031A7

:00401BFD

a)

pop

eCcx

:00401BFE

59

pop

eCx

:00401BFF

€3

ieNE

[ebp-20],

ecx

IDA knows how to recognize library functions by their signatures. (Almost
the same

algorithm

is used

by anti-virus

software.)

Therefore,

disassemblers

strongly depend on the version and completeness of the package. Not all IDA Pro
versions are capable of working with programs generated by present-day compilers.
(See the %IJDA%/SIG/list file for the list of supported compilers.)
Listing 10. The Start Code of first.exe Obtained Using IDA Pro 4.01
00401B2C

start

proc

00401B2C

var 20

=

dword

jee

0a

00401B2C

Vane le

=

dword

ies

Saal

00401B2C

var 18

=

dword

jeiene, llteisl

00401B2C

var

14

=

dword

ptr

-14h

00401B2C

var4

=

dword

ptr

-4

near

00401B2C

00401B2C
00401B2C

push

ebp

00401B2D

mov

ebp,

00401B2F

push

OFFFFFFFFh

00401B31

push

offset

stru_407170

00401B36

push

offset

__ except handler3

00401B3B

mov

eax,

large

fs:0

00401B41

push

00401B42

mov

eax
large

fs:0,

esp

00401B49
00401B4C

sub
push

esp,

10h

00401B4D

push,

esi

ebx

esp

—

Part I: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

00401B4E
00401B4F
00401B52
00401B58
00401B5A
00401B5C
00401B62
00401B64
00401B6A
00401B70
00401B73
00401B75
00401B7B
00401B7E
00401B83
00401B85
00401B8A
00401B8B
00401B8D
00401B8F

00401897

[ebpt+var 18],

call

ds:GetVersion

xOr

edx,

mov
mov

olper-val
dword_4087B0,
eCcx, eax

mov

00401891
~ 00401BK

edi

push

Mov

esp

edx

and

ecx,

mov

dword

shl

ecx,

8
edx

edx

OFFh

4087AC,

ecx

add

ecx,

mov

dword_4087A8,

shr

eax,

10h

mov

dword

4087A4,

push

0

call

Jsheap_iaie

pop
test

ecx
eax,

;
eax

jnz
push

short
1Ch

loc_401B97

geil

er ts
hayLek ma Teeter.

= subs. 401030.
COPY

pS

daa

macy

ive. ea

resbeige cage a

a4 vt
aye

ecx
eax

ag:

eae

PIAS fast_error_exit
TEs

Fars

BS:

teat bat gelnicey

ee

:

ea

i

~

Step Five: IDA Emerges onto the Scene

71
>

OO401BEC

;

aT

=

ao

=

=

=

XREF:

_xrdata:00407170v0

i

=

00401BEC
00401BEC

loc 401BEC:

; DATA

00401BEC

mov

eax,

[ebp-14h]

00401BEF

Mov

ecx,

[eax]

O0401BF1

Mov

ecx a ilecx]

00401BF3

mov

[ebp-20h],

00401BF6

push

eax

00401BF7

push

eCx

O00401BF8

call

_

00401BFD

pop

ecx

O0401BFE

pop

eCx

O0401BFF

retn

OO401BFF

start

endp

ecx

XcptFilter

; sp =

-34h

IDA Pro successfully copes with the above example, acknowledged by the line
"Using

FLIRT

signature:

VC v2.0/4.x/5.0

runtime” in the message box.

“<IDA - first.exe

in
SED
APSED
IPSED

JLLAPSED
JLLAPSED
JLLAPSED

sub_461066

sub

sub_491CEB

Om

signature
t

FUNCTION
FUNCTION
FUNCTION

=
=
setb (char
-seekoffF {long
ekpos(long, int).

ed
:pbackfail {int}. PRESS
Kf
streambu
utbacke(char). PRESS KEYPAD
start. PRESS KEYPAD “+” TO EXPAND]

near

4610086

{O68 B00: 5

g FLIRT

proc

Il
iew-A
ene
=ere
FUNCTION
streamb
FUNCTION
b

BYTES:
sy
;

}

IPSED FUNCTION
YPSED
FUNCTION
.SED FUNCTION
IPSED FUNCTION

— amsg_exit.
PRESS KEYPAD
sub_401030
3S Kf
ff
d.
S
i
— flush.
PRESS
KEYPAD “+”

near

v2

.6/

.8 runtime

os $

Fig. 7. Loading the signature library

“+” TO EXPAND]
“ T0 EXPANDI
10 EXPAND!
TO EXPAND]

~

72

Part |: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

The disassembler has successfully determined the names of all the functions
called by the start code, except the one located at the address 0x0401BDB. Knowing
that three arguments are passed, and exit is called upon the return from the function, we can assume this exception is main.

There are several ways of getting to the address 0x0401000 to see the main function, including scrolling the screen using the arrows, or pressing the <G> key and
entering the required address in the dialog box that appears. However, it's easier
and faster to use the navigation system built into IDA Pro. If you place the cursor
on a name, constant, or expression and press the <Enter> key, IDA automatically
goes to the required address.
In this case, we need to place the cursor on the string sub_401000 (an argument
of the call instruction). Press the <Enter> key. The disassembler window should
look like this:
00401000

;----------=---—-=

Sy UBS

ARO MOM AG! A OS

ead

00401000
00401000

; Attributes:

bp-based

frame

00401000
00401000

sub

401000

proc

near

7 CODE

00401000

push

ebp

00401001

mov

ebp,

00401003

push

offset

00401008

mov

ecx,

0040100D

call

XREF:

starttAFYp

; "Hello,

Sailor!\n"

esp
aHelloSailor

Offset

dword

408748

??6ostream@@QAERAAVO@PBDG@Z

0040100D

;

7;ostream: :operator<<(char

00401012

pop

00401013

retn

const

*)

ebp

00401013 sub 401000 endp
The disassembler recognized a string variable and has given it the meaningful
name: aHelloSailor. For clarity, in the comment on the right, it has given the
original contents: "Hello, Sailor!\n". If you place the cursor on aHelloSailor
and press the <Enter> key, IDA will go to the required string:
00408040

aHelloSailor

db 'Hello,

Sailor!',0Ah,0

; DATA XREF:

sub_401000+3To

The comment DATA XREF: sub_401000+3%o is known as a cross-reference: In the
third line of the sub_401000 procedure, a call was made to an offset address. The "o"
stands for offset, and the arrow directed upward specifies the relative position of
the cross-reference.

Step Five: IDA Emerges onto the Scene

73

If you place the cursor on the sub _401000+3 expression and press the <Enter>
key, IDA Pro will go to the following line:
00401003

push

offset

aHelloSailor

; "Hello,

Sailor! \n"

Pressing the <Esc> key cancels the previous move and returns the cursor to its
initial position (like the Back command in a Web browser). An offset to the string

"Hello, Sailor!\n" is passed to the procedure ??6ostream@@QAEAAVO@PBD@z, the
<< operator in C++. The strange name comes from the limitation on characters
that can be used in names of library functions. Compilers automatically mangle
such names, transforming them into gobbledygook suitable only for operation with
the linker. Few novice programmers suspect such hidden "machinations."
To facilitate analysis of code, IDA Pro displays the "correct" names in the comments, but it can be forced to show demangled names everywhere. To do this, we

need to select the Demangled names item from the Options menu, then set the

Names radio button in the dialog box that pops up; after that, the call to the << operator will appear as follows:
0040100D

call

ostream:

:operator<<(char

const

*)

At this point, the analysis of the first.cpp application is complete. We only have
to rename the sub 401000 function to main. For this, we need to position the cursor
on the 0x0401000 string (the function's start address), press the <N> key, and enter
"main" in the dialog box that opens. The result should look like this:
DOGO

O00) 6

SaaS aaa

SSS

SUBROUTINE

-----------------=-------

00401000
00401000

; Attributes:

bp-based

main

proc

frame

00401000
00401000

near

00401000

push

ebp

00401001

mov

ebp,

; CODE

00401003

push

offset

mov

ecx,

0040100D

call

ostream:

00401012

pop

ebp

00401013

retn
main

endp

start+AFlp

; "Hello,

Sailor!\n"

esp

00401008

00401013

XREF:

aHelloSailor

offset

dword

408748

:operator<<(char

ate

const

*)

Part I: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

74

Compare this to W32Dasm. (Only the contents of the main function are given.)
:00401000

55

push

ebp

:00401001

8BEC

mov

ebp,

Possible

StringData

Ref

from

Data

Obj

esp

->"Hello,

Sailor!"

:00401003

6840804000

push

00408040

:00401008
:0040100D

B948874000
E8ABO00000

mov
call

ecx, 00408748
004010BD

:00401012

5D

pop

ebp

:00401013

C3

ret

Another important advantage of IDA is the ability to disassemble encrypted
programs. In the example /SRC/Crypt.com, a static encryption method, frequently
found with "wrapper" protections, was used. This simple trick "dazzles" most disassemblers. For example, processing the Crypt.com file using Sourcer results in:
Crypt

LOC

7E5B: 0100

AOR

Steacita

7OU0Os

esa

TEMES OAMOSY
(ESBS01L05

meat

ou OG

add

ARIE NG
= BOs

L4BE

SaO

jmp

GL.

7*No

entry

Es

point

Mov

cx,

14BEh

to

code

7E5B:0108

01 AD

5691

add

ds:data

le[di],

bp

;

7E5B:010C

80

66

xor

DYLESDEr

SSI

OO

wer

(ESB: OL0ER
7E5B:0110

46
E2 FA

inc
loop

si
$-4

7E5B:0112

FF E6

jmp
7*No
sbb

34

7E5B:114

18

00

7E5B3116
7E5B:119
7E5B:11F
7H5B:125
7E5B:12B
(Na ISRINSHE

D2
6H
03
07
6B
Wah

6F DC
67 AB 47
OA OA 09
OF OA 09
6C 42 E8
foyd, wiehge (OL

7H5B:137

2B CE

Crypt

A5
4A
14
00
(aly
F3 A4 C3

shr

2E
35
47
00
15\7)

poop

Si
Pe
entry point to
[bx+si], al

(7E5B:5691=0)

Eily cxS=0

code

byte ptr [bx-24h],cl ; Shift w/zeros
6Eh, 67h, OABh, 47h, OA5h, 2Eh
03h, OAh, OAh, 09h, 4Ah, 35h
O7h, OFh, OAh, 09h, 14h, 47h
6Bh, 6Ch, 42h, E8h, 00h, OOh
Io
San Beh, OOh;, Oli. 57h
& 2Bh,
GEEE&
CEhy~F3h, A4h, C3h

fill

endp

Sourcer failed to disassemble half of the code, leaving it as a dump, and it incorrectly disassembled the other half! The ump st instruction at line :0x103 jumps

Step Five: IDA Emerges onto the Scene

75

to the address :0x106. (When the COM file is loaded, the value in the sz register is
equal to 0x100; therefore, after the ADD si, 6 instruction is executed, the sz register contains 0x106.) However, the instruction following the vp is at address 0x105!
The source code has a dummy byte inserted in this location, which leads the disassembler astray. That byte is interpreted as the next instruction, leading to a shift in
the code to be disassembled.
Start:
addi,

si,

jm

3sy

db

OB9H

lea

si,

<6

;
end

; to

the

beginning

of

the

encrypted

fragment

Sourcer is unable to predict register change points. After encountering
the gvp SI instruction, it continues disassembling, silently assuming that instructions are sequential. It's possible to create a file of definitions that would indicate a
byte of data is located at address 0x105, but this is inconvenient.
In contrast to Sourcer-like disassemblers, IDA was designed as an interactive,

user-friendly environment. IDA doesn't make assumptions; if difficulties arise, it
asks the user for help. Therefore, after encountering a register change to an unknown address, it stops further analysis. This means the result of analyzing the
Crypt.com file looks like this:
seg000:0100

start

seg000:0100

seg000:0103
seg000:0103

proc

near

add

Sip

jmp

si

start

endp

sp

ee

See

db

OB9h

;

OBeh

; -

6

seg000:0103
Seg 0002 O03

seg000:0105

= Sa

seg000:0106

db

seg000:0107

db:

Se

oS

eee

ee

(i4h=;

seg000:0108

db

alae

seg000:0109

db

OAdhiv;

seg000:010A

dba

olny

SN

We can help the disassembler by specifying the jump address. In this situation,
novice users usually bring the cursor to the corresponding line and press the <C>
key, forcing IDA to disassemble the code from that position to the function's end.
However, such a solution is erroneous; we still don't know where the branch in line

:0x103 points, or how the code at address :0x106 receives control.

76

Part |: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

The correct solution is to add a cross-reference that would link line :0x103 to
line :0x106. For this, we need to select Cross references from the View menu.
Then, in the dialog box that opens, we need to fill in the from and to fields with the
values seg000:0103 and seg000: 0106, respectively.

As a result, the disassembler output should look as follows. (A bug in IDA
4.01.300 means adding a new cross-reference does not always result in automatic
disassembling.)
seg000:0100
seg000:0100

public
start

proc

start

near

seg000:0100

add

Seip

seg000:0103

jmp

si

seg000:0103

start

endp

seg000:0103

Seg OCH Od

:

Obi) aie

a en

seg000:0105

SS
db

a

ee

ee

OB9h

seg000:0106 ; -----------------------------------------------------------

seg000:0106

.

~ seg000:0106 loc_0 106:
|
seg000:0106
mov

; CODE XREF: start+3tu
71a

seg000:0109

lodsw

seg000:010A

xchg

ax,

= ie

seg000:010B

Pushok

. 8%

CX

=

seg000:010C

seg000:010C loc_0 10¢:

500

eee

>

CODE XREF:

Ser ieSoyer pen ‘tat eer

sae gidin~ SSinat a ReaD!
ae

ee =

AGS

>
a

hae
.

Step Five: IDA Emerges onto the Scene

77

navigation. Place the cursor on line :0x103, press the <:> key, and enter a comment
in the dialog box that opens (for example, "jump to address 0106"). The display will
change as follows:
seg000:0103

jmp

Sal

; Jump

to

address

0106

Such a comment makes it possible to jump to the specified address: Just place
the cursor on 0106 and press the <Enter> key. Note that IDA Pro doesn't recognize
hexadecimal format in the C style (0x106) or in the MASM\TASM style (0106n).

What does the value 114h represent at line :0x106 — a constant or an offset?
To figure this out, we need to analyze the Lopsw instruction. Since executing it results in loading the word located at address ps: si into the ax register, the offset is
loaded into the st register.
seg000:0106

mov

seg000:0109

lodsw

si,

114h

Pressing the <O> key transforms the constant to an offset. The disassembled
code will appear like this:
seg000:0106

mov

seg000:0109

lodsw

seg000:0114

unk
_0 114

si,

offset -unk 0.114

db

18h

seg000:0115

db

0

; DATA

seg000:0116

db

OD2h

pouty

seg000:0117

db

6Fh

FEXe)

XREF:

seg000:0106To

;

IDA Pro automatically created a new name — unk_0 114 — that refers to an
unknown variable with a size of 1 byte. But the Lopsw instruction loads a word into
the ax register; therefore, we need to go to line :0144 and press the <D> key twice
to obtain the following code:
seg000:0114
seg000:0116

word_0

114 dw 18h

; DATA

XREF:

seg000:0106to

ley AONE yZiai eae

What does the word
0 144 location contain? The following code will help us
find out:
awe
seg000:0106

mov

seg000:0109

.lodsw

si,

offset

word_0_114

78

Part I: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

seg000:010A

xchg

ax,

seg000:010B

push

si

CX

seg000:010C

seg000:010C

; CODE

0 10C:
loc

seg000:010C

One

byte

seg000:010F

ia

si

seg000:0110

loop

oc TOS LOC

ptr

[si],

XREF:

seg000:0110+5

66h

In line :0x10a, the ax register value is moved to the cx register, then used by
the LOOP LOC _010¢ instruction as a loop counter. The loop body is a simple decoder: The xor instruction decrypts a byte pointed to by the si register, and the
INC SI instruction moves the pointer to the next byte. Therefore, the word_0 144
location contains the number of bytes to be decrypted. Place the cursor on it, press
the <N> key, and give it a better name ("BytesToDecrypt," for example).
There's one more unconditional register jump after the decryption loop.
seg000:0112

jmp

si

To find out where it transfers control, we need to analyze the code and determine the sr register's contents. For this, the debugger is often used: We set
a breakpoint on line 0x112 and, when the debugger window pops up, look for
the register value. IDA Pro generates MAP files that contain the debugger information especially for this purpose. In particular, to avoid memorizing the numerical
values of all the addresses being tested, each of them can be assigned easily remembered names. For example, if you place the cursor on line seg000:0112, then press
the <N> key and enter "BreakHere," the debugger will be able to calculate the return address automatically using its name.
To create a MAP file, click on Produce output file in the File menu and select
Produce MAP file from the drop-down submenu, or press the <Shift>+<F10> key
combination. In either case, a dialog box will appear, which allows us to specify the

data to include in the MAP file: information on segments, names automatically
generated by IDA Pro (1oc_0_106, sub_0x110, etc.), and demangled names. The contents of the MAP file obtained should be as follows:
Start

Stop

Length

Name

Class

00100H

0013BH

0003CH

seg000

CODE

Address

Publics

by Value

0000:0100

start

0000:0112

BreakHere

Step Five: IDA Emerges onto the Scene

0000:0114
Program

79

BytesToDecrypt
entry

point

at

0000:0100

This format is supported by most debuggers, including the most popular one:
SoftIce. It includes the msym utility, launched by specifying the MAP file on the
command line. The SYM file obtained should be placed in the directory where the
program being debugged is located, then loaded from the loader without specifying
the extension

(WLDR

Crypt, for example). Otherwise, the character information

won't be loaded.
Then, we need to set a breakpoint using the bpx BreakHere command, and quit
the debugger with the x command. In a second, the debugger window will pop up
again, informing us that the processor has reached a breakpoint. Looking at
the registers displayed at the top of the screen by default, we can see that sr
equals 0x12E.
This value can also be calculated mentally, without using the debugger. The mov
instruction at line 0x106 loads the offset 0x114 into the st register. From here, the
LODSW instruction reads the quantity of decrypted bytes — 0x18 — and the SI register
is increased by the word size (2 bytes). Hence, when the decryption cycle is complete, the sz value will be 0x114+0x18+0x2 = 0x12E.
After calculating the jump address in the line 0x112, let's create a corresponding
cross-reference (from 0x122 to 0x12E) and add a comment to line 0x112 ("Jump to

address 0125"). Creating the cross-reference automatically disassembles the code
from the address seg000:012E to the end of the file.
seg000:012E

loc
0 12E:

seg000:012E

; CODE

XREF:

Call

s+3
Cx

seg000:0131

pop

seg000:0132

pop

Sa

seg000:0133

mov

di,

seg000:0136

jsorsiah

= lay

seg000:0137

sub

Cx,

seg000:0139

repe

movsb

seg000:013B

retn

seg000:0112Tu

100h
om

The cALL $+3 instruction ($ designates the current value of the IP instruction
pointer) pushes the IP contents to a stack, from which it can be extracted into any
general-purpose register. In Intel 80x86 microprocessors, the IP register cannot be
addressed directly, and only instructions that change the course of execution can
read its value, including call.

es

We can supplement lines 0x12E and 0x131 with a comment — Mov cx, IP —
or we can calculate and substitute the direct value — Mov cx, 0x131.

80

Part |: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

The Pop siz instruction at line 0x132 pops a word off the stack and places
it in the st register. Scrolling the disassembler upward, you will see the PUSH SI instruction at line 0x10B. This is paired with the pop st instruction, and pushes the offset of
the first decrypted byte to the stack. Now, the meaning of the subsequent Mov DI,
0x100\SUB Cx, and SI\REPE MOVSB instructions is clear: They move the beginning of
the decrypted fragment to the address starting at offset 0x100. Such an operation is
characteristic for "wrapper" protections superimposed on a compiled file that should be
"reset" to its "native" addresses before it is launched.
Before relocation, the cx register is loaded with the length of the block being

copied. (The length is calculated by subtracting the offset of the first decrypted byte
from the offset of the second instruction of the code performing relocation.)
The true length is 3 bytes shorter; consequently, we need to subtract three from
that value. However, the difference has no effect: The contents of memore locations
at addresses beyond the end of the decrypted fragment aren't defined, and those locations may contain anything.
The 0x136:PUSH DI and 0x13B:RETN instructions are an analog of the CALL DI instruction: PUSH pushes the return address on the stack, and RETN extracts it and passes
control to the corresponding address. Knowing the pr value (0x100), we can add a
cross-reference (from :0x13B to :0x100) and a comment to line : 0x13B — "Jump to address 0x100." However, after relocation, different code is located at the indicated ad-

dresses! Therefore, it's more logical to add the cross-reference from :0x13B to :0x116
and the comment "Jump to address 0x116."
After the new cross-reference is created, IDA will try to disassemble the encrypted code. The following will result:
seg000:0116

7 CODE

XREF:

seg000:0116

loc
0 116:

shr

byte

ptr

seg000:013BYu
[bx-24h],

seg000:0119

outsb

seg000:011A
seg000:011C

stos
inc

word
di

ptr

es: [edi]

seg000:011D

movsw

seg000:011E

add

excess

seg000:0121

or

ely

seg000:0123

dec

dx

seg000:0124

xor

ax,

seg000:0127

or

Cla

oxeaa |

seg000:0129

adc

al,

47h

cl

(bpts4ul

derek |
sOr07h

56900070129; —————
ee

eee

Step Five: IDA Emerges onto the Scene

seg000:012B

db

6Bh

; k

seg000:012C

db

Glow

Heal

seg000:012D

db

AZ

ee,

81

seg000:012E;

Immediate disassembling of the encrypted code is impossible: It must be decrypted first. Most disassemblers aren't able to modify analyzed code on the fly;
they require it to be decrypted completely beforehand. In practice, however, things
are different. Before decrypting, we need to understand the decryption algorithm
by analyzing the accessible part of the file. Then, we can quit the disassembler,
decrypt the "secret" fragment, load the file into the disassembler again, and continue analyzing it until the next encrypted fragment occurs. We'll have to repeat the
"quit-decrypt-load-analyze" cycle.
IDA allows us to solve the same task with less effort and without quitting the
disassembler. This can be achieved because of virtual memory. We can imagine
IDA is a "transparent" virtual machine, operating on the physical memory of the
computer. To modify memory, we need to know the address. This consists of a pair
of numbers: a segment address and an offset.
On the left side, each line's offset and segment name are given (seg000:0116,
for example). We can get the base address of a segment from its name: Open the
Segments window and select the Segments item from the View menu.
Ee ———
||

Name

|| seg000

Program Segmentation =
Align Base Type Cls

Start

End

00000100

0000013C

byte

1000

pub CODE

32es

ss_

ds

N

FEFFF

1000

FFFF

|

[1]
A

00010100

0001013C

|

v
Fig. 8. The Segments window

The required address is in the Base column. (It is in bold and underlined
in Fig. 8.) Any location of the segment can be addressed using the
[segment:offset] construction. Memory cells can be read and modified
using
the
Byte
and
patchByte
functions,
respectively.
Calling
a=Byte ([0x1000,0x100]) reads the cell at 0x100 offset in the segment with the
base address of 0x1000; calling PatchByte ([0x1000,0x100],0x27) writes the
value 0x27 in the memory cell at the 0x100 offset in the segment with the base address
of 0x1000. As their names indicate, the functions work one byte at a time.
These two functions and familiarity with the C language are enough to write
a decrypting script. The IDA-C implementation doesn't follow completely the ANSI

Part I: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

82

C standard. In particular, IDA doesn't allow the variable type to be set; the decom-

piler automatically defines it with the auto keyword when it's used for the first
time. For example, auto Myvar,

sO declares two variables: Myvar and sO.

To create a script, we need to press the <Shift>+<F2> key combination, or select IDC Command

from the File menu. Then, we must enter the source code of

the program into the dialog box that pops up.
=) Notepad
|

Enter

| auto

IDC

statement
(s)

|

a;

A

|

| for (a=0x116; a<0x12E; at+)
|| PatchByte([0x1000, al],
| Byte([0x1000, a])*0x66);

a
E
_

|
|

El
|

|

E

Cancel

|
|
|
|

_
a
i
H

error

|

OK
a

|
gg |
|

|
|
Py |

|
|

Help

a

g|

|

Fig. 9. An embedded script editor

Listing 11. The Source Code of a Decryption Script
auto

a;

for

(a=0x116;

a<Ox12E;

PatchByte([0x1000,

a],

at+)

Byte([0x1000,

a])*0x66);

Explanation
As shown, the decryption algorithm sequentially converts the bytes of the encrypted fragment using the XOR 0x66 operation. (This operation is highlighted in bold.)
seg000:010C

xor

byte

seg000:010F

inc

si

seg000:0110

loop

loc

ptr

0_10C

[si],

66h

Step Five: IDA Emerges onto the Scene

The

encrypted

to address
a<Ox12E;

fragment

seg000:0x12E.
a

++)

itself

starts

Therefore,

from

address

decryption

PatchByte([0x1000,a],

seg000:0x116

in C looks

like this:

and
for

83

proceeds
(a=0x116;

Byte([0x1000,a]*0x66) ;

To execute the script, press the <Enter> key (in IDA version 3.8x or higher), or
the <Ctrl>+<Enter> key combination (in earlier versions). After executing the
script, the disassembler window should show the code as it is in Listing 12.
If you encounter an error, you may have used the improper character case
(IDA is case sensitive), the wrong syntax, or a base address that does not equal
0x1000. (Call the Segments window again to check its value.) Place the cursor on

line seg000:0116 and press the <U> key to delete the previous disassembling results, then press the <C> key to disassemble the decrypted code anew.
Listing 12. The Output of the Decryption Script
sego000116

loc
OF 1163

7; CODE

seg000:0116

Mov

Ella,

seg000:0118

mov

dx,

seg000:011B

int

21h

XREF:

108h
7; DOS

—

seg000:011B

; DS:DX

seg000:011B

pebyae)

seg000:011D

PRINT

(string

retn

seg000:011E

dios

48hs7

5H

AeSier FP 1S)

seg000:011F

ley

seg000:0120

dbs 4 6Che;—

seg000:0121

dpie6Cha

r= I

seg000:0122

db=

GE

+750
aed

1

seg000:0123

alow

AC

seg000:0124

doa

ZOns;

seg000:0125

Gizmo

She

ies

seg000:0126

ain

6h

ya

seg000:0127

elo

@elays 7s

seg000:0128

role}

oe@iaheary™

alk

seg000:0129

Cle

sauclialges

16)

seg000:012A

dbisii2hery

seg000:012B

(ols) UeCalla pee!

seg000:013Biu

i

STRING

terminated

84

Part |: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

“(ODN

F

db

OAh

;

Gish

eZAheer

seg000:012C

ole)

seg000:012D
seg000:012E

eS

GISTo(OIONOVSNO Neen fh a

The chain of characters beginning at address seg000:011£ can be converted
to a readable string: Place the cursor on it, and press the <A> key. The disassembler
window will look like this:
seg000:0116 loc_0 116:
; CODE XREF: seg000:013Biu
seg000:0116

mov

ani

hes

seg000:0118

mov

dx,

108h

seg000:011B

int

21h

; DOS

—

seg000:011B

; DS:DX

seg000:011B

; by $)

seg000:011D

seg000:012E

PRINT

STRING

(string

terminated

retn

;

Prior to calling interrupt 0x21, the Mov AH, 9 instruction at line :0116 prepares
the au register: It selects the function that will display the string whose offset is written in the px register by the next instruction. To successfully assemble the listing,
we need to replace the constant 0x108 with a corresponding offset. However, when
assembling the code (before relocation), the string that will be displayed is located
in another place! To solve this problem, you could create a new segment and copy the
decrypted code to it; this would simulate the relocation of the working code.

Explanation
The new segment, MySeg, can have any base address if there's no overlap with the seg000

segment. The initial address of a segment is set equal to a value that the offset makes
0x100 the first byte. The difference between the first and last addresses is the segment
length. This can be calculated by subtracting the offset of the beginning of the decrypted
fragment from the offset of its end: 0x13B - 0x116 = 0x25.

To create a new segment, select Segments from the View menu and press

the Insert button in the dialog box. Another dialog box similar to the following one

will appear:

Step Five: IDA Emerges onto the Scene

|

Start

address

and

End

address

|
| Segment

name

end

address

> Start

should

be

valid.

85

|

address

|

MySeg

Ll

|

|| Start address
| End
address

0x20100
0x20125

[iJ Cc-notation:
bss
hex is (0x...

|
|

| Base

0x2000

Ll

in paragraphs

|

Ll

(class

| Class

|

{ ] 32-bit

|

any

text) |

segment

OK g
Get

|

is

|

Cancel gy
RE ae

Fig. 10. Creating

Fl — Help g
SePoeR Cav TeERR

|

|

a new segment

We can use the following script to copy the required fragment to the segment
we just created:
Listing 13. The Source Code of the Copying Script
auto

for

a;

(a=0x0;

a<0x25;

at+)

PatchByte([0x2000,

at0x100],

Byte([0x1000,

at0x116]));

To enter this script, press the <Shift>+<F2> key combination again. The previous script will be lost. (IDA doesn't allow us to work simultaneously with more
than one script.) After the operation is complete, the disassembler screen will look
like this:

Listing 14. The Result of Executing the Copying Script
MySeg:0100

segment

byte

MySeg: 0100

MySeg

assume

cs:MySeg

public

MySeg: 0100

;org

MySeg: 0100

assume es:nothing,

''

usel6

100h

MySeg:0100

db

MySeg:0101

db

MySeg: 0102

db OBAh

OB4h

;

SF

;

ss:nothing,

ds:nothing,

fs:nothing,

gs:nothing

Part I: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

86
>

ie

MySeg: 0103

MySeg: 0104

iby ie

MySeg: 0105
MySeg: 0106

Obici

MySeg: 0107

OCshy

&

MySseg: 0108
MySeg: 0109
MySeg: 010A

oO (@)HT

MySeg: 010B
MySeg: 010C

OO
Orr

Myseg: 010D

NO Q ay

MySeg: 010E

Myseg: O10F
MySeg: 0110

MySeg: Ogee
MySeg: Oa.
MySeg: (alas
MySeg: 0114
MySeg: OLUS

MySeg: 0116
MySeg: 0117

Peete
ec
ES
sc
ESE
SSS
ES
EE
Go

MySeg: 0118
Myseg: 0118

MySeg

ends

Now, we need to create a cross-reference from :seg000:013B to :MySeg:0x100,

converting the chain of characters to a readable string. For this, bring the cursor to
line MySeg: 0108 and press the <A> key. The disassembler window should change to

the following:

.

Listing 15. The Result of Disassembling the Copied Fragment

MySeg:0100 loc 1000 100:

; CODE XREF: seg000:013BTu

MySeg: 0100

mov

ah,

9

MySeg: 0102

mov

dx,

108h

MySeg: 0105

int

21h

MySeg: 0105

i DS:DX
retn

MySeg: 0107

MySeg:0107

> DOS — PRINT STRING

;

(string terminated by S$)

Step Five: IDA Emerges onto the Scene

MySeg:0108

aHelloSailorS

MySeg: 0108
MySeg:0118

db

'Hello,

Sailor!',

ODh,

87

OAh

dons
MySeg

ends

As a result of all these operations, the offsets loaded in the px register are the
same. (In the code, they are in bold.) If we bring the cursor to constant 108h and

press the <Ctrl>+<O> key combination, it will change into an offset.
Listing 16. Converting a Constant into an Offset
MySeg: 0102

mov

dx, offset aHelloSailorS

; "Hello,

MySeg: 0105

int

21h

; DOS — PRINT STRING

MySeg: 0105

; DS:DX

MySeg: 0107

Sailor! \r\ns"

(string temminated by S$)

retn

MySeg:0107

7 ————————————__—_—_____—__—

MySeg:0108

aHelloSailorS

db

‘Hello,

Sailor!',

ODh,

OAh

; DATA XREF:

MySeg:01020

The listing obtained is convenient for analysis, but it isn't ready for assembling:
No assembler is capable of encrypting the required code. That can be performed
manually, but IDA allows us to do the same without using any other tools.
Our demonstration will be more to the point if we make some changes
to the file — add waiting for a keystroke, for example. To do this, we can use
the assembler integrated into IDA First, however, we should separate the boundaries of MySeg to add some space for new code.

Select Segments from the View menu. In the window that opens, move the
cursor to the MySeg line. Press the <Ctrl>+<E> key combination to open the dialog
box for setting segment properties that contain, among other fields, the last address
to be changed. We do not need to set an exact value; we can expand the segment
with a small surplus over the space required to accommodate the planned changes.
If we try to add the code xor AX,AX;INT

16h to the program, it would overwrite

the beginning of the string "Hello, Sailor!". Therefore, we need to move it
downward slightly beforehand (i-e., into higher addresses). We can do so with
a script such as:
for

(a=0x108;

a<0x11A;

a++)

PatchByte([0x2000,

at+0x20],

Byte( [Ox2000,

a]);

88

Part |: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

Explanation
y The
declaration of variable a is omitted for brevity. The relocation, as usual, is specified with
a surplus to avoid the need for precise calculations. It occurs from left to right because the
initial and target fragments do not overlap.

Place the cursor on line :0128 and press the <A> key to transform the chain of
characters to a form convenient for reading. Then, bring the cursor to line :0102
and select the Assembler from the Path program submenu of the Edit menu. Enter
the instruction Mov Dx,128h

(where 128h is the new offset of the string) and imme-

diately make it an offset by pressing the <Ctrl>+<O> key combination.
Now, enter the new code. Place the cursor on the ret

instruction, call the as-

sembler again, and enter xoR aAx,AX <ENTER> INT 16h <Enter> RET <Enter>
<Esc>. It wouldn't be a bad idea to clean up a little: Reduce the segment size to the
one used, and move the line containing "Hello, Sailor!" upward, closer to the
code.

Explanation
The Disable Address option in the Segment Properties window is called by pressing the
<Alt>+<S> key combination. If it is set, you can decrease its size and delete addresses beyond the
end of the segment.

If everything is done correctly, the final result should look as follows:
Listing 17. The Final Disassembled Code
seg000:0100

; File Name

: F:\IDAN\SRC\Crypt.com

seg000:0100

; Format

: MS-DOS

seg000:0100

; Base

1000h

Address:

COM-file

Range:

10100h-1013Ch

Loaded

length:

seg000:0100
seg000:0100

seg000:0100

; =======Sss==s=SssSSSSsSSsSSSSSSSS5555555555555=5==

seg000:0100

seg000:0100

; Segment

seg000:0100

seg000

type:

Pure

code

segment

byte

seg000:0100

assume

cs:seg000

seg000:0100

org

seg000:0100

assume

seg000:0100

public

'CODE'

usel6

100h

es:nothing,

ss:nothing,

ds:seg000

3Ch

Step Five: IDA Emerges onto the Scene

seg000:0100.

.7¢..——--=—-—---—-----

SAO) SE SRO

Tae TN

Ba

89

rere

seg000:0100

seg000:0100
seg000:0100
seg000:0100

public
start

proc

start

near

seg000:0100

add

Sipe

seg000:0103

jmp

Sa

seg000:0103

start

6

; jump

to address

0106

endp

seg000:0103
seg000:0103

; oRene
ar 5ae

seg000:0105

seg000:0106

eam

TS - we Meee

Glo) (Ola,

8

5)

a

S'S ara

Ge

nee

; ----------~-------------~--~-----~--------------=-=---=-=------

seg000:0106

mov

seg000:0109

~

seg000:010B

seg000:010C

si,

offset

xchg

ax,

CX

push

So

=

peg’

:

seg000:010C loc_0 10C:

ia

seg000:010C

seg000:010F

=

byte=per

Sine

si

loop

seg000:0112 ——
5
seg000:01122 BEeatWers?

ee

os
ost

on?

seg000: OL12..

x

jmp

S

;

a
bi

ee

;
si

000: pen ih
ge s SORRRSTE

dw 18h

x4

EE

Fig

is

66h

Brea
tthe =:
; Jump to the 012E address
ae

ee
oe

y

ee

oF

-seg000:0114 By esToDecrypt

(si),

= loc_0 10¢

Se
a

5

; CODE XREF: seg000:0110V;

xor

seg000:0110

€

BytesToDecrypt

lodsw

seg000:010A

-seg000: 0112

amis

|

Ke

int

Sake)

eee

it«s

_

90

Part |: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

SOUZH

; CODE

EOC
UOmLZ Br

:012E

call

$+3

sokhsul

pop

Cx

HOM 32

pop

si

BOnUSis)

mov

ai)

sOnS6

push

di

+0137

sub

eh

OHS)

repe

movsb

XREF:

seg000:01124u

LOO

ek

retn

:013B
:013B

seg000

ends

:013B

:0100

; Segment

:0100

MySeg

type:

Regular

segment

byte

public

:0100

assume

cs:MySeg

:0100

;org

''

usel6

100h

:0100
:0100

loc _ 1000

; CODE XREF:

100:

:0100

Mov

ahnpe9

:0102

mov

dx,

20102

offset

; "Hello,

:0105

int

xor

20109

int

Sailor!\r\n$"
7 DOS

; DS:DX

:0107

aHelloSailor0

21h

ROMOS

ax,

seg000:013BTu

(string

—

PRINT

terminated

ax

16h

70109

; KEYBOARD

20109

; WAIT

:0109

; Return:

—

READ

CHAR

FROM

a

AH

=

scan

code,

AL

ODh,

OAh,

'S'

ath tT

:010C aHelloSailor0

db

"Hello,

:010C
:010C

; DATA
MySeg

ends

s010C

:010C
:010C

start

end

BUFFER,

IF EMPTY

:010B
OHO) EY

STRING

by $)

Sailor!",

XREF:

MySeg:0102To

=

character

Step Five: IDA Emerges onto the Scene

91

Structurally, the program consists of the following parts: the decoder, occupying
addresses from seg000:0x100

to seg000:0x113;

the one word variable, containing

the number of decrypted bytes that occupies the addresses from seg000:0x114 to
seg000:0x116; the executable code of the program, occupying the entire MySeg segment; and the loader, occupying addresses from seg000:0x12E to seg000:0x13B. All
these parts should be copied to the target file in the listed order. Prior to copying,
each byte of the executable code should be encrypted using the xor 0x66 operation.
An example of a script that performs these operations is in Listing 18. To load
it, just press the <F2> key or select IDC File from the Load File submenu of the
File menu.
Listing 18. The Source Code of the Compiler Script
// A Compiler

for the Crypt file

VW.
static main()

{
auto

a, f;

// The Crtypt2.cam file is opened for binary writing.
£ =

fopen("crypt2.com,

""wb");

// The decoder is copied into the Crypt2 file.
for

(a = 0x100;

// The

word

// found
fputc(

a < 0x114;

that

and

at+)

contains

copied

fputc(Byte([0x1000,

the

to the

number

of bytes

a]),

f);

to be deciphered

is

file.

SegEnd([0x2000,0x100])

—

SegStart([0x2000,0x100]),£);

fputc
(0, £);

// The
for(a

deciphered
=

fragment

is copied
0x100]);

SegStart([0x2000,

a

and

encrypted

on the

!= SegEnd([0x2000,

fly.

0x100]);

at++)

fputc (Byte (a) *0x66, f£) ;

// Code

is added

forle

Oxi 2b

—

to the

loader.

eas<0x1 SC

rata)

fputc (Byte ([0x1000,a]),
// The

file

is

f);

closed.

fclose(f);

}
Se
a cn enn

gaeeeiapeenlioer passe oaanaeee

92

Part |: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

Executing this script will create the Crypt2.com file. You can test it by launching
it. The program should display a string, wait until a key is pressed, and terminate.
One advantage of such an approach is a "walkthrough" compilation of
the file; that is, the disassembled code wasn't assembled! Instead, the original contents, identical to the source file except for the modified lines, were read byte

by byte from virtual memory.
the results in the original file.

Repeated

assembling

practically never

gives

IDA is a convenient tool for modifying files whose source code is unavailable.
It's almost the only disassembler capable of analyzing encrypted programs without
using additional tools. It has an advanced user interface and a convenient system
for navigating code being analyzed. It also can cope with any task.
However, these and many other capabilities can't be used to their full potential
without mastery of the script language, which the previous example has confirmed.
Most protection methods can be cracked using standard techniques that don't
require you to understand "how it works." A man widely known to investigators for
nearly ten years (and with whom I share the same name) once said: "Having the
skills to remove protection doesn't imply having the skills to set it." Crackers typically break and destroy. But a hacker's aim isn't breaking (i.e., finding ways to force
the program to work at any cost); it's an understanding of the mechanism, of "how
it works." Breaking is secondary.

Step Six: Using a Disassembler
with a Debugger

There are two ways to analyze programs distributed without source code: disassembling (a static analysis), and debugging (a dynamic analysis). Generally, every debugger has a built-in disassembler; otherwise, we'd have to debug programs directly
in machine code!
However, disassemblers included with debuggers usually are primitive and
provide few functions. The disassembler built into the popular SoftIce debugger is
not much better than DUMPBIN, whose disadvantages we have experienced. The
code becomes much more understandable when it's loaded in IDA!
When is the debugger useful? Disassemblers have several limitations because of
their static nature.
First, we would have to execute the program on an "emulator" of the processor,
"hardwired" into our own heads. In other words, we would need to mentally run
the entire program. To do so, we would need to know the purpose of all processor
instructions, functions, and structures of the operating system (including undocumented ones).

Second, it's not easy to start analysis at an arbitrary place in the program. We
would need to know the contents of registers and memory, but how could we find
these? For registers and local variables, we can scroll the disassembler window upward to see the values stored in these locations. But that won't work with global
variables, which can be modified by anyone at any time. If only we could set a
breakpoint... But what kind of breakpoint works in a disassembler?

94

Part |: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

Third, disassembling forces us to completely reconstruct the algorithm of each

function, whereas debugging allows us to consider a function as a "black box" that
only has input and output. Let's assume that we have a function that decrypts the
main module of the program. If we're using a disassembler, we have to figure out
the decryption algorithm. (This can be a difficult task.) Then, we need to port this
function into IDA-C, debug it, and launch a decrypting program. In the debugger,

it's possible to execute the function without trying to understand how it works and,
after it finishes, to continue the analysis of decrypted code. We could continue the
comparison, but it's clear that the debugger doesn't compete with the disassembler;
they are partners.
Experienced hackers always use these tools in conjunction. The profram's logic
is reconstructed using a disassembler, and details are cleared up on the fly by running the program in a debugger. When doing so, hackers would like to see in the
debugger the character names assigned in the disassembler.
Fortunately, IDA Pro allows this to happen! Select the Produce output
file submenu from the File menu, then click Produce MAP file (or press

the Shift>+<F10> key combination). A dialog box prompting you for
a file name will appear. (Enter simple.map or similar file name.) Then, a modal dialog box will open, asking which names should be included in the MAP file. Press
the <Enter> key, leaving all the default checkboxes. The simple.map file will contain all the necessary debug information in Borland's MAP format. The SoftIce debugger doesn't support such a format, however. Therefore, before using the file, we
need to convert it to the SYM format using the idasym utility, created for this purpose. It can be downloaded for free from http://www.idapro.com, or obtained
from the distributor who sold you IDA.

Run idasym simple.map on the command line and make sure that simple.sym
has been created. Then, load the simple.exe application in the debugger. Wait until
the SoftIce window appears, then give the syM command to display the contents of
the character table. SoftIce's response should look like this (abridged version):
> Sym

CODE (001B)

001B:00401000

start

001B:00401074

_ GetExceptDLLinfo

001B:0040107C

Main

001B:00401104
001B:00401124
001B:00401148

memchr
memcpy
_memmove

001B:00401194

memset

001B:004011C4

strcmp

Step Six: Using a Disassembler with a Debugger

001B:004011F0
001B:0040120C
001B:00401250

strlen
_memcmp
_strrchr

001B:00403C08
DATA (0023)

printf

0023:00407000

aBorlandCCopyri

0023:004070D9

aEnterPassword

0023:004070E9

aMygoodpassword

0023:004070F9

aWrongPassword

0023:00407109

aPasswordOk

0023:00407210

aNotype *

0023:00407219

aBccxhl

95

It works! It shows the character names that simplify understanding of the code.
)

You also can set a breakpoint at any of them — for example, bpm aMygoodpassword —

|

and the debugger will understand what you want. You no longer need to remember
those hexadecimal addresses.
a

ra
——

———

4

et

ee
»

==

Gr

3

ae

;

par

a

We

3331

Sai,

ys

>

i

4

=

4

:

2

ees
,
=?

<<

.

(ee EO
—

:

ie

Orayia oe aie ef Se 19%

F

ete

x

2% 2

;

z

EE
:

Aes

RAD
Es

ce.

RS
Ceres
5

ety

2S

Step Seven: Identifying
Key Structures of
High-Level Languages

Research of execution algorithms implemented in programs written in high-level
languages traditionally starts with the reconstruction of the key structures of the
source language — functions, local and global variables, branches, loops, etc. This
makes the disassembler listing more readable and considerably simplifies its analysis.
Present-day disassemblers are rather intelligent, and perform the lion's share of
work when recognizing the key structures. In particular, IDA Pro successfully copes
with the identification of standard library functions, local variables addressed via
the ESP register, CASE branches, etc. However, IDA occasionally makes mistakes,

thus misleading the code digger. In addition, its high cost sometimes justifies using
a different disassembler. For example, people studying an assembler
(and the best way to learn about it is to disassemble someone else's programs) can
hardly afford IDA Pro.
Certainly, there are more fish in the sea than IDA. DUMPBIN,

for example,

is a part of the regular SDK delivery — why not use it, if it comes down to it?
Of course, if there's nothing better on hand, DUMPBIN

will do; but in this case,

you'll have to forget about the disassembler's intelligence and use your own brain.
We'll first get acquainted with nonoptimizing compilers. The analysis of their
code is rather simple and quite comprehensible, even for programming newbies.
Then, having mastered the disassembler, we'll proceed to more complex things —
to optimizing compilers that generate artful and intricate code.

98

Part |: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

Functions
The function (also called a procedure or a subroutine) is the main structural unit of
procedural and object-oriented languages. Therefore, disassembling a code usually
starts with identifying functions and the arguments passed to them.
Strictly speaking, the term "function" is not used in all programming languages.
Even when it is, its definition varies from one language to another. Without going
into detail, we'll take a function to be a separate routine that can be called from

various parts of a program. A function either can accept one or more arguments,
or it can reject all of them; it can return the result of its execution, or it can return
nothing. This isn't important. The key property of the function is returning control
to the place from which it was called, and its characteristic feature is it can be called
repeatedly from various parts of a program (although some functions are called
from only one place).
How does a function know where it should return control? Obviously,
the calling code should save a return address and pass it to the called function along
with the other arguments. There are plenty of ways to solve this problem: We can,
for example, place an instruction for an unconditional jump to the return address
at the end of the function before calling it. We also could save the return address in
a special variable, then, when the function's execution is complete, make an indirect jump using this variable as an operand of the sump instruction. Without going
into a discussion of the strong and weak points of each method, I'd like to note that
in most cases, compilers use the CALL and RET special machine instructions for call-

ing functions and returning from them.
The CALL instruction pushes the address of the instruction following it on top of
the stack, and RET pops it out from there and passes control to it. The address to

which the CALL instruction points is the address of the function's beginning.
The RET instruction ends the function. (However, be aware that not every RET
designates a function's end! See the "Values Returned by Functions" section for
more details on this issue.)

Thus, we can recognize a function in two ways: by cross-references that lead to
the CALL machine instruction, or by its epilog, which ends with the RET instruction.
The cross-references and the epilog allow us to determine the addresses of
the function's beginning and end. Jumping a bit ahead (see the section "Local Stack
Variables" ), I'd like to note that at the beginningofmany functions, there is a spe-

cial sequence of instructions, called a prolog, which is also suitable for identifying
functions.
Cross-references.

Looking

up the disassembled

code, let's find all cau.

instructions; the contents of their operands are simply the required addresses

Step Seven: Identifying Key Structures of High-Level Languages

99

of the function's beginning. The addresses of the nonvirtual functions called by
name are calculated during compilation, and the operand of the CALL instruction
in such cases represents an immediate value. Thanks to this, the address of the function's beginning can be discovered by simple analysis: Using a context search, we find
all cALL substrings and remember (or write down) immediate operands.
Let's consider the following example:
Listing 19. A Direct Function Call
FUACI) +

main

()

{
int

a;

£unc,() ¢

a=0x666;

func ();
}
func ()

{
int

az

aats

The result of its compilation should look approximately like this:
Listing 20. The Disassembled Code for the Direct Function Call
.text:00401000

push

ebp

.text:00401001

mov

ebp,

.text:00401003

push

ecx

.text:00401004

call

401019

esp

.text:00401004

; Here

.text:00401004

; in which

we've

caught

the

.text:00401004

; is an

.text:00401004

; to be more

address

.text:00401004

;

(.text,

.text:00401004

;

.text:00401019

.text:00401004

; replace

of the

exact,

in this
the

the

CALL

immediate

instruction

operand

function's

beginning

or,

its

offset

in the code

case).

Now we

can jump to the

line,

operand

and,

having

of the

CALL

named

segment

the

instruction

function,

with

100

Part I: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

.text:00401004

; the

.text:00401009

mov

.text:00401010

call

call

dword

offset

Function_name

ptr

[ebp-4],

666h

yet

another

function

401019

.text:00401010

; Here

is

.text:00401010

; the

.text:401019

.text:00401010

; of

instructions

is

. text: 00401010

; and

all

to do

. text: 00401010

construction.

; Call

we

have

offset

.text:00401015

mov

esp,

.text:00401017

pop

ebp

.text:00401018

retn

line,

we

see

already

is

call!

Having

that

this

defined

to

as

replace

with

returning

from

Funection_name.

.text:00401018

; the

function;

.text:00401018

; the

function's

.text:00401018

; However,

.text:00401018

; My function,

. text: 00401018

; the

call

instruction.

Since

the

functions

.text:00401018

; it

seems

likely

this

ret

is

encountered

an

however,

instruction

this

is not

end — a function

next

to

this

ret

identifiable

that

is

necessarily

can
the

by the

for

have

several

beginning

operand

the

exits.

of

of

can't

overlap,

function's

end!

ebp

.text:00401019

; The

-text:00401019
.text:00401019
.text:00401019
.text:0040101A

401019

ebp

we've

.text:00401019

combination

call

; Here

push

at

a function,

.text:00401018

.text:00401019

looked

of

several

call

; have

references

to this

line.

; Hence,

this

; Every

function

; How

operands

should

mov

ebp,

is an
we

should
name

it?

of a function's

have

its

Let's

own

beginning.

name.

name

it My function.

body

of My

:-)

esp

.text:0040101C

push

ecx

-text:0040101D

mov

eax,

[ebp-4]

-text:00401020

add

eax,

1

.text:00401023

mov

[ebp-4]
, eax

.-text:00401026

mov

esp,

-text:00401028

pop

ebp

-text:00401029

retn

.text:00401029;

This

is the

address

instructions

; This

is

the

function.

ebp

end

of My function.

As you can see, everything is pretty simple.-However, the task becomes much
more complicated if the programmer (or the compiler) uses indirect function calls,

passing their addresses via the register and dynamically calculating the address
while executing the program. In particular, an operation with virtual functions
is implemented just in this way. (See the section "Virtual Functions.")

Step Seven: Identifying Key Structures of High-Level Languages

101

In any case, the compiler should somehow save the function address in code, which
allows us to find and calculate it. It's even easier to load the analyzed application in
the debugger, set a breakpoint on the CALL instruction "under investigation," and, after waiting for the debugger to pop up, see to which address it will pass control.
Let's consider the following example:
Listing 21. Calling a Function Using a Pointer
une);

ater

(ar ei) icy

a=func;

a();

Generally, the result of its compilation should be this:
Listing 22. The Disassembled Code for Calling a Function Using a Pointer
. text: 00401000

push

ebp

.text:00401001

mov

ebp,

. text: 00401003

push

ecx

.text:00401004

mov

adword

ptr

[ebp-4],

.text:0040100B

call

dword

ptr

[ebp-4]

CALL

instruction

.text:0040100B

; Here

.text:0040100B

; an indirect

is

the

esp

401012
that

.text:0040100B

; at

the

address

contained

in the

.text:0040100B

; How

can

we

what

contained

.text:0040100B

;

.text:0040100B

; until

we

.text:0040100B

; Aha!

Then

.text:0040100B

; This

is exactly

.text:0040100B

; Let's

Let's

implements

call of the function
know

scroll

the

is

/EBP-4]

cell.

there?

disassembler

screen

encounter

the mov

dword

ptr

control

is passed

to the

.text:401012

the address

of the

function's

name

the

function

and

up

a little

[ebp-4],401012

beginning.

replace

.text:0040100B

; mov

dword

ptr

[ebp-4],

401012

with

.text:0040100B

; mov

dword

ptr

[ebp-4],

offset

Function_name.

. text: 0040100E

mov

esp,

.text:00401010

pop

ebp

text:00401011

retn

ebp

;

sie

line.

address.

Part I: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

102

Some quite rare programs use indirect calls of functions that involve a complex
calculation of their addresses. Let's consider the following example:
Listing 23. Calling a Function Using a Pointer and a Complex Calculation of
the Target Address
UIC

ee ur

saubaton

0)

smhate! SQ) 5

aig

Sh

int

a[3]={

slacks,

Ue)

for

(x=0;

(int)

func_1,

(int)

func_2,

(int)

func_3};

OH

x<3;

x++)

{
f= (Ante

Oo) a Exile

EQ )ey

Generally, the result of disassembling should look like this:
Listing 24. The Disassembled Code for Calling a Function Using a Pointer
and a Complex Calculation of the Target Address
.text:00401000

push

ebp

.text:00401001

mov

ebp,

esp

.text:00401003

sub

esp,

14h

-text:00401006

mov’

[ebp+0xC],

offset

sub 401046

-text:0040100D

mov

[ebpt+0x8],

offset

sub 401058

offset

sub

.text:00401014

mov

[ebp+0x4],

.text:0040101B

mov

[ebp+0x14],

0

-text:00401022

jmp

short

loc_40102D

-text:00401024

mov

eax,

[ebpt0x14]

-text:00401027

add

eax,

1

.text:0040102A

mov

[ebp+0x14],

eax

-text:0040102D

cmp

[ebp+0x14],

3

-text:00401031

jge

short

loc_401042

40106A

Step Seven: Identifying Key Structures of High-Level Languages

103
>

~ text: 00401033

MOv

ecx,

[ebp+0x14]

00401036

Mov

edx,

[ebptecx*4+0xC]

- text :0040103A

Mov

[ebp+0x10],

sexes 0040103D

call

[ebp+0x10]

eRe

BLexes 0040103D

,

; This

- text

:0040103D

.
,

Cex.

0040103D

,

Exes

in

; we

0040103D

r

sceXt: 0040103D

f

~eexte 0040103D

f

sECXe: 0040103D

,

is

.

indirect

function

we

have

is

the

EDX

value?

Scrolling

that

EDX

is

the

as

what
see

the

the

[EBP+ECX*4+0xC]

a mess!

to

learn

the

EDX

that

we
we

also

have

ECX

equal

to?

AES 0040103D

And

what

is the

value

a moment,"

we

window.

contents

are

It's

certainly

possible

0040103D

and

sexes 0040103D

but

Sbexts 0040103D

mistakes?

ZEexE's 0040103D

the

are

loaded

scrolling

it!

In

into

it.

to waste

a lot

of time

key

now

come

to

end

that

any

It's

we've

guarantees

much

being

faster

sEexis 0040103D

The

pissy. Goo 0040103D

times,

and

show

a new

~Eexts 0040103D

mind that you will only notice

. text: 0040103D

you

window

completed

the
you

algorithm.

However,

the

power

Lees 0040103D

call

the

same

sGext's 0040103D

call a different

of the

function

text: 0040103D

The

debugger

such

a function

cannot

Heer EH 0040103D

a certain

combination

~ text: 0040103D

moon,

the

up

address

wait

see

what

will

pop

each

set

is

there

up three

time!

Bear

this in the disassembler
reconstruction

shouldn't

one thousand

can

and

debugger

debugger.

the

reveal

call

data

pops

entire

function

sexes 0040103D

load

then,

cell.

about

no

to

and

[EBP+0x10]

nEexEs 0040103D

be

text:0040103D,

in the

stext; 0040103D

will

reliable

debugger,

a breakpoint

it will

analysis),

the

until

line

algorithm
of the

into

sCLexts 0040103D

on

there

and more

investigated

debugger

the

that

the

0x40102A,

entire

sees. 0040103D

and

up

line

the

program

have

seems.

reconstructing

there

the

have

/[EBP+0x14]?

Got

EAX's

is

it

murmur,

disassembler

(especially

What

of

mia
Sy GB 0040103D

preety 0040103D

line,

cell,

address!

effort

of

fact

/[EBP+0x14],

eee.

up

this

its

;

one

contents

of

of

PCCXEs 0040103D

for

the

the

contents

"Just

line,

/EBP+0x10].

contents

calculate

;

in

location.

to

- text: 0040103D

what's

previous

Besides

The

~ tEXEs 0040103D

the

value

same

0040103D

SS

at

And

see

that

looked

sECXts 0040103D

SECs

call.

Having

; What

sCexXt 0040103D

edx

[EBP+0x10]?

; And
we

the

ll

one

this.

occur

at

cherish

any
can

illusions

times,

and can

thousand

first

The

is that

of the current
processed

of the

A program

fact

any moment

by the

time,

time!

— when

the phase

program

in

after

of the

occurs,

for

Part I: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

104

.text:0040103D

; example.

Certainly,

we

aren't

going

debugger

for

ages.

The

the

.text:0040103D

; under

.text:0040103D

~

quite

another

~

of

algorithm

.text:0040103D

™

and

.text:0040103D

; That's

why

.text:0040103D

; should

be

.text:00401040

jmp

short

loc

.text:00401042

mov

esp,

ebp

.text:00401044

pop

ebp

.text:00401045

retn

.text:0040103D

the

reliably
the

matter.
will

trace

all

in

run

the

reconstruction

allow

unequivocally

us

to

addresses

one

and

of

indirect

the

debugger

program

is

A complete

disassembler

galloping

to

disassembler

calls.

harness.

401024

.text:00401042

The most difficult cases are "manual" function calls that use a ump instruction
that preliminarily pushes the return address on the stack. In general, a call using
gmP

looks

like

this:

PUSH

ret_addrr/JMP

func_addr,

where

ret_addrr

and

func_addr are a direct or an indirect return address and the function's beginning
address, respectively. (By the way, keep in mind that the PusH and up instructions
don't always follow one after the other; occasionally, they are separated by other
instructions.)

You might ask: What is so bad about cALL, and why do we use omp at all?
The function called by the cALL instruction always passes control to the instruction
next to CALL after returning control to the parent function. In some cases
(for example, when performing structured exception handling), the execution returns from the function and continues from a completely different branch of the program, rather than from the instruction next to CALL. If this is the case, we have to

manually specify the required return address and call the child function using omp.
It can be very difficult to identify such functions (especially if they have no
prolog); a context search gives no result because the body of any program contains
plenty of ump instructions used for near jumps. How, then, can we analyze all of
them? If we don't identify the functions, two of them will drop out of sight — the
called function and the function to which control is passed just upon returning.
Unfortunately, there is no quick and easy solution to this problem; the only hook
here is that the calling ump practically always goes beyond the boundaries of the
function in whose body it's located. We can determine the boundaries of a function
by using an epilog.

Step Seven: Identifying Key Structures of High-Level Languages

105

—

Let's consider the following example:
Listing 25. A "Manual" Function Call Using ove
Funct
() >

return

LEA

ESI,

return_addr

PUSH

ESI

JMP

funct

addr:

}

Generally, the result of its compilation should look like this:
Listing 26. The Disassembled Code for a "Manual" Function Call Using xe
.text:00401000

push

ebp

.text:00401001

mov’

ebp,

.text:00401003

push

ebx

esp

.text:00401004

push

esi

.text:00401005

push

edi

.text:00401006

lea

esi,

.text:0040100C

push

esi

.text:0040100D

jmp

401017

[401012h]

.text:0040100D

; This

would

seem

.text:0040100D

; what

could

possibly

.text:0040100D

; a simple

.text:0040100D

; do we

.text:0040100D

;

.text:00401017

push

ebp

.text:0040100D

;

.text:00401018

mov

ebp,

.text:0040100D

;

.text:0040101A

pop

ebp

.text:0040100D

; .text:0040101B

retn

branch,

know

this?

to be

a simple

branch

—

be unusual

in it?

However,

a masked

function

call.

How

0x401017

and

but

Let's

go

to

address

esp —

it's

not

see.

Part |: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

106

; What

.text:0040100D

; Naturally,

.text:0040100D

; stack.

And

.text:0040100D

; 401017

is popped

.text:0040100D

; Well...

let's

.text:0040100D

; and

.text:0040100D

; tracing

.text:0040100D

; The

.text:0040100D

; contents

of

.text:0040100D

; and

register

.text:0040100D

; which

.text:0040100D

; of

.text:0040100D

;

.text:0040100D

; But

this

.text:00401012

pop

edi

.text:00401013

pop

esi

.text:00401014

pop

ebx

.text:00401015

pop

ebp

.text:00401016

retn

(To

begin

the

is

have

we

return

back

the

JMP

instruction

to

simply

Here

from

line

401000C

onto

the

top

the

function

be

more

value

of

called

exact,

isn't

the

address

takes

it's

of great

by the
not

an

window

up,

throws

the

it is!

stack.

register

the

disassembler

the

the

line

EBP

line 40101B.

to the

SI

from

PUSH

from

instruction

the

top

POP

scrolling

calls

ESI

there?

of

the

by the

back

slowly

all

PUSH

do

what

on

lies

that

address

the

to

control?

return

ret

this

does

— where

do you think

.text:0040100D

of

the

stack,

of

0x401012,

the

beginning

UMP

instruction.

address

but

an

offset.

importance.)

Automatically identifying functions using IDA Pro. The IDA Pro disassembler
is capable of analyzing operands of the CALL instructions, which allows it to divide
the program into functions automatically. Besides which, IDA quite successfully
copes with most indirect calls. However, it can't yet master complex calls and manual function calls that use the ump instruction. This shouldn't cause much distress,

since constructions of this kind are extremely rare; they make up less than one percent of "normal" function calls, which are easily recognized by IDA.
Prolog.

Most

nonoptimizing

compilers

place the following

code,

called

a prolog, at the beginning of the function.
Listing 27. The Generalized Code of a Function Prolog
push

ebp

mov

ebp,

esp

sub

esp,

XX

Generally, the purpose of a prolog comes down to the following: if the ZBP register is used for addressing local variables (as is often the case), it must be saved

in the stack before using it. (Otherwise, the called function will make the parent

Step Seven: Identifying Key Structures of High-Level Languages

107

function "go crazy".) Then, the current value of the stack pointer register (ESP) is
copied into EBP — the stack frame is opened, and the EsP value is decreased by the
size of the memory block allocated for local variables.
The PUSH EBP/MOV EBP, ESP/SUB ESP, xx sequence can be used to find all
functions in the file being investigated, including those that have no direct references to them. In particular, IDA Pro uses this technique. However, optimizing
compilers know how to address local variables through the Esp register and use
EBP, as well as any other general-purpose register. The prolog of the optimized
functions consists of only one sUB ESP,xxx instruction. Unfortunately, this
sequence is too short to be used as a signature of the function. A more detailed
story about function epilogs is ahead. (See the "Local Stack Variables" section.)
Therefore, to avoid unnecessary repetition, I don't cover this topic in much
detail here.
Epilog. At the end of its "life," the function closes the stack frame, moving the

stack pointer downward, and then restores the former value of EBP (only if the optimizing compiler didn't address local variables via ESP using EBP as a generalpurpose register). The function's epilog can work in one of two ways: Either ESP is
increased by the proper value using the App instruction, or the EBP value that points
to the bottom of the stack frame is copied into it.
Listing 28. The Generalized Code of a Function Epilog
Epilog 1
pop

ebp

add

esp,

64h

mov

esp,

pop

ebp

ebp

retn

Note
The POP EBP/ADD ESP, xxx and MOV ESP, EBP/POP EBP instructions needn't follow
one after another; they can be separated by other instructions. Therefore, a context search
is unsuitable for finding epilogs — we will have to use a search on a mask.

If the function was written taking into account the Pascal convention, it should
clear the stack of arguments itself. In the overwhelming majority of cases, this is
done by the RET n instruction, where n is the number of bytes popped from the stack
upon returning. Functions obeying the C convention leave clearing the stack to the
code that called them and always terminate with the RET instruction. Windows API
functions obey a combination of the C and Pascal conventions — arguments

108

Part |: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

are placed on the stack from right to left, but clearing the stack is done by the function
itself. (See the "Function Arguments" section for more details on this.)
Thus, RET can be a sufficient indication of the function's epilog, but not just any
epilog is the function's end. If the function has several RET operators in its body
(as is often the case), the compiler usually generates an epilog for each of them.
Check whether there's a new prolog after the end of the epilog, or if the code of
the old function continues. Don't forget that compilers usually don't place a code
that never receives control into an executable file. In other words, the function

will have only one epilog, and everything after the first RET will be thrown out as
unnecessary.
Listing 29. Eliminating Code after the Unconditional ret Operators
shoe

TEuiavel(tinhe

Sh),

{

return

att;

a=1/a;
return

a;

}

push

ebp

mov

ebp,

esp

Mov

eax,

[ebptarg
0]

Mov

ecx,

[ebptarg
0]

add

ecx,

1

mov

[ebptarg
0], ecx

pop

ebp

retn

On the other hand, if an unplanned exit from the function occurs when some
condition becomes true, such a RET will be preserved by the compiler and "embraced" with a branch jumping over the epilog.
Listing 30. A Function with Several Epilogs
int

func(int

a)

{
if

(!a)

return

return

at+;

1/a;

Listing 31. The Disassembled Code for the Compiled Function with Several Epilogs

Neen nn nnn nn nnn nnn
S
nnn
ne
SS

push

ebp

mov

ebp,

cmp

febprarg.0},.0

jnz

short

esp
loc
0 401017

STS

Step Seven: Identifying Key Structures of High-Level Languages

109
>

MOv

eax,

mOv

ecx,

[ebptarg
0]

[ebptarg0]

add

ecx,.)

1

Mov

lebprang20i 7 ecex

pop

ebp

retn

7 Yes,

this

is

; but

it's

followed

obviously
by

; not

a new

prolog

at

loc_0 401017:
; This

cross-reference

a continuation

7 Of

a new

one,

since

, DUE

CALL

And

whate:

to

check.

7 on

of

Just

; hence,

our

assumption

2s

the

that

leads

us

former

function,

figure

of

stack

the

function,

to

sub 0401000+7T3

the

a branch

functions

aievsean

top

epilog;

continuing

all!

"normal"

the

;

function's

; CODE XREF:

; is

7 easy

the

a code

are

“abnormal!

out

whether

and

indicates
not

the

that

called

using

-ftunction?

Well,

that's

address

is

the

return

or

not.

It

isn't

there;

about

the

function

code's

this

code

beginning
not

UMP,

continuation

true.

mov

eax,

1

cdq

Idiv

[ebp+arg_
0]

loc_0 401020:
pop

; CODE XREF:

sub 0 401000+15T3

ebp

retn

A special remark
Starting with the 80286 processor, two instructions — ENTER and LEAVE — have appeared
in the instruction set. They are specifically intended for opening and closing the stack
frame. However, they are practically never used by present-day compilers. Why? The reason is that ENTER and LEAVE are very sluggish, much slower than PUSH EBP/MOV EBP,
ESP/SUB

ESB,xxx,

and MOV

ESP,EBP/POP

EBP. So, on a Pentium, ENTER takes ten
clock cycles to execute; this sequence normally takes only seven cycles. Similarly, LEAVE
requires five clock cycles, although the same operation can be executed in two cycles (or

even fewer if you separate MOV ESP,EBP/POP EBP with an instruction. Therefore,
the contemporary reader will likely never come across either ENTER or LEAVE. However,
it shouldn't be too much trouble to remember their purpose. (You suddenly may want

110

Part |: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

to disassemble ancient programs or programs written in assembler. It's no secret that many
of those who write in assembler don't know the subtleties of the processor's operation very
well, and their manual optimization is appreciably worse than the compiler's when it comes
to performance.)

Naked functions. The Microsoft Visual C++ compiler supports the nonstandard attribute naked, which allows programmers to create functions without
a prolog and an epilog. Yes, without a prolog and an epilog at all! The compiler
doesn't even place RET at the end of the function; you have to do it manually using
an assembly insert _asm{ret}. (Using return alone doesn't produce the desired
result.)

Generally, support for naked functions was planned only for writing drivers in
pure C (well, almost pure — with small assembly inserts), but it has gained unexpected recognition among developers of protection mechanisms, too. It's really
pleasant to have the possibility of manually creating functions without worrying
that the compiler will cripple them in an unpredictable way.
For us code diggers, this means that one or more functions that contain neither
a prolog nor an epilog can occur in the program. Well, what's so scary about this?
Optimizing compilers also throw out the prolog and leave only the Ret from the
epilog, but functions are easily identified by their CALL instructions.
Identifying inline functions. The most effective way to avoid the overhead inflicted by calling functions is to not call them. Really, why can't we insert the function's code directly in the calling function? Certainly, this will appreciably increase
the size (especially as the function is called from more places), but it will also considerably increase the program's performance (if the inline function is called frequently).
Do inline functions hinder the analysis of a program? Well, inlining increases
size of the parent function and makes its code less readable. Instead of
CALL\TEST AX,EAX\JZ xxx containing an evident branch, we see a heap of instructions reminiscent of nothing and whose operation logic has yet to be figured out.
Recall that we already came across such a technique when analyzing crackme02:
Listing 32. The Disassembled Code for an Inline Function
TEE

mov

ebp,

push

esi

push

edi

mov

edi,

push

eax

push

666h

ds:SendMessageA

ecx

ee

Step Seven: Identifying Key Structures of High-Level Languages

MOv

ecx,

push

ODh

push

eCx

[edi+80h]

enue

ebp

lea

esi,

[esp+678h+var

mov

eax,

offset

dl,

[eax]

; SendMessageA
668]

aMygoodpassword

loc_0_4013F0:

MOV

; "MyGoodPassword"

; CODE XREF:
Diy

aesaal

Gils

elk

sub 0 4013c0+52Tj

.

aire

short
rene

loc_0 401418

nani

short
dl,

loc_0 401414
[eax+1]

bi,’ (esiti)

=

:

gimost

Aci yamd is
felis woslk-

short

?

Pee

loc_0_401418

eax,2

—_—-7Ti°.

esi,

a

:

test

lac

bes

jnz

short loc_0_4013F0_

‘

F

.

Z

Dt ae

«ae?

>a

111

112

Part I: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

To summarize, inline functions have neither their own prolog nor epilog. Their

code and local variables (if any) are completely inlined in a calling function — the resulting compilation looks exactly as if there were no function call at all. The only
catch is that inlining the function inevitably results in doubling its code in all places

where it's used. This can be revealed (although with difficulty), because the inline
function, when it becomes a part of a calling function, undergoes optimization in
the context of the parent function, which results in significant variations in the
code. Let's consider this example:
Listing 33. The Pass-Through Optimization of an Inline Function
#include

<stdio.h>

peal antes Shah

atebe(Shane, ey,

alge

10)

{
if(a>b)

return

return

int main(int

a;

b;

argc,

char

**argv)

{
printf ("$x\n",

max(0x666,

Ox777));

printf ("%x\n",

max(0x666,

argc));

printf ("%x\n",

max(0x666,

argc) );

return

0;

Generally, the result of its compilation will look like this:
Listing 34. The Disassembled Code for the Pass-Through Optimization of an
Inline Function
push

esi

push

edi

push

777h

; The

compiler

has

function

returns

and

rid

extra

function

; that

the

; thus

getting

push

OfEsSst

max

; This

is the

code

of

already

calculated

the

of an

abroc

» "ex\n"

the

call

of max.

inserted

it in the

program,

first
value

call.

Step Seven: Identifying Key Structures of High-Level Languages

113
“a

jopeabiayeas
esi,

[esp+8+arg

esp,

8

esi,

666h

; The

code

of

edi,

666h

; The

code

of

short

loc
0 401027

edi,

esi

edi

push

offset

cat

printf

add

esp,

8

esi,

666h

aProc

short

666h

the

code

how

become

; turned

; the third

; placed

JGE!

in the

loc_0

the

ESI

has

the

of

Offset:

call

printf

add

esp,

8

mov

eax,

edi

second

call

of

of

second

the

second

call

max
max

call
of

of max

max

the

third

call

of

max

of the

second

call

the

second

call

of max

of

has

changed!
It was

the

nothing

optimization

function,

and
and

isn't

aProc}i;)

JL branch

used

has

has

occurred!

anymore.

The

of max

the

-> MOV

sequence
-> Ux,

and

mysteriously

really mysterious

in this —

Since

after

that the compiler

compiler

this

register

the

EDI

register

Variables"

section.)

sub 0401000+3BT3

"$x\n"

First,
CMP

the argc variable

allocating

Temporary

; CODE XREF:

push

of

changed:

there's

register

variable

"Register

call

code

Second,

esi

edi

of

of directly modifying

401042:
push

However,

call of the max

; a temporary
(See

function

a pass-through

; the possibility

;

the

code

-> Jx-> MOV.

just that

the

code

; The

instructions

CMP

into

code

; The

of

second

; "%$x\n"

; The

esi,

the

sub 0 401000+231}

loc_0 401042

7 of executing

; it's

code

; CODE XREF:

push

; has

; The

; The

loc _0 401027:

; See

0]

instead
to

can

use

of using
it.

114

Part |: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

When calling the function for the first time, the compiler throws out all of its
code, having calculated the result of its operation at compile time. (Really, 0x777 is
always greater than 0x666; there's no need to waste processor time comparing
them.) The second call is only slightly similar to the third one, although the same
arguments were passed to both functions. Here, a mask search will not help (nor
a context search). Even a skilled expert will fail to understand whether the same
function is called or not!
ng Memory models and 16-bit compilers. Up until now, the address of
a function was understood as its offset in a code segment. The flat memory model
of 32-bit Windows NT/9x packs all three segments — the code segment, the stack

segment, and the data segment — in a uniform 4-gigabyte address space, allowing
us to forget about the existence of segments in general.
The 16-bit applications for MS-DOS and Windows 3.x are another matter.
In these, the maximum segment size is only 64 KB, which is not enough for most

applications. In tiny memory models, the code, stack, and data segments are also
located in the single address space. In contrast to the flat model, this address space
is extremely limited in size, and serious applications should be stuffed in several
different segments.
In this case, it's not enough to know the function's offset to call a function —
you also must specify the segment in which it's located. However, today we can forget about this old-fashioned rule with a clear conscience. In view of the forthcoming 64-bit Windows version, describing 16-bit code in detail would simply be ridiculous.
Order of translating functions. Most compilers allocate functions in an executable file in the order they were declared in the program.

Start-up Functions
If we were to ask the first programmer who comes along: "With what function does
the execution of a Windows program start?" We would most likely hear the answer:
"With WinMain" — which is a mistake. Actually, the first to receive control is
the start-up code, which is imperceptibly inserted by the compiler. Having executed
the necessary initialization procedures, at some point the start-up code calls
WinMain. After the completion of winmain, the start-up code receives control again
and performs a thorough deinitialization.
In most cases, the start-up code isn't of any interest to us; finding the winMain

function becomes the first task for the code digger. If IDA Pro recognizes the compiler, it identifies winMain automatically; otherwise, we have to use our own brains

Step Seven: Identifying Key Structures of High-Level Languages

115

and hands. The standard compiler usually contains the source codes of its libraries,

including the start-up code procedures. For example, in the Microsoft Visual C++
package, the start-up code is located in the CRT\SRC\crto.c file in the version for
static linking, in the CRT\SRC\crtexe.c file in the version for dynamic linking (i.e.,
the library code isn't linked to the file, but is called from a DLL), and in the
CRT\SRC\wincmadln.c file in the version for console applications. In the Borland
C++ package, all files containing the start-up code are stored in a separate directory
(Startup). In particular, the start-up code for Windows applications is contained
in the cOw.asm file. Now that I have explained source codes a bit, it'll be much easier to understand the disassembler listing.
But what should you do if a compiler that is unknown or unavailable to you
was used for the investigated program? Before we begin a tiresome manual analysis,
let's see what kind of prototype the Winmain function has:
int

WINAPI

WinMain (

HINSTANCE

hiInstance,

// Handle

to

HINSTANCE

hPrevinstance,

// Handle

to previous

instance

// Pointer

to

line

LPSTR

int

lpCmdLine,

nCmdShow

// Show

state

current

command

instance

of window

de

First, four arguments (see the "Function Arguments" section) are quite enough.
In most cases, WinMain appears to be the function of the start-up code that is richest in arguments. Second, the last argument placed in the stack —
hInstance — is most often calculated on the fly by calling the GetModuleHandleA
function. For example, having met a construction of the type CALL
GetModuleHand1eA, we can assert with a high degree of confidence
that the following function is nothing else than winmain. Finally, the call to WwinMain is usually located near the end of the code of the start-up function. It's usually followed by no
more than two or three functions such as exit or XcptFilter.

Let's consider the following code fragment. Our attention is arrested by
the multitude of pusH instructions pushing the arguments into the stack, the last
one of which passes the result of executing GetModuleHandlea. This means we are
dealing with nothing else than the call to winMain (and IDA confirms that this is
indeed the case).
Listing 35. Identifying the winMain Function by the Arguments Passed to It
.text:00401804

push

eax

.text:00401805

push

esi

.text:00401806

push

ebx

116

Part I: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

.text:00401807

push

ebx

.text:00401808

call

ds :GetModuleHandleA

.text:0040180E

push

eax

.text:0040180F

call

_WinMain@16

.text:00401814

mov

.text:00401817

push

eax

.text:00401818

call

ds:exit

[ebp+var

68], eax

However, things are not always that simple. Many developers modify the
source start-up code, sometimes considerably, when it is available. As a result, executing a program may start not with winMain, but with any other function. In addition, the start-up code can contain an operation critical for understanding the algorithm (a decryptor of the main code, for example). Therefore, it's always necessary
to skim through the start-up code to figure out if it contains something unusual.
Matters are similar with dynamic link libraries (.dll). Their execution doesn't
start with the pilmMain function (if there's one in the DLL at all), but rather with

__DllMainCRTStartup by default. However, developers sometimes change
the defaults, specifying the start-up function they need using the /ENTRY key of the
linker. Strictly speaking, D11Main is not a start-up function — it's called not only
when loading DLL, but also when unloading and when the process that has linked
the function creates/terminates a new thread. Having received messages about
these events, the developer can undertake some actions (for example, prepare code
for working in a multithreaded environment). But is this significant for the analysis
of the program? Most often, the dynamic link library must not be analyzed as
a whole; rather, the operation of some functions exported by it must be
investigated. If DllMain performs any operations — say, initializes variables —
then other functions somehow related to these variables should contain direct references to them that lead straight to D11Main. Thus, we don't need to manually
search for DllMain — it'll come to light by itself. It would be nice if this were
always the case! But life is more complicated than any rules. What if there is a certain destructive code in D11Main, or if the library, besides its main activity, spies on
threads to trace their appearance? Then, we can't do without a direct analysis
of its code.
It's more difficult to reveal D11Main than WinMain; if IDA doesn't find it, the

situation is hopeless. First, the prototype of D11Main is relatively unsophisticated
and doesn't contain anything special:
BOOL WINAPI D11Main(
HINSTANCE hinstDLL,

// Handle to DLL module

Step Seven: Identifying Key Structures of High-Level Languages

DWORD

fdwReason,

// Reason

LPVOID

lpvReserved

// Reserved

for

calling

117

function

)

Second, its call comes from the depth of a rather impressive function,
__D11MainCRTStartup, and there's no way to easily make sure that it's exactly that
CALL

we

need. There

are some

catches, however.

When

the initialization fails,

DllMain returns FALSE. The code of __D1l1MainCRTStartup checks this value, and
jumps are possible even to the end of the function. The body of the start-up func-

tion contains few of such branches, and only one of them is usually connected to
the function accepting three arguments.
Listing 36. Identifying D1imain by the Failed Initialization Code
.text:1000121C

push

edi

.text:1000121D

push

esi

.text:1000121E

push

ebx

“text: 1000T21F

call

_D11Main@12

.text:10001224

cmp

esi,

.text:10001227

mov

[ebptarg
4], eax

een

MUOOUZZA

jnz

short

.text:1000122C

test

eax,

.text:1000122E

jnz

short

1

loc_0

10001238

€ax

loc _010001267

Having scrolled the window a bit upward, it's easy to make sure that the £pz,
ESI, and EBX registers contain lpvReserved, fdwReason, and hinstDLL, respectively. Hence,

we're dealing with the DlimMain

function.

(The source

code of

__D11MaincRTStartup is contained in the dllcrt0.c file, which I strongly recommend that you study.)
.
At last, we've reached the main function of console Windows applications.
As always, the execution of the program does not start with it, but rather with the
mainCRTStartup function that passes control to main only after initializing the heap,
and the input/output system that prepares the command line arguments.
The main function accepts only two arguments: int main(int

argc,

char

**argv).

This is not enough to distinguish it from other functions. However, there is one
fact that proves to be helpful — that the keys of the command line are accessible

118

Part I: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

x

not only through arguments, but also through global variables —
__argv. Therefore, the call to main usually looks like this:

__argc and

Listing 37. Identifying the main Function
. text: 00401293

push

.text:00401299

push

dword_
0 407D14

dword_0

-text:0040129F

call

_main

arguments

.text:0040129F

; Both

.text:0040129F

; pointers

—

.text:0040129F

;

the

"Global

.text:004012A4

add

esp,

.text:004012A7

mov

[ebptvar

.text:004012AA

push

eax

value

returned

(See

of

407D10

the

function

.text:0040129F
Variables"

are

points

to

global

variables.

section.)

OCh

.text:004012AA

; The

.text:004012AA

; to the

exit

function

.text:004012AA

; Hence,

this

is main.

1C],

eax

by the

function

as

code

the

is passed

of the process'

completion

.text:004012AA

. text: 004012AB

call

Rexut

Note that the result of completing main is passed to the function next to it.
(As a rule, this is the exit library function.)

Thus, you should have an understanding of how to identify the main types of
start-up functions. Certainly, in life, things don't happen as simply as they do in theory. In any case, the techniques described above will appreciably simplify the analysis.

Virtual Functions
By definition, a virtual function is defined at the run time of a program. When a virtual function is called, the executable code should correspond to the dynamic type
of the object from which the function is called. The address of a virtual function

can't be determined at compile time — we have to do this just before we call it.
Therefore, a virtual function always answers an indirect call. (The only exception is
a virtual function of a static object.)
While nonvirtual C++ functions are called in exactly the same way as normal C

functions, virtual functions are called in a substantially different way. The method
of calling isn't standardized; it depends on the implementation of a particular com-

piler. But the references to all virtual functions are usually placed into a special

Step Seven: Identifying Key Structures of High-Level Languages

array —

119

a virtual table (VTBL). The virtual table pointer (VPTR) is placed in each

instance of the object that uses at least one virtual function. Nonderived objects, or
objects with a single inheritance, have no more than one VPTR, while objects with
multiple inheritance can have several VPTRs.
Virtual functions usually are called indirectly through the pointer to the virtual
table —

for example,

CALL

[EBX+0x10],

where

EBx

is the register containing

the offset of the virtual table in memory, and 0x10 is the offset of the pointer to
the virtual function inside the virtual table. The only exception is a virtual function
of a static object.
The analysis of virtual function calls involves a number of complications,
the most unpleasant of which is the necessity of backtracing the code to keep track
of the value of the register used for indirect addressing. It's good to initialize this by
an immediate value of the type Mov EBX, offset VTBL near the place where it's
used. However, the pointer to VTBL is most often passed to a function as an implicit
argument, or, even worse, the same register pointer is used for calling several different virtual functions. Then an uncertainty arises: Exactly which value (values)
does it have in the given location of the program?
Let's analyze the following example (first recalling that the virtual function of
the derived class is invoked for objects of the derived class, even if it is called using

a pointer or reference to the base class):
Listing 38. Calling a Virtual Function
#include

class

<stdio.h>

Base{

public:
virtual

void

demo (void)

{
print’ (“BASE AD);

};
virtual

void demo_2 (void)

{
printf ("BASE
};

DEMO

2\n");

Part I: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

420

void demo_3 (void)

{

’
printf ("Nonvirtual

BASE

DEMO

3\n");

};

he

class

Derived:

public Basef{

public:

.
virtual

void

demo (void)

!

Disumci (DELVED)
\in

he

aye

S

E

virtual void demo_2 (void)

printf ("DERIVED DEMO 2\n");
,

:

oe

ew

3

s

2

oan

ae

ae,

ro

{ rae

ee

OR:

S

a pgp

ae ee aS
=
oe

wpa

Py 2pkel>

=

ay

thes

:

Ss EP

SL

7

:

Severs

Walies stroll.
Sen

7

EW

viigaaens

+

eet

ty

8

y

.

ae

Fils

a

Se

tom

Ea

-

5p

Fatih

at

ikenaad

Kyte

>

oh)

pas

SAIS}

6

~

>

»'+

!
~

poke
Bus
GSV.IS5)
@2mb>

ie ©
ae

agee?

r

:

ote.

7

:

J

A

Me

tit

Sct

-

y

5 ef

j =

Step Seven: Identifying Key Structures of High-Level Languages

In general,
like this:

the disassembled

code

of its compiled

version

121

should

look

Listing 39. The Disassembled Code for Calling a Virtual Function
main

proc

near

; CODE

push

esi

push

4

call ??2@YAPAXI@Z
; EAX

c is

; Four

bytes

object

add

esp,

4

test

eax,

eax

shone

whether

mov

ptr

dword

the

allocated

are

allocated

consists

;7-—>

memory

[eax],

pointer

new (uint)

the

doc
0, 401019

; Checking

; Here

to

of memory

The

start+AFp

; operator

a pointer

; object.

2)

XREF:

the

Memory

BASE

written

in the

; We

can

make

sure

that

; by analyzing

the

table's

class,

and

therefore,

the

BASE

;-of

the

BASE

} a virtual

table

mov

eax

esi,

; The

;

compiler

then

pointer

; of the

; Structures,

is written
and

point.

; contains

the

BASE

; is

necessary.

jmp

short

loc 0 401019:

a virtual
the

=

class

created.

table

of

point

to members

table

**BASE

the

itself

BASE

pointer

section

Arrays"),

but

all

Therefore,

we'll

is

to

the

object

in ESI.

instance

Why?

instance

simply

pointer
going

"Objects,

these

details

are

say that

ESI

to the

into

why

virtual
this

of

no

; CODE XREF:

use

table

double

pointer

loc_0 40101B

;

class

VTBL

to BASE VIBL)

the

without

BASE

just

They

the

class,

a new

class.

the

to the

of

VIBL.

error

of the

is

to

pointer

to

successful

object

(see

in ESI

; at this
; of the

writes

is

the

elements.

to the pointer

object

allocation

of

; ESI

(the pointer

; The

of

pointer

table

; is

this

instance

one

VIBL

virtual

instance

block.

the

only

allocation

offset

to

of

memory
for

sub 0401000+D?3

122

Part I: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

xor
.
if

esi,

esi

This

overwrites

(This

the

pointer

to the

object

branch

receives

control

only

.

in allocating

memory

for

object.)

.

The

null

.

at

the

first

~ loc_0_40101B:
mov eax,

[esi]

.
La

,

,

,

Here,

pointer

the

pointer

in EAX,

table

also

first

Mov

ecx,

Now,

the

structural

NULL.

is a failure
exception

handler

of calling.

to the

keeping

virtual

in mind

is the pointer

table

that

of the

first

element

elementof the virtual

table,

in turn,

to the

first

declaration

eSi

order)

virtual
of the

class

is

to the virtual,

of this

table.

contains

function
class.

7 ECX = this

the pointer to the instance

ECX, passing an implicit
to the called function.
(See the "Function

BASE

the pointer

to the

the pointer
(in the

evoke

if there

with

; CODE XREF: sub 0 401000+1775
~ ; EAX = *BASE VTBL == *BASE DEMO

placed
The

will

attempt

the

instance

of the object

argument

— the
=

Arguments" er

eee

"call dword
ptr [eax] ; CALL BASE DEMO

is written

this pointer —

—

into

Step Seven: Identifying Key Structures of High-Level Languages

Mov

ecx,

; The

esi

pointer

; This

is

an

; pointer.

call

to

(See

one

7 which

function

points

to

the

; points

to the

offset

cary

printf

; implemented
that

; directly
; code

is

of

we

the

is

the

placed

into

function

—

ECX.

the

this

(BASE

DEMO

section.)

[BASE

a virtual

VTBL+4]

function!

should

screen

know

To

the

window

upward,
to

we

VTBL;

thus,

EDX+4

points

table

of

BASE

class,

which,

; "Nonvirtual

BASE

DEMO

the

2)

understand

contents

virtual

the

of

the

see

that

second
in

turn,

BASE DEMO 2 function.

aNonVirtualBase

a call

of

Pointer"

called,

BASE

of

2; Note

call
is

qelaans

; CALL

Scrolling

7 element

push

this

SS

instance

argument

[edx+4]

more

register.

; Here's

object

"The

ptr

7 Here's

; it

the

implicit

dword

; EDX

2 He

123

of a nonvirtual
in the

same

function.

way

as

this

as

an

inidined

in the

class,

and

the

Pay attention

call

tunction;

instead

of

—

a regular

that

of

3\n"

1s,

calling

ieus

it's
C function.
declared

it,

inserted.

push4

cabl

??2@YAPAXTI@Z

; operator

of DERIVED

; The

calls

; In

general,

we

only

needed

the

DERIVED

; to

show

virtual

tables

are

arranged.

how

class

new(uint)

add

esp,

8

test

eax,

eax

Biz.

short

mov

dword

ptr

mov

esi,

eax

jmp

short

loc_0_ 40104C

; Clearing

loc_0

40104A
[eax],

loc_0_40104C:

the

; Memory

offset

==

continue.

stack

class

after

allocation

DERIVED

; ESI

loc_0_40104A:
xor

functions

_
here

printf

and

error

VTBL~

**DERIVED

VTBL

; CODE XREF: sub_0 401000+3E7}
esi,

esi

;

; CODE XREF: sub 0401000+48T

new

124

Part I: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

MOV

eax,

[esi]

; EAX = *DERIVED

mov

ecx,

esi

; ECX

call

dword

ptr

mov

edx,

[esi]

mov

ecx,

esi

call

dword ptr

push

offset

call

printf

[eax]

that

the called

of the

derived

esp,

esi

[DERIVED

VTBL]

; EDX = *DERIVED

VTBL

; CALL

aNonVirtualBase

; not
add

VTBL

this
(DERIVED

DEMO)

; ECX=this

[edx+4]

; Note

pop

; CALL

=

[DERIVED

VTBL+4]

; "Nonvirtual

BASE

BASE DEMO function

(DERIVED DEMO 2)
DEMO

3\n"

is of the base

class,

one!

4

retn

main

endp

BASE_DEMO

proc near

push
offset aBase
"Ga lk= - DELDEE

7 DATA XREF: .rdata:004050B0vo0
ae

"BASE \n"
ina

en

ee

so Bitte ) yeaa
-

:

Step Seven: Identifying Key Structures of High-Level Languages

125
we

>
Cae

call

prance

pop

ecx

retn

DERIVED DEMO 2 endp

DERIVED VTBL

dd offset
dd offset
dd offset
dd offset

BASE _VTBL

; Note

that

the

virtual

7 in

the

order

; of

the

virtual

classes

; functions

were

7 The

order

of

7 and

depends

7 however,
; Virtual

; in

the

DERIVED DEMO
; DATA XREF:
DERIVED DEMO 2
BASE DEMO
; DATA XREF:
BASE DEMO 2
tables
were

tables

"grow"

from

the

declared

in the

"grow"

from

the

order

virtual

This

is not

always

the

elements

isn't

standardized

class.

and

entirely

the

are

allocated

they

were

that

their

developer

functions

order

and

in the

in the

of

up

program,

tables

most

bottom

down

declared
on

sub 0 401000+Ffo

top

allocating

in practice,

sub 0401000+40fo

of

compilers
close

to

the

case.

compiler;

behave
each

elements

in this

manner.

other

declared.

Object instance 1

ieteas
Oea
ee
A
Pointer to virtual function 1

VTBL 1
Pointer to virtual function 2
Pointer to virtual function 3

Object instance 2
Tat

eee

Oe ae

eae gd

VTBL 2

Pointer to virtual function A
Pointer to virtual function B

Pointer to virtual function C
Fig. 11. Implementing the calls of virtual functions

Identifying a pure virtual function. If a function is declared in the base class
and implemented in the derived class, such a function is called a pure virtual function. A class containing at least one such function is considered an abstract class.

126

Part |: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

The C++ language prohibits the creation of instances of an abstract class. How can
they be created anyway, if at least one of the functions of a class is undefined?
Note
At first glance, it's not defined — and that's OK. A pure virtual function in a virtual table is

replaced with a pointer to the library function

—_ purecall. What is this function for? At the

compile time, it's impossible to catch all attempts of calling pure virtual functions. But if such
a call occurs, the control will be passed to__ purecal11, substituted here beforehand. It will

then yell at you about the prohibition on calling pure virtual functions and will terminate
the application.

Thus, the presence of the pointer to __purecal1 in the virtual table indicates

that we're dealing with an abstract class. Let's consider the following example:
Listing 40. Calling a Pure Virtual Function
#include
class

<stdio.h>

Base{

public:
virtual

void

demo (void) =0;

};
class

Derived:public

Base

{

virtual

demo (void)

public:

void

{
printf ("DERIVED\n")

;

};

main ()

Base

*p = new

Derived;

p->demo
() ;

}
eee

Step Seven: Identifying Key Structures of High-Level Languages

127

In general, the result of compiling it should look like this:
Listing 41. The Disassembled Code for Calling a Pure Virtual Function
Main

proc’
call

near
4
? ?2@YAPAXT@Z

add

esp,

push

7 Memory

eax,

; This

checks

whether

loc_0 401017

Az

short
CCX,

)

; ECX = this

call
7 The

—

ry

Sy

allocating

memory

to

the virtual

in the

instance

object.

is

successful.

table

of the

DERIVED class

of the object.

XREF: maintcty

© CODE
eax,
7

,

loc
<0 401019:
fan

of the

©

;

eax

es EA is Set EO pul

-

instance

new

short loc_0 401019

loc_0_401017:
‘

the

GetDERIVED_VTBL

~ jmp

<=

start+ARp

cax

pointer

; is placed

xOr

eax

for

test

mov

XREF:

4

is allocated

|

+ CODE

5

te

oe sakes
ms >

:

:
c

a
<-

=

5

;

=

s

128

_— Part |: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

; The

function

; in the

places

object

the pointer

instance.

This

; of an unplanned

call

of a pure

mov

dword ptr

[esi],

offset

; The

pointer

; in the

to the

object

7 of the pointer
mov

eax,

pop

esi

virtual

instance,

to __ purecall

function

is a stub

virtual

DERIVED

table

the

case

VTBL

of the

overwriting

for

function.

the

DERIVED

class

previous

value

is placed

to~ purecall).

eSi

retn

GetDERIVED

endp

VTBL

DERIVED DEMO proc near
push

offset

Gatie.
pop

printer
ecx

.
nec
DERIVED DEMO

aDerived

; DATA XREF: .rdata:004050A8V0
; "DERIVED\n"

endp

SetPointToPureproc near
mov

€ax,

mov

dword ptr

; CODE XREF: GetDERIVED VTBL+3\p

Cx

‘

[eax], offset

PureFunc

Peper

/ pointer to the special function __purecall is written

ap

che [EAX] address ee the instance of the SSE

se

Fee

Step Seven: Identifying Key Structures of High-Level Languages

129

Sharing a virtual table between several instances of an object. However many
instances of an object might exist, all of them use the same virtual table.
The virtual table belongs to the object, not to the instance of this object. Exceptions
to this rule are further on in this section.

Object instance 1

Pointer to virtual function 1

.
Pointer to VTBL

Pointer to virtual function 2

-

:

Object instance 2

Pointer to virtual function 3

Pointer to VTBL

Fig. 12. Sharing one virtual table among several instances of the object

To confirm this, let's consider the following example:
Listing 42. Sharing One Virtual Table Among Several Instances of the Class
#include

class

<stdio.h>

Base{

publies

virtual

demo

()

{

printf

("Base\n");

he
class

Derived:public

public:

virtual

demo ()

Base{

Part |: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

130

>

printf ("Derived\n") ;

Base

* obj1

=

new

Derived;

Base

* obj2

=

new

Derived;

obj 1->demo
() ;

ob} 2->demo
() ;

Generally, the result of compiling it should look like this:
Listing 43. The Disassembled Code for Sharing One Virtual Table Among
Several Instances of the Class
main

proc
push

esi

push

edi

push

4

near

call

??2@YAPAXI@Z

add

esp,

; Memory

is

; CODE

; Operator
for

eax,

short-loc
0 40101B

ecx,

eax

; EAX

points

to the

call

GetDERIVED VTBL

; EAX contains

short

first

the pointer

eax

first

instance

of

the

object.

instance

of the

to the virtual

of the

DERIVED

; EDI

=

object.

table

*DERIVED

VTBL

loc_0 40101D

loc_0_40101B:
xor

the

eax

mov

edi,

new(uint)
?

allocated

AZ

jmp

start+ARNp

4

test

mov

XREF:

; CODE XREF: main+Et3
edi,

edi

class.

Step Seven: Identifying Key Structures of High-Level Languages

loc_0_40101D:

; CODE XREF: maint+19Tj

push

4

call

2??2@YAPAXT@Z

add

esp,

; Memory

test

DERIVED
BASE

; Note

; Operator

allocated

eax,

for

the

short
ecx,

eculik

GetDERIVED

7 Note

that

the

second

object

7 uses

the

same

virtual

table.

dd

offset

DERIVED

dd

offset

BASE

DEMO

virtual

table

is

that

the

second

instance

of

the

object.

eax

Wz

VIBL

new(uint)

4

is

mov

VTBL

131

loc
0
401043
eax

BP GHOXS

SS

Selah;

VTBL

instance

DEMO

common

; DATA

XREF:

GetDERIVED

+ DATA

XREF:

GetBASE _VTBL+2To

for

all

instances

of

VTBL+8To

the

class.

Copies of virtual tables. Well, it's obvious that a single virtual table is quite
enough for working successfully. However, in practice, we often face a situation in
which the file being investigated is swarmed by copies of these virtual tables. What
kind of invasion is this, where is it from, and how can we counteract it?

If a program consists of several files compiled into separate object modules
(such an approach is used in practically all more or less serious projects), the compiler, obviously, should place its own virtual table in each object module for each
class used by that module. Really, how can the compiler know about the existence
of other object modules, and about the presence of virtual tables in them? This
leads to unnecessary duplication of virtual tables, which consumes memory and
complicates the analysis. However, at link time, the linker can detect copies and delete them, and compilers use various heuristic algorithms to increase the efficiency

of the generated code. The following algorithm has gained the greatest popularity:
The virtual table is placed in the module that contains the first non-inline, nonvirtual implementation of a function of the class. Each class is usually implemented
in one module, and in most cases such heuristics works. Things are worse if a class
consists of only virtual or inline functions — in this case, the compiler "breaks
down" and starts pushing virtual tables into all modules where this class is used.
The last hope for deleting the "garbage" copies is pinned on the linker — but don't

132

Part |: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

think the linker is a panacea. Actually, these problems should worry the developers
of compilers and linkers (if they're worried about the volume of memory occupied
by the program); for analysis, the superfluous copies are only an annoyance, not
a hindrance.
A linked list. In most cases, a virtual table is an ordinary array. Certain compilers, however, present it as a linked list. Each element of the virtual table contains
a pointer to the following element. Elements are not close to each other, but rather

are scattered over the entire executable file.
In practice, however, linked lists are rarely used, so we won't consider this case

here — just know that it sometimes occurs. If you come across linked lists, you can
figure it out according to the circumstances.
Calling through a thunk. When looking through a virtual table in the case of
multiple inheritance, be ready to encounter a pointer not to a virtual function, but
to a code that modifies the this pointer so that it points to an instance of the object
from which the "replacing function" has been taken. This technique was offered
by C++ language developer Bjarne Stroustrup, who borrowed it from early
implementations of Algol-60. In Algol, the code that corrects the this pointer
is known as a thunk, and the call itself is known as a call through the thunk. This ter-

minology is applicable in C++ as well.
Although calling through the thunk provides a more compact storage of virtual
tables, modifying the pointer results in an excessive overhead when processors with
a pipeline architecture are used. (Pentium — the most commonly used processor —
has an architecture of just this kind.) Therefore, using thunk calls is justified only in
programs that are critical to the size, not to the speed.
A complex example that places nonvirtual functions in virtual tables. Until
now, we have considered only the simplest examples of using virtual functions.
Life, however, is more complex, and you may occasionally be in for a big surprise
with these virtual tables. Let's consider a complex case of inheritance that involves
a name conflict:
LS

Listing 44. Placing Nonvirtual Functions in Virtual Tables
I

#include

class

<stdio.h>

A{

public:

virtual void £()

{ printf ("A_F\n") ;};}

Step Seven: Identifying Key Structures of High-Level Languages

133
>

ae

};

class

B{

public:

virtualgvoidit

wirtuel

void

()

Moprinti("BiF\n")
3};

g{)

{ printf("B G\n") ;};

bi;
class

Gs

publiceA,.

public

Bl

public:
void

main

£(){°

printt("C.F\n")7}

()

What will the virtual table of class c look like? Well, let's think. Since class c is
derived from classes A and B, it inherits the functions of both of them. However,
the virtual function £() from class B overloads the virtual function of the same
name from class a; therefore, it is not inherited from class A. Furthermore, since the

nonvirtual function £() is also present in the derived c class, it overloads the virtual function of the derived class. (If a function is declared virtual in the base class,

it will be virtual in the derived class by default.) Thus, a virtual table of class c
should contain only one element — the pointer to the virtual function g (), inherited from B. The virtual function £() is called as a regular C function. Is this right?
No, it's not!

This is the case when a function that isn't explicitly declared virtual is called
through the pointer — as a virtual function. Moreover, the virtual table of the class will
contain three, not two, elements! The third element is a reference to the virtual function

Part |: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

134

) inherited from B, but this element is immediately replaced by the compiler with
a thunk to c::£(). Phew! Tough, huh? Maybe it'll become more understandable

after studying the disassembled listing.
Listing 45. The Disassembled Code for Placing Nonvirtual Functions in
Virtual Tables
main

proc
push

near

7 CODE,

push

esi

push

edi

push

4

call

??2@YAPAXI@Z

add

esp,

; Memory

start+AFVp

; Operator

new(uint)

instance

of object

7ECX

=sthas

4

is allocated

test

eax,

jz

short

loc_0

mov

eCcx,

eax

call

XREE

ebx

for

an

A.

eax

40101C

Get _A VTBL

* The pointer.to

="

-

; a[0]=*A_VTBL
the virtual

table

of the

|

eens

plis placed in its instance.

ol

ee
3.

Se
=

poet
sa 8 ote

Oo
’

Aebk, ceak

en oe
i.

oe 0-101
0te

.

7. EBX =

*a

hal

°
ae

i"

e-

e,

—e

e

etd

TS
SY
4s
"04

Hyag= Den

; CODE XREF: ae
*, -~ tiaa Jeans

of

ae

Liaise

ee
1

Step Seven: Identifying Key Structures of High-Level Languages

mov

esi,

jmp

short

eax

loc

7 St

esi,

esi

; CODE XREF: maint+2atj

xor

loc 0 401039:

; CODE XREF:

main+3513

8

call

? ?2@YAPAXT@Z

add

esp,

; Memory

; Operator

new(uint)

4

is

allocated

test

eax,

yz

short

for

the

instance

of

object

C.

eax

loc_0

mov

ecx,

eax

Gall

GET

C VIBLs

; The

pointer

401052
A THONG SS qelaule

to

; is placed

in

; Attention:

Look

mov

edi,

eax

jmp

short

the

its

virtual

7 ret:

EAX=*c

table

of

the

object

instance.

into

the

GET C-VTBLs
; EDI

loc_0

loc_0 401052:
xXOr

e=s*5

0 401039

loc_0 401037:

push

135

=

function.
“te!

401054

; CODE XREF: maint+451
edi,

edi

loc_0 401054:

; CODE XREF: maint+507j

mov

eax,

[ebx]

pe BAX =a

[0

mov

ecx,

ebx

7 ECX

*a

call

dword

ptr

mov

edx,

[esi]

mov

ecx,

esi

call

dword ptr

[eax]

=

; CALL
|

[edx]

[A _VTBL]

; EDX

=

; ECX

=

; CALL

(A _F)

b[0]
vals)

[B_ VTBL] (B_F)

mov

eax,

[esi]

; EAX

=

b[0]:

mov

ecx,

esi

; ECX

=

*H

[eax+4]

)-—= *AVIBL

=,

B VTBL

(B G)

call

dword

ptr

; CALL

[B VTBL+4]

MOV

edx,

[edi]

; EDX =

¢{0]

mov

ecx,

edi

7 ECX

ae

call

dword

ptr

[edx]

i CALL.

; Attention:

The

nonvirtual

function

=

= C_VTBL

(C_VIBL]-:(C:F)
is

called

as

a virtual

one!

wa

Part I: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

136

pop

edi

pop

esi

pop

ebx

Gbetn

main

endp

GET _C_VIBLs

proc near

; CODE

push

esi

A USuE == “Je)

push

edi

uC Ke =

mov

esi,

cal

cete anv iBE

; The

ecx

pointer

eS

to the

in the

lea

_[esit4]

ae

=

es

Se
_

_
oe

virtual

instance

table

of the A class

of object

C.

; EDI = *c([4]
jo RCs

call

Get_B VTBL

; c[4]=*B_VTBL

7

—

ha ee

ecx, edi
to the virtual

; in the instance

=

aac

mov

; The pointer

-

main+49Tp

pee LOl="ALVIBL

; is placed

edi,

XREF:

two pointers

of object

table

see

how the compiler

mov

dword ptr

[edi],

of class

C — that

to two virtual

; Let's

ar

tables
will
E

is,

B is added

object

C now

of the base

cope

with
4

contains

class.

the name

:

conflict.

~~

be

rs

+

offset C_VTBL_FORM _B ; 2 8 age,C_VTBL

# ‘The pointer to the virtual table of class B is replaced _ i

ey tien iee, to the virtual table of class Cee
= a

=

—

'

SOx

oe

ae

=e

Step Seven: Identifying Key Structures of High-Level Languages

mov
; The

-

4

L

;

dword ptr
pointer

; is placed

[eax],

to

the

in the

offset

137

A_VTBL

virtual

table

of

instance

of the

object.

class

B

1alSyeial

Get_A VTBL

endp

AF

proc near

=

=

POLhMse

is

push

offset

cali

‘print’

pop

ecx

; DATA XREF:

cehe vartuall

uncivon)-6())

aAf

.rdata:004050a8To

of classeaAy

7 "ASE\n"

:
‘

retn

INC

:

endp
i

Get_B VTBL

.

proc near

_

tows

“USany (eee

mov

_dword ptr [eax],

GET _C VTBLs+ETp

NS,

ie

ORL

offset

--S-‘placed :in the instance

=

7 CODE XREF: main+2Etp

ee Se

| The pointer to the virtual
“ee
7s

4

B| VIBL

table On class B

of the Ea

138

Part |: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

pop

ecx

ern)
endp

proc near
.

The

nonvirtual

.

as

a virtual

,

,

; CODE XREF:
function

f()

of

class

C F+3T5
like

C looks

and

is

called

one!

push

offset aC_f

call

printf

pop

ecx

Seo. B\n"

retn

endp

proc

near

sub

ecx,

4

jmp

CLF

; DATA XREF:

.rdata:004050B8To
;

; Look what a strange function this is! This is exactly the same
thunk of which we were speaking a moment ago. First, it's never

’

™e

called
MeO

the

(although

address

it would have

the replaced virtual

been called
function,

if we had decided
and 5 ae =

this pointer pointed “right past" this function) .

See ENoysa _thunk to the ona function.

peers

“s

x

<4

Step Seven: Identifying Key Structures of High-Level Languages

139
>

*; The

virtual

; to

the

table

f()

function

; virtual,

but

of

is

class

which

virtual

C contains

isn't

; The

virtual

; Class

B.

It

“offset

table

of

but

; at

time,

and

pointer

to

compile

; with

the

the

declared

; DATA XREF:

GET _C VTBLs+13To

BG
class

originally

; functions,

pointer

by default.

C_VTBL FORM B dd offset CF
dd

the

explicitly

oe
C is

copied

by the

of

two

pointers

to

the

resolved

the

conflict

of

names

consisted

compiler

replaced

the

the

adapter

pointer

for

to

compiler

from

f()

and

g/()

B::f/()

C::f().

Thus, the virtual table of a derived class actually includes virtual tables of all
base classes (at least, of those classes from which it inherits virtual functions).
In this case, the virtual table of class c contains the pointer to the c function, which

isn't explicitly declared virtual but is virtual by default, and the virtual table of class B.
The problem is how to figure out that the c::£() function isn't explicitly declared
virtual, but is virtual by default, and how to find all base classes of class c.

Let's begin with the latter. The virtual table of class c doesn't contain any hint as
to its relation to class A, but let's look at the contents of the GET Cc_vTBLs function.
There is an attempt to embed the pointer to the virtual table in the instance of class c,
and, therefore, class c is derived from A. (This is really only an attempt, because the

embedded pointer to the virtual table of class A is immediately overwritten by the
new pointer to the "corrected" virtual table of class a, which contains the corrected
addresses of the virtual functions of class c.) Someone might raise the objection
that this isn't a reliable approach — the compiler might optimize the code by
throwing out the call to the virtual table of class a, since it's not needed anyway.
This is true, it might do so indeed. But in practice, however, most compilers don't

do this. If they do, they leave enough redundant information allowing us to determine the base classes, even in a mode of acerca optimization. Another question
is: Do we really need to determine "parents" from whom not a single function is inherited? (If at least one function is inherited, no complexities arise in the analysis.)
In general, it isn't a crucial point for the analysis. Still, the more accurately the
original code of the program is reconstructed, the more readable and comprehensible it will be.
Now let's proceed to the function £ (), which isn't explicitly deed virtual, but
is virtual by default. Let's speculate about what would happen if it actually was explicitly declared virtual. It would overlap the same function of the base classes,

140

Part I: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

and we would encounter no absurdity in the compiled program

(like we did

in those thunks). The function isn't virtual, although it tends to look like it. Theoretically, the smart compiler could throw out a thunk and a duplicated element
of the virtual table of the c class, but such intelligence isn't exhibited
in practice. Functions explicitly declared virtual and functions that are virtual
by default are absolutely identical; therefore, they can't be distinguished in the disassembled code.
Static binding. Is there any difference between the instance of an object created
aS MyClass

zzz,

OF MyClass

*zzz=new

MyClass?

Certainly.

In the first case,

the

compiler can determine the addresses of virtual functions at compile time, whereas
the addresses have to be calculated at run time in the second case. One more distinction: Static objects are allocated on the stack (in the data segment), and dynamic ones on the heap. The table of virtual functions is persistently created by
compilers in both cases. When each function is called (including a nonvirtual one),
the this pointer containing an address of the instance of an object is prepared. (As
a rule, the pointer is placed in one of the general-purpose registers. See the "Func-

tion Arguments" section for more details.)
Thus, if we encounter a function called directly by its offset, but at the same
time listed in the virtual table of a class, we can be sure that it's a virtual function of
a static instance of an object.
Let's consider the following example:
Listing 46. Calling a Static Virtual Function
#include

class

<stdio.h>

Base{

public:
virtual

void

demo (void)

{
printf ("BASE

DEMO\n") ;

,
virtual

void demo
2 (void)

{
printf ("BASE

DEMO

he
void

demo_3 (void)

2\n");

Step Seven: Identifying Key Structures of High-Level Languages

141

{
printf ("Nonvirtual

class

Derived:

BASE

public

DEMO

3\n");

Base{

public:

virtual

void

demo(void)

{

;

printf ("DERIVED

a
.*F

DEMO\n") ;

};
virtual

void

demo
2 (void)

{

oa

;

printf ("DERIVED DEMO 2\n");

Ie

y
:

a

eae
a

7

a

———_——

void demo_3(void)
ddinoki

Mes

ptonists
==

print
=
ei

.

ae

on

Ti

wes

£("Nonvirtual
.

eee

%

DERIV
~

=

-

ee

$<

——

Part I: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

142
ag

Generally, the disassembled listing of the compiled version of this program
should look like this:
Ss

Listing 47. The Disassembled Code for Calling a Static Virtual Function
main

proc

near

; CODE

XREF:

var 8

= byte

ptr

-8

; derived

var

=byte

ptr

-4

; base

4
; The

; on

instances

the

stack

; from

which

of

objects

from

the

you

push

ebp
ebp,

esp

sub

esp,

8

lea

ecx,

[ebptvar
4]

call

GetBASE

often

bottom

declared

mov

are

them

start+tARp

(but

up,

that

in

the

not

is,

always)

in

the

order

located

on

; base

VTBL

7

p[0O]=*BASE

VTBL

the

is

that

the

instance

of

; not

the

heap!

This,

course,

doesn't

yet

of the object

(dynamic

objects

; nature

of the

instance

7 on

stack,

too),

the

of

but

ecx,

; The

this

pointer

is prepared

;

case

it

be

call

[ebptvar
4]

will

object

nevertheless

lea

(in

opposite

program.

; Notice

on

allocated

hints

at

prove
the

the

stack,

the

static

can be allocated
"statics."

; base

needed

for

the

function).

BASE DEMO

; A direct call of the function! Along with its presence
; in the virtual table, this is the evidence of the static
; Character of the declaration of the object instance.

lea
; A new

call

ecx,

; base

is prepared

to the

base

instance.

BASE DEMO 2

; A direct

; Yes,

[ebptvar4]

this pointer

call

it is!

of the

This

function.

means

that

Is

it's

it there

in the

a virtual

function,

virtual

table?

Step Seven: Identifying Key Structures of High-Level Languages

; and

}

q

the

instance

lea

ecx,

; The

this pointer

call

BASE DEMO 3

[ebptvar4]

; This

function

7

the

(see

isn't

lea

ecx,

call

GetDERIVED

lea.

ecx,

DERIVED

7; Same

as

[ebptvar8]

static.

for

the

in the

hence,

nonvirtual

virtual

it's

not

function

table

a virtual

one.

; derived
; d[0]=*DERIVED
VTBL

; derived

DEMO

above...

lea

ecx,

call

DERIVED

; same

as above...

[ebptvar
8]

; derived

DEMO 2
=e

lea

eCxX,

call

BASE_DEMO_ oo

lebp+var 8]

; derived

this pointer

; when the function

:pees

present

VTBL

is declared

7 base

table),

[ebptvar8]

call

object

is prepared

virtual

7 Attention: The

&

of the

points

to ne DERIVED object

of the BASE object

is called!

the BASE function is a derived one.

aati:

ay

143

bots 22

:

2”

demo_3.

144 __— Part I: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

; This

is the demo_2

function

push

aBaseDemo2

offset

of the BASE class.
; "BASE

DEMO

2\n"

alslil, — —jokeslnntiens

pop

ecx

retn

BASE DEMO 2

endp

BASE DEMO 3. proc near
; This

is the

; CODE XREF: maint21Tp

demo3 function

push

offset

call

jonabiahese

pop

ecx

of the BASE

aNonVirtualBase

class.

; "Nonvirtual

BASE

DEMO

3)\n"

retn

BASE

DEMO 3

_ DERIVED DEMO
; This

endp

proc near

is the demo

push
call

AE

function

; CODE XREF:
of the DERIVED

offset aDerived
printf

St

maint31Tp
~

class.

; "DERIVED\n"

ay ee

Patti

’

Step Seven: Identifying Key Structures of High-Level Languages

™

The

DERIVED

object

inherited

™

and

has made

a copy

of

™

Ubleinifey GLsy —Neramloletone

~

It'd

be better

™

But

you

™

of the

see,

this

the

BASE

class,

it.

Gpkilivgs

off

it from

Sechmuie.

using

the

simplifies

cies

original...
the

analysis

program!

push

offset

call

prints

pop

ecx

aNonVirtualDeri

; "Nonvirtual

DERIVED

.

retn

BASE DEMO 3

endp

GetBASE

VIBL

proc near

; In the

instance

7 the offset
mov
mov

; CODE XREF: main+9tp

of the

BASE

of its virtual
eax, eCx
dword ptr

object,

table

is written.
aes

[eax],

-retn

offset

BASE_VTBL

peat
a

ad

oe

ira

ae

6

risk
St ke!

——

- GetDERIVED
—

7

145

ViEieproc“near

2

©aviied gnivi
of the Bee riuee
the instance
;saryIne
ee er oe
Pate
ne api
sit Mp a

the eaieet of its,“virtual table is. written

DEMO

3\n"

146
N

Part |: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

nS

dd offset BASE DEMO 2
dd offset DERIVED DEMO ; DATA XREF:
dd offset DERIVED DEMO 2

DERIVED VTBL
; Note

that

the

virtual

table

occurs

even

where

it's

GetDERIVED_VTBL+8To
not

needed!

Identifying derived functions. Identifying derived nonvirtual functions is
a rather subtle problem. At first you might think that if they're called like regular
C functions, it's impossible to recognize in what class the function was declared.
The compiler destroys this information at compile time — but not all of it. Before
it calls each function (it doesn't matter whether it's a derived one or not), the this

pointer must be created in case it is required by the function pointing to the object
from which this function is called. For derived functions, the this pointer stores

the offset of the derived object, not the base one. That's all! If the function is called
with various this pointers, it's a derived function.
It's more difficult to figure out from which object the function has been de-

rived. There are no universal solutions to this. Still, if we've singled out the a object
that uses the £1(), £2()... functions and the B object that uses the £1(), £3(),
f4()... functions, then we can safely assert that the £1() function is derived from
class A. However, if the £1() function has never been called from the instance of the
class, we won't be able to determine whether it's a derived one or not.

Let's consider all this in the following example:
Listing 48. Identifying Derived Functions
#include

class

<stdio.h>

Base{

PubiLes

void base_demo(void)
{

printf ("BASE

DEMO\n") ;

i
void base demo 2 (void)
{
printf ("BASE DEMO

he
te
class

Derived:

public

Base{

2\n");

Step Seven: Identifying Key Structures of High-Level Languages

147

public:
void

derived
demo (void)

{
printf ("DERIVED

DEMO\n") ;

};
void

derived

demo

2 (void)

{
printf ("DERIVED

DEMO

2\n");

bi

Generally, the disassembled listing of the compiled version of this program
should look like this:
Listing 49. The Disassembled Code for Identifying Derived Functions
main

proc

near

7 CODE

push

esi

push

£

call

??2@YAPAXI@Z

; A new

instance

; We

don't

yet

mov

esi,

eax

add

esp,

4

7 operator

of

some

know

ecx,

esi

call

BASE

DEMO

; Now

we're

7. that.

this

points—t0"-a.

mov

ecx,

eSi

call

BASE DEMO 2

; Now we're

calling

calling

this points

push

it

call

? 2?2@YAPAXI@Z

object

of which

mov

; that

XREF:

BASE

is

one.

new(uint)

created.

Let's

say,

Sl

=a

pein

eens

aS)

taking

into

DEMO,

7 ECX

=

*a_

it

is

the

a object.

account

the

fact

(this)

BASE DEMO 2, taking

into account

to a.

-

; Operator

; One more

instance

of some

object

mov

eax

:

Fa HoH

esi,

start+AFp

fact

call

it b.

new(uint)

is created;
Raia

the

6)

let's

Part |: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

148

add

esp,

4

mov

ecx,

esi

call

BASE

DEMO

; Bha!

We're

; Hence,

* ECXe=)

calling

BASE

DEMO

mov

ecx,

call

BASE DEMO 2

; Here

we're

; Hence,

calling

BASE DEMO
ecx,

Cail

DERIVED
we're

; and we

BASE

now

both

this

a and

points

to

b.

b.

DEMO 2, but

now

to both

this

a and

points

to b.

Db.

esi

DEMO

calling

can't

see

DERIVED

any

calling,

mov

ecx,

call

DERIVED DEMO 2

pop

but
to

2 is related

; When

7 the

DEMO,

related

esi

mov

; Now

BASE

is

sbitchis))

this

DEMO.

relation

has

never

The

this

pointer

between

DERIVED

pointed

to

DEMO

points

and

to

b,

a.

a.

esi

same...

esi

retn

main

endp

So you see, you can identify nonvirtual derived functions. The only difficulty is
how to distinguish the instances of two different objects from instances of
the same object.
We've already discussed identifying derived virtual functions. They are
called in two stages — the offset of the virtual table of the base class is written
in the object instance, then it's replaced with the offset of the virtual table of
the derived class. Even though the compiler optimizes the code, the redundancy remainder will be greater than necessary for distinguishing derived functions from other ones.
Identifying virtual tables. Now, having thoroughly mastered virtual tables and
functions, we'll consider a very insidious question: Is any array of pointers
to functions a virtual table? Certainly not! Indirectly calling a function through

Step Seven: Identifying Key Structures of High-Level Languages

a pointer is often used by programmers

149

in practice. An array of pointers to

functions. -. hmm. Well, it's certainly not typical, but it happens, too!

Let's consider the following example — it's a somewhat ugly and artificial, but
to show a situation where a pointer array is vitally necessary, we'd have to write
hundreds of lines of code.
Listing 50. An Imitation of a Virtual Table
#include

void

<stdio.h>

demo
1 (void)

{
printf£("Demo

void

1\n");

demo
2 (void)

{
printf("Demo

2\n");

call demo(void

**x)

Rad,

void

a

Static void*, x12] =
1, (void*)
{ (void*) demo

demo 2};

an array
ff.
// in the course of the program (i.e.,
Wi x[0]=(void *) demo_1, ...), the compiler will generate
Si an adequate code that writes the functions! offsets
// at run time, which is absolutely unlike a virtual table!
// On the contrary, initializing an array when it's declared
ae causes ready pointers to be placed in the data segment,
// which resembles a true virtual table.
ha (By the way, this also helps save CPU clocks ticks. )
Attention:

If you

call demo(&x[0]);

initialize

Part |: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

150

Now, see if you can distinguish a handmade table from a true one.
—

Listing 51. Distinguishing an Imitation from a True Virtual Table
main

proc

neat

push

offset

call

demo_call

; A pointer
; to

the

; CODE

Like

to something

function.

; discover

this

; passed

so

XREF:

start+AFYp

VIBL

very

similar

having

grown

wise

with

falsification.

First,

the pointers

(The

code

used

for

this

isn't

the

register,

not

via

the

pointer

But

crude

simply.

to a virtual

table

is passed

experience,

we

easily

to VBTL

aren't

that

basic.)

; Second,

; they're

passed

; Third,

no

via

existing

; directly,

compiler

but

places

7 an object

nor

a this pointer.

; although

to the

pop

it

untrained

uses

in an
eye,

object.

the

stack.
to

a virtual

table

But

here,

there's

neither

Therefore,

this

isn't

a virtual

table,

it looks

very

similar.

ecx

rectn
main

endp

demo_call

proc

arg

near

0

; That's
; and

it!

The

virtual

push

ebp

mov

ebp,

push

esi

argument

tables

are

; CODE

XREF:

sub 0 401030+5Tp

=

dword

ptr

8

is

a pointer,

addressed

through

the

register.

esp

mov

esi,

[ebptarg
0]

call

dword

ptr

[esi]

; Here's

a two-level

; to the

array

function call — through the pointer
of pointers to the function, which is typical for
; Calling virtual functions. But again, the code is too simple —
# calling virtual functions involves a lot of redundancy,
; and in addition, the this pointer is absent.
call

dword

ptr

[esi+4]

Step Seven: Identifying Key Structures of High-Level Languages

; The

same

thing

; for

calling

pop

esi

pop

ebp

here.

This

a virtual

is

too

151

simple

function.

igtsyaig!

demo

call

Like

VTBL

endp

dd

offset

demo1

dd

offset

demo2

7 The

pointer

7 but

does

not

array

; DATA

XREF:main

externally

reside

where

looks

virtual

like

a virtual

table,

tables

usually

reside.

Let's recap the main signs of a falsification:
OV The code is too simple — a minimum number of registers are used, and there
is no redundancy. Calling virtual tables is much more intricate.
© The pointer to a virtual function is placed in the instance of an object, and is
passed via the register, not via the stack. (See "The this Pointer" section.)

©
O

There is no this pointer, which is always created before calling a virtual function.
.
Virtual functions and static variables are located in various places of the data
segment — therefore, we can distinguish them at once.

Is it possible to organize the function call by reference so the compilation of the
program produces a code identical to the call of a virtual function? Theoretically,
yes. But in practice, it's hardly possible to do so (especially without intending to).
Because of its high redundancy, the code that calls virtual functions is very specific
and can be recognized on sight. It's easy to imitate a common technique of working
with virtual tables, but it's impossible to exactly reproduce it without assembly
inserts.

Conclusion. In general, working with virtual functions involves many
redundancies and "brakes," and the analysis of them is very labor-consuming.
We permanently have to keep many pointers in mind and remember where each of
them points. Still, code diggers seldom face insoluble problems.

152

Part |: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

Constructors and Destructors
Why is it difficult to identify the constructor? First, in most cases, the constructor
is called automatically when a new instance of the object is created. This makes

it the first function to be called — but only if it is called. The constructor is
optional; it may be present in an object, or it may not. Therefore, the function
called first isn't always a constructor!
Second, by looking at the description of the C++ language, we learn that
the constructor doesn't return a value. This is unusual in regular functions, but this
feature isn't unique and can't be used to reliably identify the constructor. What
should we do then?
According to the standard, the constructor shouldn't throw exceptions automatically, even if the memory allocation for the object fails. Most compilers
implement this requirement by placing a check for a null pointer before evoking
the constructor. The control is passed to the constructor only if memory for
the object has been allocated successfully.

In contrast, the other functions of the object are always called, even if the
attempt to allocate memory was unsuccessful. To be precise, the other functions
try to be called. If a memory allocation error occurs, a null pointer is returned.
This causes an exception to be thrown when the first call is attempted for these
functions. The control is then passed to the handler of the corresponding exception.
Thus, the function enclosed only by checks for a null pointer is a constructor.
Theoretically,

a similar

check

can

be used when

other

functions

are

called,

but I have not come across such functions yet.
The destructor, like the constructor, is optional; the object's function called last

must not necessarily be a destructor. Nevertheless, it's simple to distinguish a destructor from any other function — it's called only if memory has been successfully
allocated and the object has been created. This is a documented property of the

language; it must be implemented by all compilers. Just as with the constructor,

a "ring" of null pointers is placed in the code, but no confusion arises because the
constructor is called first, and the destructor last.
An object consisting entirely of one constructor or one destructor is a special
case. How can we figure out what we're dealing with? The call of a constructor is
practically always followed by a code that resets this to zero if memory allocation
was unsuccessful; there's nothing of the kind for a destructor. What's more, the destructor is rarely called directly from the parent procedure. Instead, the destructor

Step Seven: Identifying Key Structures of High-Level Languages

153
ay

is called from a function wrapper, along with the delete operator that releases the
memory acquired by the object. So, it's quite possible to distinguish a constructor
from a destructor!
To better understand these distinctions, let's consider the following example:
Listing 52. An Example of a Constructor and a Destructor
#include

class

<stdio.h>

MyClass {

public:
MyClass
void

(void) ;

demo

~MyClass

(void) ;

(void) ;

};
MyClass: :MyClass

()

{
print’ (“Gonstructor\n™);

MyClass: :~MyClass ()

{
printf ("Destructor\n")

void

;

MyClass:
:demo (void)

{
printf ("MyClass\n") ;
ro

main ()
MyClass

*zzz

=

new

MyClass;

Zzz—>demo () ;
delete

zzz;

}
aaa
er
eee

:

as

Part I: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

154

In general, the disassembled code of the compiled version of this example
should look like this:
ED

Listing 53. The Disassembled Code for a Constructor and a Destructor

SS

Se ee

Constructor

; This

is

proc

near

a constructor

function.

; a constructor

by looking

;

function

(See

the

main

push

esi

mov

esi,

push

offset

Caley

feugalinlene

add

esp,

4

mov

eax,

esi

pop

esi

at

an

; CODE

XREF:

maint11/p

We

make

sure

that

this

of

its

call.

can

implementation

is

below.)

ecx

aConstructor

;

"Constructor\n"

retn

Constructor

endp

Destructor

proc

; This

is

; a destructor
;

(See

near

a destructor

the

function.

by looking

main

function

push

offset

call

printf

pop

eCx

at

the

7 CODE

XREF:

We

make

can

__destructor+6)p
sure

implementation

of

that

this

its

call.

below.)

aDestructor

; "Destructor\n"

retn

Destructor

demo
; This

endp

proc
is an

near

; CODE

ordinary

demo

aMyclass

push

offset

(ce MRS

“ieheulyansnr

pop

ecx

XREF:

maintlEvp

function.

; "MyClass\n"

retn

demo

endp

main

proc

near

; CODE

XREF:

start+AFlp

is

ae

Step Seven: Identifying Key Structures of High-Level Languages

push

esi

push

1

cal

? ?2@YAPAXI@Z

add

esp,

; Memory

allocated

rather,

test

eax,

jz

short

; A check

; Operator

an

for

attempt

a new

object,

is

to

made

for

whether

the

Pay

allocation

attention

is

use

the

null

thrown,

but

the

constructor

allocating

resets

causes

an

should

not

the

7 only

if the

memory

allocation

; Hence,

the

function

preceding

eCcx,

eax

; The

this

pointer

call

Constructor

; This

function

; only

if the

mov

esi,

jmp

short

is

; The
; to

XOR

a constructor,

memory

allocation

object

the poiner

object

to the object.

exception
throw

an

exception,

is unsuccessful.

control

a success.
ESI,

ESI

is

since

it's

just

a constructor!

is

called

a success.

eax

loc_0_40105C

; CODE XREF: maintD1j
esi,

esi

pointer
cause

an

<

to the

object

exception

when

; Attention:

The

constructor

; therefore,

the

function

;

loc_0_40105¢:
mov

is

the

the

is prepared.

loc_0_40105A:
xOr

for

gets

for

destination.

which

; Therefore,

mov

jump

pointer

memory

constructor

of memory

the

to

though

XOR ESI, ESI,

to

; Attempting
; even

so.

loc
0
40105A

successful.

be

do

eax

7; The destination

7 to

new(uint)

4

is

; Or,

7 is

155

ecx,

esi

is

reset

attempting

never

below

to use

throws

definitely

an

the pointer.

exception,

isn't a constructor.

; CODE XREF: maint+18Tj

156 _— Part |: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

; The

this

pointer

demo
; An ordinary

is prepared.

call

test

esi,

4z

short

; Checking

function

(If not,

; Thus,

the

push

1

we

this pointer

ae
2

Se

for

the

object

have

nothing

function

of bytes

ecx,

esi

; Preparing

the

to

sdestructor

; The

destructor

been

to

destructor

is

(This

and nothing

is necessary

else.

for

delete.)

called.

;

fe

called

allocated.

CODE XREF: main+25tj
y

;

main pare — endp — aires. ee Tame rein (AR
NES, ALETG
ee
ae
ates. Beet— erate Vater ats 1? Pier
:

is

release.)

is a destructor

release.

«4
esi

has

The

this pointer.

calles.

SPOR:

for NULL.

likely

following

loc_0_401070:
ies

is called.

loc_0_401070

the

; The number

mov

object

esi

8 only if memory
;

of the

>

r

ey)
ase r =
oe a

A

ns

Step Seven: Identifying Key Structures of High-Level Languages

}z

short

push

esi

loc
0
40109A

call

??3@YAXPAX@Z

add

esp,

; Memory

is

157

; operator

delete(void

*)

4
released,

previously

loc_0 40109A:

allocated

for

the

object.

; CODE XREF: __destructort+Ft3

mov

eax,

pop

esi

pop

ebp

een:

esi

-

meces Gruccor

gendp

For objects in automatic memory, the constructor/destructor can't be identified. If an object is placed on the stack (in automatic memory), no checks are performed for the success of its allocation. In this case, the call of the constructor be-

comes indistinguishable from the calls of other functions. The situation is similar
with the destructor: The stack memory is released automatically upon the function's completion, and the object ceases without evoking delete (only used for deleting objects from the heap).
To make sure of this, let's modify the main function of our previous example as
follows.
Listing 54. A Constructor/Destructor for an Object on the Stack
main ()

{
MyClass

22Z;

ZZz.demo();

In general, the result of compiling this code should look like this:
Listing 55. The Compilation of a Constructor/Destructor for an Object on the Stack
main

proc

var 4
.
,

The

near

= byte

zzz

local

push

ptr

variable

ebp

; CODE

XREF:

start+Arp

-4

is an

instance

of the MyClass

object.

158

Part I: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

mov

ebp,

push

eCx

lea

ecx,

; The

this

esp

[ebptvar4]

pointer

call

constructor

; The

constructor

; We

can

guess,

this

;

constructor

lea

ecx,

Gane

demo

is

that

differ

lea

ecx,

destructor
the

; has

specific

ebp

just

like

an

with

complete

judging

from

initializes

an

ordinary

function!

certainty,

its

contents

alone.

object.)

from

the

demo

calling

function
the

constructor!

[ebptvar
4]

; Calling

pop

not

usually

calling

Cana:

esp,

invoked

[ebptvar
4]

; doesn't

mov

is

asconstructon

; Notice

no

prepared.

although

7 that
(The

is

destructor,

as

we

already

understand,

peculiarities.

ebp

retn

main

endp

Identifying the constructor/destructor in global objects. Global objects (also
known as static objects) are allocated in the data segment at compile time. Hence,

memory allocation errors are basically impossible. Does this mean that, as with
stack objects, we can't reliably identify the constructor/destructor? Not quite.
A global object is accessible from many places in the program, but its constructor should be called only once. How is this done? Most compilers simply use
a global variable-flag initially equal to zero, then incremented by one before the
first call of the constructor (set to TRUE, in a more general case). We just have to
find out whether the flag is equal to zero when the program iterates. If it's not, we
must skip calling the constructor. Once again, the constructor is encircled with a
branch that allows us to reliably distinguish it from all other functions.

Step Seven: Identifying Key Structures of High-Level Languages

159

Things are easier still with the destructor: If the object is global, it's deleted only
when the program is completed. And what can trace it, besides run time type
information (RTTI)? A special function, such as _atexit, receives the pointer to
the destructor, saves it, and then invokes it when it becomes necessary. The special

function should be called only once. To avoid using yet another flag, it's called just
after the constructor is invoked. At first, the object may seem to consist of the constructor/destructor only, but this is not the case! Don't forget that atexit doesn't
immediately pass control to the destructor code; it only remembers the pointer to it
for later use.
Thus, it's simple to identify the constructor/destructor of the global object, as
the following example proves:
Listing 56.
main

A Constructor/Destructor for a Global Object

()

{
static

MyClass

22z;

ZZz.daemo();

Generally, the result of compiling this code should look like this:
Listing 57. The Compilation of a Constructor/Destructor for a Global Object
main

proc

mov

cl,

near

byte
0 4078EO

; CODE

XREF:

_; This

is

; the
mov
test

; Is

naz
.
,

Yes,

aul

de

cule

Toll

the

object

start+AFVp

a flag

instance

for

of the

initializing
object.

initialized?

short

loc_0_ 40106D

it's

initialized;

the

constructor

mov

ai,

mMOv

ecx,

offset

unk_0 4078E1

; The

this

pointer

is prepared.

or

Gis

al.

shouldn't

be

called.

ei

; This is an instance of the object.

Part |: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

160

; The

initialization

flag

; and

the

called.

mov

byte
0 4078E0,

call

constructor

is

dl

; Notice
7 and

that

the

Thus,

the

instance

initialized

constructor

isn't

easily

i tie rlaoeatie

called.

offset

thunk_destructo

add

esp,

i This

is passing

pointer

to the destructor

; The

destructor

should

be

=~

“a

La

object.

above),

_atexit

ares
:

check

call

meme “ nite os

of the

object

the

push

identified!

>

4

called

upon

to the _atexit

completion

function.

of the

program.

; CODE XREF: main+tatj

- elorey Tonmerstene unk, 0 4078E1 ; This is an instance of the object.

; The this pointer

a

of the

be

PE Pinene

kasjeS

instance

(see

loc_0_40106D:

mom

is a flag for initializing

; the

it can

™

a

; This

constructor

; is already

Cag ee

set,

demo

ee

is prepared.
ee

(ee

one 4 aseimaiaa ttheai

PUR

:. een

MAiMhS.¢ 2O. no

snags:

Ob

i

eee

_——

Minltin
th te ge ema

see
Lea

50

As oe ce

Oe

;

ee

tlgmas |r
gente

©

‘

a

ee sara
>tie

Ae gavel s

lating

:

ae

:

SC

7” v Serge

Rn

ae
ty<h

7 re

Step Seven: Identifying Key Structures of High-Level Languages

161

Similar code is generated by Borland C++; the only difference is Borland creates
artful calls of all destructors. These calls are placed in a special procedure that usually
resides before or near library functions, and so they're easy to identify. Take a look:
Listing 58. A Constructor/Destructor for a Global Object Using Borland C++

_main

proc near
push

; DATA XREF:

DATA:00407044Vo

ebp

mov

ebp,

cmp

ds:byte
0 407074,

jnz

short

; If the

mov

esp
0 ; A flag

object

eax,

is already

Offset

unk_0

initialized,

4080B4

; An

call

constructor

snaKe

ds:byte

0 407074

; A flag

; The

flag

is

incremented

by one

;

set

the

(to

for

initializing

the

object

loc
0 4010EC

TRUE

the

constructor

instance
for

of

the

initializing

isn't

called.

object
the

object

value).

loc_0 4010EC:

; CODE XREF: maintAtj

mov

eax,

call

demo

xOr

eax,

pop

ebp

Offset

unk_0

4080B4

; An

instance

of the

object

eax

retn

_Mmain
call

endp
destruct

This
i!;

proc

function

near

contains

.
’

objects.

Since

.

for

the

initialization

only

this

,

function

constructors

push

the

are

; DATA XREF:
the

call

calls

of each

of all

the

destructor

DATA:004080A4vo
destructors

of global

is encircled

by the

flag,

this

function

can

contains

such

encircling

code.

(Calls

entire

program. )

usually

scattered

over

the

be easily

check

identified

of

ebp

mov

ebp,

cmp

0 407074,
ds:byte

esp

4z

short

loc
401117
_0

0 ; A flag

for

initializing

the

object

—

Part I: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

162

; Is

TOS

the

object

initialized?

mov

eax,

offset

; The

this

pointer

Mov

edx,

call

destructor

unk_0

; An

instance

of

the

object

is prepared.

2

ORs OAT

pop

4080B4

; CODE

XREF:

call _destruct+ATj

ebp

retn
call

destruct

endp

Virtual destructor. A destructor can be virtual, too! It's useful if the instance of

a derived class is deleted using the pointer to the base object. Since virtual functions
belong to the class of an object, not the class of a pointer, a virtual destructor is in-

voked according to the object type, not the pointer type. However, these subtleties
concern programming. Code diggers are interested in how to identify the virtual
destructor. It's easy — a virtual destructor combines the properties of a typical destructor and of a virtual function. (See the " Virtual Functions" section.)

Virtual constructor. Is there such a thing? Standard C++ doesn't support anything of the kind. That is, it doesn't directly support a virtual constructor; programmers seldom need one. Still, if they do, they could write some emulating code.
The code is placed in a virtual function (not the constructor!) specially chosen for
this purpose. It looks approximately like this: return new (class name) (*this).

This trick is not pretty, but it works.
Certainly, there are other solutions. A detailed discussion of them is beyond the

scope of this book. It would require a profound knowledge of C++, would occupy
too much space, and would hardly interest most readers.

So, the identification of a virtual constructor is basically impossible because it
lacks a concept. Its emulation can be performed using any of dozens of solutions —
go ahead; try and count them all. However, in most cases, virtual constructors are
virtual functions that take the this pointer as an argument and return the pointer
to a new object. This isn't a reliable identification criterion, but it's better than
nothing.

Step Seven: Identifying Key Structures of High-Level Languages

163
>.

i

One constructor, two constructor... There may be more than one object con-

structor. This doesn't influence the analysis in any way. Only one constructor is
chosen by the compiler, depending on the declaration of the object, and it is invoked for each object instance. One essential detail: Various object instances may
invoke various constructors — be on guard!
More than one way to skin a cat, or, Attention: the empty constructor. Certain

limitations of a constructor (no returned value, in particular) have resulted in the

empty-constructor programming style. The constructor is deliberately left empty,
and all initializing code is placed in a special member function called Init.
The strong and weak points of such a style could be the subject of a separate discussion. It's enough for code diggers to know that such a style exists and is actively
used — not only by individual programmers, but also by giant companies such as
Microsoft. Therefore, don't be surprised if you encounter a call of an empty constructor; just look for the initializing function among the ordinary members.

Objects, Structures, and Arrays
The internal representation of objects is similar to the representation of structures
in the C language. (After all, objects are structures, too.) We'll look at how to identify both of them.
Structures are popular among programmers. They allow programmers to unite
related data under one roof, making the program listing more readable and understandable. Accordingly, identifying structures during disassembling facilitates the
analysis of code. To the great regret of code diggers, structures exist only in the
source code of a program. They almost completely "dissolve" at compile time and
become indistinguishable from ordinary variables that are not related to one another in any way.
Let's consider the following example:
Listing 59. Eliminating Structures at Compile Time
#include

<stdio.h>

#include

<string.h>

SErUCE

22z

re

{
char

inte

s0O[16];

ay

rm@ileyehe

aay

Part I: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

164

hi

fune (SELUGUZZZ

// Clearly,

YY)

it's

// Here, this
// the hidden

better to avoid passing a structure
is done deliberately to demonstrate
creation of a local variable.

DEL ME

eS

see or
\ epee

SHEICMCNE

VazAva, NEP

strepy (&y.s0)[0],

ye SO) Olli yrcl

“Hello,

by value.

peeve)er

Sailor!") ;

y.a = 0x666;
Wipe. sienie

func (y) ;

In general, the disassembled listing of the compiled version of this program
should look like this:
Listing 60. The Disassembled Code Eliminating Structures at Compile Time
main

proc

near

var 18
var 8
var 4

= byte ptr -18h
= dword ptr -8
= dword ptr -4

; CODE

; The members of the structure are
; from ordinary local variables.
push
mov
sub

XREF:

start+ARp

indistinguishable

ebp

ebp,
esp,

; A place

esp
18h

is allocated

push
push
push

esi
edi
offset

lea

eax,

on

aHelloSailor

[ebptvar_ 18]

the

stack.

; "Hello,

Sailor!"

Step Seven: Identifying Key Structures of High-Level Languages

; This
; The

is the pointer
variable

; hence,

next

0x18-0x8=0x10

; var _1¢6 occupies,

;

(See

push

ead:

; The

the

it

is

—

16 bytes

which

"Literals

and

hints

offset

—

this

is

to us

that

it's

Strings"

section.)

from the data

segment

8,

just

how much

a string.

strcpy

string

is copied
of

esp,

the

to the

local

variable

structure.

8
666h

; The

is assigned

value

of 0x666

mov

[ebp+var
4], 40D33333h

; This

value

7

the

is equal

"Function

to

by the

6.6

compiler

to a variabe

in the

Arguments"

~ sub
esp, 18h
; Memory is allocated
; used

var_18.

at

mov __—s« [ebpt+var_
8],

(See

variable

located

eax

7 a member

add

to the local

to

165

float

of DWORD

type.

format.

section.)

rae
for the hidden local variable
for passing

a member

of the structure

; to the function by value.
3

einen

;

(See the "Register 200 ge DCE Ae yak
eg
=

ec

Pad

le

fae coe

ii

aaa

6

are Rs 20 ROKe®: saodouble words (or 24bytes) wi 1 be copied: 16 bytes to the
‘4
allel
ala
frUSft
iar

_

the float and int variabies.

—

Part |: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

166
=

pop

edi

pop

esi

Mov

esp,

pop

ebp

ebp

retn

main

endp

Now, we'll replace the structure with a sequential declaration of the same variables:
Listing 61. The Resemblance between Structures and Ordinary Variables
main()

{
char

s0[16];

LMeealy
fl Gate may
Strepy(esO101;

=thHello-m

sanlorn!™) >

a=0x666;

£=6.6;

Now, let's compare the disassembled listing of the compiled version of this example with the previous code:
Listing 62. Comparing Structures with Ordinary Variables
main

< $0)) 6B

proc

bh lee)

<q io)"ue be na

var 4
; There

Il

dword

ptr

-18h

ll

byte

ptr

-14h

= dword

; and not
; need

; CODE

on the

in the

members

of

; However,

when

stack

in the order

order

in which

the

structure,

to be placed

XREF:

start+ARp

ptr -4

is likely to be some difference

; are placed

; The

near

in the

The local variables

that

the

they were
on

order

disassembling,

here!

the

declared

other

in which

the

initial

compiler

prefers,

in the

program.

hand,

they

were

order

declared.

of variables

is unknown,

Step Seven: Identifying Key Structures of High-Level Languages

; and

we

can't

mo CORrectiiy'

determine

whether

they

are

ordered

or-not.

push

ebp

Mov

ebp,

esp

sub

esp,

18h

; 0x18 bytes of the stack space are allocated
push

offset

lea

eax,

push

eax

Calli

strcpy

add

esp,

Mov

[ebptvar
4],

mov

; The

aHelloSailor

; "Hello,

(as in the previous

Sailor!"

[ebptvar
14]

.
8
666h

{[ebpt+var
18], 40D33333h

code

coincides

byte

for byte!

_; Hence, it's impossible |
; to distinguish a structure
; from a simple

|

167

mov
pop

esp, ebp
ebp —

_

proc near
rt

At Pe

collection

;

a

of local variables.

~

Re A

Sap em

fae
» ost

A

Tm

.

eo

example).

168

Part I: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

; at

the

relative

0x14,

offset

sub

esp,

; Eight

bytes

fstp

[esp+8+var8]

; The

floating-point

; is

stored

mov

eax,

push

eax

are

allocated

in the

number

local

for

a

EAX pointer,

on

the

FPU

stack.

value

local

variable.

(which

we've

just

read)

variable.

10]
[ebptarg

previously

stored

; and

pushed

the

to

real

variable

is

read

stack.

0]
[ebptarg

ecx,

; A pointer

the

8

; The

lea

to

to

push

eCxX

push

offset

call

printf

add

esp,

pop

ebp

the

aSXF

first

argument

7 "Ss

is

x

obtained.

t£\n"

14h

GLern

func

endp

It seems likely that we won't be able to distinguish structures from ordinary
variables. Will an individual code digger really have to recognize the "relationship"
of data and bind the data with "conjugal ties," occasionally making mistakes and
inexactly reconstructing the source code of the program? Well, yes and no.
Yes, because the instance of a structure declared and used in the same translation

unit is "unwrapped" at compile time in independent variables. These are addressed
individually by their actual, possibly indirect, addresses. No, because in this case,
the scope has only one pointer to the instance of a structure. Therefore, all structure members are called through the pointer to a corresponding instance of this
structure. (Since the structure is out of the scope — for example, passed to another

function by reference — then calculating the actual addresses of its members is impossible at compile time.)

Step Seven: Identifying Key Structures of High-Level Languages

169
i

ll

Just a moment. You probably know that array elements are addressed in exactly
the same way: The base pointer points to the beginning of an array. The offset of
a required element relative to the beginning of an array is added (an index of the
element multiplied by its size). The result of calculations will be the actual pointer
to the required element.
The fundamental difference between arrays and structures is that arrays are
homogeneous (consisting of elements of an identical type), and structures may be
either homogeneous or heterogeneous (consisting of elements of various types).
Therefore, structures and arrays can be easily identified by determining the memory locations addressed through a common base pointer, then determining the
variable type. If we find more than one type, we're probably dealing with a structure. If we find only one type, a structure or an array are equally probable. We have
to judge by the circumstances and the program.
Let's suppose a programmer takes it into his or her head to determine
the dependence of the amount of coffee he or she drinks each day of the week.
The programmer may either use the array day[7] or start the structure struct
week{int Monday; int Tuesday;..} to keep record. In either case, the codes generated by the compiler will be identical — and not only the codes, but the meanings
as well! In this context, a structure is indistinguishable physically and logically from
an array. The programmer's choice is a matter of personal preference.
Keep in mind that arrays, as a rule, are long; when their elements are addressed,
they frequently are accompanied by various mathematical operations on the
pointer. In addition, array elements typically are processed in a loop, whereas
the members of a structure are usually "picked out" individually.
What's even more unpleasant is that the C and C++ languages allow (if not
provoke) the explicit conversion of types, and... oh, wait. During disassembling,
it seems unlikely that we can figure out whether we're dealing with data of different
types united under one roof (a structure), or with a handmade conversion applied
to an array. Strictly speaking, such conversions turn an array into a structure.
(An array is homogeneous by definition; it can't store data of different types.)
Let's modify the previous example so the pointer is passed to a function, not to
the structure, and see what kind of code the compiler generates:
Listing 63. Passing a Structure Pointer to a Function
near

funct

proc

var 8

= qword ptr -8

; CODE

XREF:

sub_0

401029+29p

170

_‘ Part |: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

arg_0
; The

= dword

ptr

8

function

_

takes

only

one

push

ebp

argument!

mov

ebp,

esp

mov

eax,

[ebptarg0]

; This

is loading

the

fld

dword

[eax+14h]

; The

floating-point

; relative

ptr

to

argument
value,

located

to the

at

the

the

EAX pointer,

is

first

of all,

EAX

(the argument

; function)

is the

pointer.

Second,

; but

one

a base

ee

of the

=e

and

sub

first

continue
esp,

ee

it's not

FPU

stack.

passed

to the

a simple

for accessing

elements

or

array.

Let's

the

an

element
our

recall

(a floating-point

pointer,

type

value),

analysis.

8

for

local

variables.

ae

irks

lesp+8+var_8 VAets

gr

the

is used

tae raisin anioewtavariabler war 8.buljegincan

Se

to

in EAX.

0x14

that

; Eight
bytes
are
allocated

fstp

loaded

function

offset

; Therefore,

; of a structure

Ii

passed

AS eS

(3s

nd

YY

ableton

VATE

ms ybrieepet gash
one

ME

2eihihid

Step Seven: Identifying Key Structures of High-Level Languages

7 to occupy

all

0x10

of these

; the

case.

Possibly,

; not

used.

We

7 by having

can

a look

; initialized

this

; reconstruct

its

PES

although

the

rest

members

figure

out

how matters

at

calling

the

structure.
view

even

this

of the

can,

without

function

however,
doing

necessarily

structure

actually

(parent)

We

isn't
do

simply

are

stand

that

approximately

this.

6
eo.a

# Ghar jxPOxi0}]
pane

bytes,

171

|| int x[¢f {| -intié/e).||

. int64 (2);

SV

Sis OBE

ae

rae
push

offset

aSXF

piss

; The

format

specification

string

ascertain
“ee to

|

the data

types.

Sxase\n"
allows

us

_

; The first element is undoubtedly char x(x010],
;

_; Hence,

Si
ar

-

; since it's outputas a string.
our pe

aL een

ey esa

CAR, HAR

ey

assumption that eos is a structure

pea? ay coasters
o tes, Qe eke) ory SRE
“aioBu Qaiss

is correct!

4
ae

ioe

~

.

172

_‘ Part |: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

push

offset

lea

eax,

push

eax

aHelloSailor

; "Hello,

call
unknown_libname_1
; unknown_libname_1 is a strepy,
; even

; the
se

analyzing

pointer

of

is obtained

code.

The

0x10

bytes

to the

by subtracting

; stremp

has

exactly

; since

the

local

can

add

; The

function

the

mov

the

same

buffer

isn't

only be a receiving

esp,

and we can figure

its

; from the offset of this variable

; It

Sailor!"

[ebptvar
18]

takes

two

this

out without

arguments

local

buffer

(the

size

offset

of the

nearest

—

of

0x10

variable

relative to the frame of the stack).

prototype,

but

this

can't

be

strcmp,

initialized.

buffer.

8

arguments

are

popped

off

the

stack.

[ebp+var
8], 666h

; Initializing

a local variable

mov

{ebptvar_
4], 40D33333h

; This

is initializing

a local

var 8 of DWORD type.

variable

var 4 of type...

no,

“not of DWORD type (despite the fact that it looks like DWORD).

“=e
™“e

Having analyzed how this variable is used _

=a the fune peaciien to iets tt =

oa

oN

weAce cued

Step Seven: Identifying Key Structures of High-Level Languages

7 LO

;

Ene

struct

;

string

buffer

int

s

float

var 4

data

types

an

passed

to. the

function.

var_18[10];

-

; not

is

x{

char

; Since

—

173

var

8;

are

different,

this

is

a

structure,

array.

Caick

funct

add

esp,

4

Mov

esp,

ebp

pop

ebp

retn
sub
0 401029

endp

Identifying objects. Objects of the C++ language are actually structures that
include data, processing methods (functions), and protection attributes (of the
types public, friend...).

The data elements of an object are processed by the compiler as if they were ordinary members of a structure. Nonvirtual functions are called by the offset; they
aren't contained in the object. Virtual functions are called through a special pointer
to the virtual table contained in an object, and protection attributes are deleted at
compile time. We can distinguish a public function from a protected one by remembering that a protected function is called only from its own object; a public
one can be called from other objects.
So, what exactly is an object (or object instance)? Let's assume that we have the following object:
Listing 64. The Structure of an Object
class

public:

MyClass{

void

demo_1(void);

Int

ay

int

b;

Part I: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

174

virtual
int

void

demo_2(void);

(CF

be
MyClass

222;

The object instance will be "grinded" by the compiler into the following structure (Fig. 13):

)|
Y

Fig. 13. A representation of an object in memory

The code digger has to solve several problems: How can we distinguish objects
from simple structures? How can we find the size of objects? How can we determine which function belongs to which object? Let's answer the questions in the
order they are posed.
In general, it's impossible to distinguish an object from a structure; an object is
just a structure that has private members by default. To declare objects, we can use

the struct or the class keyword. For classes with unprotected members, it's preferable to use struct because members of a structure are public by default. Compare these two examples:
Listing 65. Declaring Objects Using the struct or the class Keyword
struct

MyClass{
void

class

demo (void);

int x;
private:

MyClass{

void

demo private (void) ;

Bean

y

public:

void demo_ private (void) ;

void

ave, Wag

demo (void) ;
sigalee se<1)

he

Step Seven: Identifying Key Structures of High-Level Languages

175
>

The listings differ in their syntax, but the code generated by the compiler will be
identical. Therefore, it's best to learn to distinguish objects from structures as soon

as possible.
Let's regard structures that contain at least one function as objects. How can we
determine which function belongs to which object? This is relatively simple with
virtual functions: They're called indirectly through the pointer to the virtual table.
The compiler places this pointer in each object instance pertaining to that virtual
function. Nonvirtual functions are called using their actual addresses, just like
normal functions that don't belong to any object. Is the situation hopeless? By no
means. Each function of an object is passed an implicit argument — the this
pointer, which refers to the object instance pertaining to that function. The object
instance isn't the object, but something related to it. Therefore, reconstructing the

initial structure of objects in a disassembled program seems feasible.
The size of objects is determined using the same this pointers — as the difference between adjacent pointers (for objects located on the stack or in the data segment). If object instances are created using the new operator, the code contains the
call for the new function that takes as an argument the number of bytes to be allocated. This number is exactly the size of the object.
Well, that's pretty much all. We just need to add that when many compilers
create an object instance that contains neither data nor virtual functions, they allocate a minimum amount of memory (usually, 1 byte) for the object instance, even
though they don't use it. Why do they do this? Memory isn't made of rubber, and
you can't allocate 1 byte on the heap — the granulation causes a considerable piece,
the size of which varies from 4 bytes to 4 KB depending on the heap implementation, to be eaten off!

The memory is allocated because the compiler vitally needs to define the this
pointer. Alas, this can't be a null pointer, since an exception would be thrown dur-

ing the first attempt of calling. In addition, the delete operator should delete
something, but first, this "something" should be allocated...
Arrrgh! Although C++ developers tell us over and over that their language is no
less efficient than pure C, all implementations of C++ compilers that I know generate very buggy and sluggish code. Well, all this is just talk; let's proceed to the consideration of particular examples:
Listing 66. Identifying an Object and Its Structure
#include
class

<stdio.h>

MyClass{

oe

Part |: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

176

public:
void

demo (void) ;

sGGNE B66
private:
demo

private

LES

Vir

(void) ;

hi
void

MyClass::demo_ private

(void)

{
printf ("Private\n") ;

void

MyClass:
:demo (void)

{
printf ("MyClass\n") ;
this->demo

private

();

this—>y=0x666;

MyClass

*zzz

=

new

MyClass;

ZzZz->demo
() ;
ZZZ->X=0x%777;

In general, the disassembled code of the compiled version of this program
should look like this:
Listing 67. The Disassembled Code for Identifying an Object and Its Structure
main

proc

near

-; CODE

XREF:

start+ARNp

push

esi

push

8

call

??2@YAPAXT@Z

; Operator

new(uint)

; Using

the

operator,

we

8 bytes

; some

object.

Generally,

it's

new

allocate

not

very

for an object

(there might

; char

char[8]),

let's

7 aS

dogma,

and

accept

so

it as

not

a working

the

instance

all

that

be something

like

certain

; is allocated
*x = new

for

consider

at

this

hypothesis.

of

memory

assertion

Step Seven: Identifying Key Structures of High-Level Languages

; Further

analysis

Mov

esl,

eax

add

esp,

4

mov

ecx,

esi

will

show

how

matters

prepared

and

passed

; A

this

pointer

is

; to

the

function

through

7 a pointer
"The

to

this

call

the

instance

Pointer"

last

gotten

; It's

not

yet

clear

; a character

the

name

object

instance

a.

(that

the

(a was

object

; the

demo

mov

dword

; Well,

is,

created

; the

; in the

Hence,

object!
more

; class

this

assigned

ECX

detail.)

we

very

just

-

remember
out

that

that

a variable

to preliminary

function!

does

(for

clarity,

but

we

know

that

ECX points.

Let's

name

function

that

"pull

777h

demo

function
it),

the

in now)

function

[esi],

we

the

since

a public

find

of

we're

is

—

itself
one.

the

calls

belong

instance
by the

hair"),

A good

start,

isn't

ESI points
one

of type

int.

to the

more

object

public

the object

to

a

of

out

there's

conclusions,

doesn't

it belongs

it?

instance,

member

looked

like

this:

myclass{

pm

pUbITC:

;

void demo(void);

// Note

that

// neither

;

void is used because

receives

nor returns

x7

i}
pop

is

(See

to

to which

function

by this

ptr

call

Furthermore,

function

object

; According

what

couldn't

well...
then

the

instance

; demo

Hane

for

to

is

; this

; and

of an

stand.

demo

at

;

register.

section

; We've

; to

the

actually

177

esi
=

cetn

main

endp

demo

proc

near

7 CODE

XREF:

maintFtp

the

function

anything.

178

Part I: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

; now

we're

in the

demo

function,

push

esi

mov

esi,

eCcx

; The

this

pointer

passed

push

offset

aMyclass

Call

= printt

;

add

esp,

; A line

is

a member

to the

function

is

of

object

A.

loaded

in ECx.

but

later...

My Glass\iie

4

is displayed.

mov

ecx,

call

demo_private

; Oops!

That's

7, Judging

which

This

isn't

interesting,

eSi

~from

it!

é
One more

“this,

B seiavel wie probably has

; since

it's

mov

dword ptr

; Well,

there's

; private.

function

thisris
the

only called
[esit4],
one more

Then, according

of our

private

attribute,

from

function

the

sobyect,

of the very

object.

666h_
variable

in the object,

to our-current

; the object should look like this:
; class myclass{

ee

is called!

a function

ae te se——

and it's

probably

c.

understanding,

|

:

;

“a

Step Seven: Identifying Key Structures of High-Level Languages

; at

least

pop

179

approximately.

esi

rec

demo

demo

endp

private

; This

is

the

proc

near

; CODE

private

demo

function

push

offset

aPrivate

call

printf

pop

eCxX

-

XREF:

demo+12Tp

nothing

interesting.

pL Pmaivate\nY

IRSMELGY

demo

private

endp

Objects and instances. There are no objects in the code generated by the compiler. There are only object instances. This would seem to make no difference.
The instance of an object is the object itself, right? No, it isn't. There's a basic difference

between

an

object and

an

instance:

An

object is a representation

of

the class (i.e., the structure in memory); an object instance (in a generated code) is

a substructure of this. Suppose we have class a, which contains the functions a1
and a2. Then, suppose two of its instances have been created — we'll call function
al from one of them and a2 from the other. Using the this pointer, we can only
clarify that one instance possesses the function a1 and the other one possesses a2.
It's impossible to figure out whether these instances are spawned by one or two objects! Inheritable functions aggravate the situation: They aren't duplicated in derived classes. An ambiguity arises: Suppose the ai and a2 functions are connected
with one instance. The a1, a2, and a third function, which we'll call a3, are con-

nected with another instance. In this case, the instances may belong to one class
(the a3 function simply isn't called from the first instance), or the second instance
may be derived from the first class. The code generated by the compiler will be
identical in either case. We'd have to restore the hierarchy of classes based on the
sense and purpose of the functions that belong to those classes. Only a psychic
could approximate the original code.
In summary, never confuse an object instance with the object itself. Also, remember that objects only exist in the source code and are deleted at compile time.
On the street where you live... And where do structures, arrays, and objects

live? In the memory, of course! There are three types of allocation: on the stack

180

Part |: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

(automatic memory), in the data segment (static memory), and on the heap (dy-

namic memory). Each type has its own "personality." Let's take the stack as an example: Memory allocation is automatic and occurs at compile time. Only the total
amount of memory allocated for all local variables is determined definitely; it's basically impossible to determine how much memory each of them occupies individually. Suppose we have the code char al[13]; char a2[17]; char a3[23].
If the compiler aligns arrays to multiple addresses, the difference in the offsets of
the neighboring arrays may not equal the sizes. The only hope for determining the
original size is to find checks for going beyond the array boundaries. (However,
these are rarely done.) One more unpleasant point: If one of the arrays is declared
but never used, nonoptimizing compilers (and even some optimizing ones) may,
nevertheless, allocate space on the stack for it. It will adjoin the previous array.

We'll have to guess whether this is the array size, or if the unused array is "stuffed"
in its end! Well, we can cope with arrays somehow, but matters are worse with
structures and objects. Nobody provides a program with a code that traces violations of the structure (object) boundaries. Such violations are impossible, unless
the programmer works with pointers too carelessly.
Let's leave the size alone and move on to problems of allocating and finding
pointers. As mentioned above, if the array (object, structure) is declared in the direct scope of a translation unit, it's "ripped open" at compile time. In this case, its
members are addressed using an actual offset, not the base pointer. Objects can be
identified by the pointers to the virtual tables contained in them, but not all tables

of pointers to functions are virtual tables! They may simply be pointer arrays to
functions defined by the programmer. An experienced code digger can easily recognize such situations (see the "Virtual Functions" section); nevertheless, they're
rather unpleasant.
Objects located in static memory are easier to handle; because of their global
nature, they have a special flag preventing a repeated call of the constructor. (See
the "Constructors and Destructors" section for more details.) Therefore, it's easy to

distinguish an object instance located in the data segment from a structure or an
array. However, we come across the same difficulties when defining the size.
Finally, objects (structures, arrays) located on the heap are incredibly easy
to analyze! Memory is allocated by a function that explicitly takes the number
of bytes to be allocated as an argument. It then returns a pointer to the beginning
of the instance of an object (structure, array). In addition, instances are always
called through the base pointer, although the declaration is done within the scope.
(This can't be done any other way, since the actual addresses of the dynamic memory blocks being allocated are unknown at compile time.)

Step Seven: Identifying Key Structures of High-Level Languages

181

The this Pointer
The this pointer is a true "life buoy" that saves us from drowning in the stormy
ocean of OOP. Using just this, we can determine to which object instance the
called function belongs. Since all nonvirtual functions of an object are called directly using the actual address, the object appears to be split at compile time into

the functions that compose it. If there were no this pointers, it would be impossible to reconstruct the hierarchy of functions!
Thus, correct identification of this is very important. The only problem is how
to distinguish it from pointers to arrays and structures. We identify an object instance using the this pointer; if this points to allocated memory, we are dealing
with an object instance. However, by definition, this is a pointer that refers to an
object instance. We have a never-ending loop! Fortunately, there is a loophole —
a specific code handles the this pointer, allowing us to distinguish it from all other
pointers.
Generally, each compiler has its own specifics; I strongly recommend that you
study them by disassembling your own C ++ programs. However, there are some
commonly accepted guidelines for most implementations. Since this is an implicit
argument of each member function of a class, it seems reasonable to defer further
discussion of its identification until the "Function Arguments" section. Here we'll
just give a brief table summarizing the mechanisms of passing this in various
compilers:
Table 1. The Mechanisms of Passing the this Pointer
Function type
default

Microsoft
Visual C++

Borland C++
aaa

Watcom C++

fastcall

The this pointer is
passed through the ECx
register.

The this pointer is
passed through the EAX

register.

stdcall

The this pointer is
passed through the
stack as the last argument.
:

The this
pointer is
passed
through the
stack as the
last argument of a

function.

182

Part |: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

The new and delete Operators
The compiler translates the new and delete operators into calls of library functions that can be precisely recognized like ordinary library functions. (See the "Library Functions" section.) IDA Pro, in particular, can recognize library functions
automatically, removing this concern from the user's mind. However, not everyone
has IDA Pro. In addition, it doesn't know all library functions and doesn't always
recognize new and delete among those it knows. Thus, there are lots of reasons for
identifying these functions manually.
The new and delete operators can have any implementation, but Windows

compilers rarely implement functions for working independently with the heap —
there's no need for them. It's easier to use the operating system services. However,
it's naive to expect the call of HeapAlloc

instead of new, or HeapFree

instead

of delete. The compiler isn't that simple! The new operator is translated into the new
function,

which

calls malloc

for memory

allocation;

malloc,

in turn,

calls

heap_alloc (or a similar function, depending on the implementation of the memory
management library). This function acts as a "wrapper" for the Win32 API procedure of
the same name. Releasing memory is performed in a similar way.
It's too tedious to go deep into the jungle of nested calls. But it's possible

to identify new and delete in a less laborious way. Let's recall all we know about
the new operator:

The new operator takes only one argument — the number of memory bytes to
be allocated. This argument is calculated at compile time in the majority of cases,
making it a constant.

01 If the object contains neither data nor virtual functions, its size is one memory unit
(the minimum memory allocation, giving this something to point to). Therefore,
a lot of calls will be of the PUSH 01\CALL xxx type, where xxx is simply the new
address. The typical size of objects is less than 100 bytes. So look for a frequently called function that has a constant smaller than 100 bytes as an argument.
O The new function is one of the most popular library functions, so look for
a function that has a "crowd" of cross-references.
O Impressively, new returns the this pointer, and this is easily identified, even
when you are glancing over the code. (See "The this Pointer" section.)
© The result returned by new is always checked for equality to zero. If it equals
zero, the constructor (if there is one — see the "Constructors and Destructors"
section) isn't called.

Step Seven: Identifying Key Structures of High-Level Languages

183

The new operator has more "birthmarks" than necessary to quickly and reliably
identify it, so there's no need to waste time analyzing its code. Still, keep in
mind that new is used not only to create new object instances, but also to allocate
memory for arrays, structures, and, occasionally, single variables (of the sort
int *x = new int; it's usually pretty stupid, but some people do it). Fortunately,
it's simple to distinguish the creation of a new object instance from the allocation of
memory — neither arrays, nor structures, nor single variables have the this
pointer!

To sum up, let's consider a code fragment generated by the Watcom compiler
(IDA Pro doesn't recognize its "native" new operator):

Listing 68. Identifying the new Operator
main_

proc

near

; CODE

push

10h

call

25 CHK

push

ebx

push

edx

mov

eax,

call

W?S$nwn_ui_pnv

; This

is,

; By

the

; but

as

we'll

way,

IDA
have

; allocation

find

to

a psychic

to

be

* small

value.

That

;

the

treats

; Other

compilers,

; always

push

mov

edx,

eax

test

eax,

eax

argument

an

many
on

new

gobbledygook!

accepts

one

it's

certainly

Offsets"

via

the

the

argument

to

functions

the

memory

now,

notice

not

an

of a very

offset.

section.)

register

other

For

the

argument— a constant

and

library

function.

recognize

in this

is,

"Constants

; Watcom

the

it,

function

the

later,

recognized

operator

; Passing

out

has

new

(See

the

__CMain+40Vp

4

you'd

; that

XREF:

hand,

stack.

tells
in

us

such

nothing
a manner.

—

184

Part |: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

(Gelaliey

akc pMayienkorel

imope” jelei9)7

a4

short

loc_41002A

mov

dword

ptr

; Aha!

The

[eax],

function
to

has

pointer

functions)

is

written.

; but

to

of

this,

mov

ebx,

[edx]

mov

eax,

edx

call

dword

BASE

returned

; of

sure

the

offset

; the

be

null

for

checked

is

function

by the

returned

result

; The
Be

virtual

table

EAX
we

loc_41002a:

VTBL

a pointer
(or

at

to

least

suspiciously

need

more

the

location
an

array

resembles

to

this,

where

signs.

; CODE XREF: main +1AT3

; There

is

no

ptr

[ebx]

longer

any

doubt

+ and

this

code

is

; just

the

call

of a virtual

; Hence,

the

W?$nwm_ui_pnv

;

else

could

(what

have

that

EAX

is

the

this

pointer,

function!

function

returned

is new

this?)

It's more difficult to identify delete. This function has no specific features.
It takes only one argument: a pointer to the memory area to be released. In the
most cases, the pointer is this. But, the this pointer is accepted by dozens, if not

hundreds, of other functions! There's one, tiny distinction between delete and
other functions —

in most cases, delete receives the this pointer via the stack,

whereas the other functions receive it via the register. Unfortunately, certain compilers (for example, Watcom) pass arguments via registers to many library functions, hiding all distinctions. What's more, delete returns nothing, but there are
lots of functions that behave in the same way. The call of delete follows the call of
the destructor (if there is one), but the destructor is identified as the function preceding delete. Now we're in a vicious circle!

All we can do is analyze the contents of the function — sooner or later, delete
calls HeapFree. Other variants are possible; Borland C++, for example, contains li-

braries that work with the heap at the low level, so memory is released by calling
VirtualFree.

Fortunately,

IDA Pro identifies delete

in most

cases, and you

needn't strain yourself.
Approaches to implementing the heap. In many programming manuals on

C++ ("Advanced Windows" by Jeffrey Richter, for example), you will be urged to al-

locate memory using new, not malloc. This is because new employs the effective

Step Seven: Identifying Key Structures of High-Level Languages

185

memory management tools of the operating system, whereas malloc uses its own

(rather sluggish) heap manager. But this is a rather strained argument! The standard says nothing about heap implementation, and we don't know beforehand
which function will appear more effective. Everything depends on the specific libraries of a specific compiler.
Let's consider memory management in the standard libraries of three popular
compilers: Microsoft Visual C ++, Borland C ++, and Watcom C ++.
In Microsoft Visual C++, both malloc and new represent a thunk to the same
__nh malloc function. Therefore, either function can be used successfully.
__nh_ malloc calls __heap_ alloc, which, in turn, calls the Windows API function
__heapAlloc.

(It's worth noting that __heap alloc can call its own heap man-

ager if the system's manager is unavailable. In Microsoft Visual C++ 6.0, however,
only one wrapper of the hook remains; its own heap manager was excluded.)
Things are quite different in Borland C++. First, it works directly with
the Windows virtual memory and implements its own heap manager based on
VirtualAlloc/VirtualFree functions. Testing shows that it performs poorly on
Windows 2000. (I didn't test other systems.) It also places superfluous code in the
program that increases its size. In addition, new calls the malloc function — not directly, but through several layers of "wrapping" code! Therefore, contrary to all
guidelines, in Borland C++, calling malloc is more effective than calling new.
Watcom C++ (its eleventh version, in any case — the latest one I could find)

implements new and malloc in practically identical ways: Both of them refer to
_nmalloc, a "thick" wrapper of LocalAlloc, the 16-bit Windows function that itself is a thunk to HeapAlloc!

Library Functions
Reading code of a program written in a high-level language, we can only analyze
the implementation of standard library functions (such as printf) in exceptional
cases. But there's really no need to do so! We already know the purpose of such
functions. If there are some uncertainties, we can consult the documentation.
Analyzing a disassembled listing is another matter. Function names are rarely
present, so it's impossible to determine visually whether we're dealing with printf
or another function. We have to delve into the algorithm, which is easier said than

done! The print£ is a complex interpreter of the format specification string; it's
difficult to make it out right away. Of course, there are more monstrous functions,
whose operation algorithms have no relation to the analysis of the program under

186

Part |: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

investigation. The same new can allocate memory from the Windows heap or use
its own manager. It's enough to know that it's new, a function for memory allocation, and not free or open.

On average, library functions constitute 50 percent to 90 percent of a program.

This is especially true of programs composed in visual development environments
that employ automatic code generation (Microsoft Visual C++ and Delphi, for example). Library functions are sometimes more intricate and difficult to understand
than the simple program code. It's almost insulting — the lion's share of effort
needed to perform the analysis appears to be a waste. Is it possible to optimize this
process?

The ability of IDA Pro to recognize standard library functions of numerous
compilers favorably distinguishes it from most other disassemblers. Unfortunately,
IDA (like everything created by man) is far from ideal — the list of supported
libraries may be extensive, but particular versions from specific suppliers or
certain memory models may be lacking. Moreover, not all functions, even those
from libraries known to IDA, are recognized. (The reasons for this will be given
later.)

An unrecognized function is half the trouble. A function recognized incorrectly
is much worse, since this results in errors (sometimes hard to find) in the analysis

of the program, or leads a code digger to a dead end. For example, fopen is called,
and the result it returns is transferred to free. Then, fopen returns a pointer to
the FILE structure, and free deletes it. However, what if free isn't free at all?
What if it's fseek? Having skipped the operation of positioning, we won't be able
to figure out the correct structure of the file with which the program works.
It's easier to recognize IDA errors if we understand how the disassembler
performs recognition. For some reason, many people assume a trivial CRC (Cyclic
Redundancy Check) is involved. It is tempting to perform a CRC, but this would be
unsuitable for solving this task. The main obstacles are variable fragments, namely, relocatable elements. (See "Step Four: Getting Acquainted with the Debugger" for more details.) Relocatable elements can be ignored when you perform a CRC — if you

remember

to perform the same

operation in the function being identified.

Nevertheless, the developer of IDA has chosen another way. It's more intricate and
artful, but more efficient.

The key idea is that there's no need to waste time performing a CRC — a trivial
character-by-character matching, ignoring relocatable elements, will do for preliminary identification of the function. Truthfully, matching is not performed;
instead, a search is made for a particular sequence of bytes in the standard base,

Step Seven: Identifying Key Structures of High-Level Languages

187
>

organized as a binary tree. The time a binary search takes is proportional to the log
of the number of records in the base. Common sense tells us that the length of
a template (a signature, or the sequence being matched) should be sufficient
to clearly identify the function. However, IDA's developer decided to limit us to
the first 32 bytes. (This is rather few, especially allowing for the prolog, which is
practically identical for all functions.)
And rightly so! Many functions end up on the same leaf of the tree, causing
a collision, or ambiguity in the identification. To resolve the situation, CRC16 is calculated from the thirty-second byte to the first relocatable element for all the functions
that can collide, then compared to CRC16 for standard functions. As a rule, this works.

But if the first relocatable element is too close to the thirty-second byte, the sequence for
counting CRC16 appears too short or even of zero length. (The thirty-second byte can
be a relocatable element.) For a repeated collision, we find the byte in the functions by
which they differ and remember its offset in the base.
With IDA, we match character-by-character not to the end, but only for
32 bytes; we calculate CRC not for the entire function, but depending on the case;

and we consider the last byte as the "key" one, but not always. Many functions coincide byte-to-byte but completely differ in their names and purpose. You don't believe
me? Then look at the following:
Listing 69. The Difficulty in Identifying Library Functions

push

ebp

mov

ebp,

call

_read

esp

push

ebp

mov

ebp,

call

_write

pop ebp

pop ebp

ret

ret

esp

Here we must analyze relocatable elements! This is not a far-fetched example;
there are lots of similar functions. The libraries from Borland, in particular, teem

with them. It's no wonder that IDA frequently "stumbles" over them and runs into
gross errors. Let's take the following function as an example:
void

demo (void)

{
print ("DERIVED\n") ;

}e

22

Part |: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

188
>.

ie

Even IDA 4.17, the latest version available while I was writing this book, makes
a mistake, calling it
CODE:004010F3

pure

__ pure

error:

error_

proc

; DATA

near

CODE: 004010F3

push

ebp

CODE:004010F4

mov

ebp,

CODE: 004010F6

push

offset

CODE: 004010FB

call

sveihayens

CODE: 00401100

pop

eCX

CODE: 00401101

pop

ebp

CODE: 00401102

retn

CODE: 00401102

pure

error.

XREF:

DATA: 004080BCTo

esp

aDerived

; format

endp

Is it worth talking about the unpleasant consequences this error can have for
analysis? You could be sitting, stupidly staring at the disassembler listing, and for
the life of you be unable to understand what a fragment does. It's only later that
you figure out one or more functions were identified incorrectly!
To decrease the number of errors, IDA tries to recognize the compiler by
the startup code. It then loads only the library of that compiler's signatures. Therefore, it's easy to "dazzle" IDA by slightly modifying the start code. This code usually
is delivered with the source texts of the compiler, so alterations can be made easily.
Changing one byte at the beginning of the startup function will suffice.
And that's all — the hacker has to give up! Fortunately, IDA provides the possibility of manually loading the base of signatures (FILE\Load file\FLIRT signature file),
but how can we determine which library versions’ signatures must be loaded?
Guessing takes too much time. It helps if you visually identify the compiler.
(Experienced code diggers usually succeed in doing so, since each compiler has
a unique "handwriting.") Instead, you could simply use libraries from the delivery
of one compiler in a program compiled by another compiler.
Be prepared to identify library functions by yourself. This task consists of
three stages: deciding if the function is a library one, determining the origin
of the library, and identifying the function according to this library.

The linker usually allocates functions in the order of the listing of OBJ modules
and libraries. Most programmers specify their. own OBJ modules, then libraries.
(Compilers independently calling the linker upon termination of their operation
also behave in this way.) Therefore, we can conclude that library functions are located at the end of the program, and the code of the function is at the beginning.
There are exceptions to this rule, but it often works.

Step Seven: Identifying Key Structures of High-Level Languages

189

Overview navigator Scale: 1 pixel =2048 bytes; Range: ended StI 00457330

Fig. 14. The structure of pkzip.exe, showing all library functions
in one place — at the end of the code segment, but before
the beginning of the data segment

Let's

consider,

for example,

the structure

of the well-known

program

pkzip.exe (Fig. 14). The diagram constructed by IDA 4.17 shows all library func-

tions concentrated in one place — at the end of the code segment. They closely adjoin the data segment. In most cases, the start-up function is located at or close to
the beginning of the library functions. Finding start-up isn't a problem; it coincides with the entry point into the file!
Thus, we can take it almost for granted that all functions located "below"
start-up (that is, at higher addresses) are library ones. Has IDA recognized them,
or has it shifted this problem to you? Two situations are possible: No functions are
recognized, or only some functions are recognized.
If no functions are recognized, it is likely that IDA failed to identify the compiler
or encountered unknown versions of libraries. Recognizing compilers is a matter
for a special consideration. For now, we'll focus on recognizing library versions.
First, many libraries contain copyrights that include the name of the manufacturer and the library version — simply look for the corresponding text strings in
the binary file. If they aren't there, it doesn't matter. We'll perform a simple context
search to find other text strings (as a rule, error messages) in all the libraries we can

reach. (Code digger should have many compilers and big libraries on their hard
disks.) Possible options are: There are no other text strings; there are strings, but
they are found in many libraries; or the fragment being searched for isn't found.
In the first two cases, we need to single out a distinctive byte sequence, which

doesn't contain relocatable elements, from one or several library functions.
Then we must search for it again in all accessible libraries. If this doesn't help, then
you don't have the required library.
Such a situation is bad, but not hopeless! Without the required library, we
wouldn't be able to restore the function names automatically, but we could find

the purpose of the functions. The names of the Windows API functions called from
the libraries allow us to identify at least the category of the library (for example,

190

Part I: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

for working with files, memory, graphics, etc.). Mathematical functions are typically rich with coprocessor instructions.
Disassembling is similar to solving a crossword puzzle: Unknown words are
guessed using known ones. In some contexts, the name of a function follows from
its purpose. For example, we could ask the user for a password, then pass it to
the X function along with the standard password. If the completion result is zero,
we write "password OK;" we also write something appropriate for the opposite
situation. Your intuition suggests that the X function is strcmp, doesn't it? This is a

simple case. But if you encounter an unfamiliar subroutine, don't despair over its
"monstrosity." Look at all of its entries, paying attention to who calls it, when, and
how many times.
A statistical analysis clarifies many things. Each function, like each letter in an
alphabet, occurs at a specific rate. The dependence on context also gives us food for
thought. For example, a function for reading from the file can't precede a function
for opening it!
Other catches include arguments and constants. For arguments, everything is
more or less clear. If a function receives a string, it obviously is from the library for
working with strings; if a function receives a floating-point value, it possibly belongs to the mathematical library. The number and type of arguments (if we take
them into account) substantially narrow the range of possible candidates. Things
are even easier with constants — many functions accept a flag that can have a limited number of values as an argument. Except for bit flags, which are as alike as
peas in a pod, unique values are frequently encountered. Although they do not
positively identify the function, they do narrow the range of "suspects." Besides
which, functions may contain characteristic constants. For example, if you encounter a standard polynomial for calculating the CRC, you can be sure that the "suspect" calculates the checksum. An objection can be raised here: All these are details.
Perhaps there's a point to this. Having identified some of the functions, the rest of
them can be identified using the rule of the contraries. But at least it's possible to
know the kind of library and where to search for it.
Finally, the identification of algorithms (that is, the purposes of functions)
is greatly facilitated by knowledge of these algorithms. In particular, a code that
performs LZ packing (unpacking) is so distinctive that it can be recognized
at a glance — you just need to know this packing mechanism. If you don't know
the mechanism, however, analysis of a program will be extremely difficult! Some
people may assume that we wouldn't obtain such information. However, despite
a common opinion that a hacker is a hacker, first, and a programmer, second,

everything in life is contradictory. The programmer who doesn't know how to pro-

Step Seven: Identifying Key Structures of High-Level Languages

191

gram can make a living — there are many libraries; just use them and earn! A
hacker can break off a serial number without higher mathematics, but will get on
better knowing computer science.
Libraries were created to relieve developers from having to penetrate into those
areas of learning that they deem unnecessary. Alas, code diggers don't get off as
easy. They have to use their hands, their heads, and even their spinal cords. This is
the only way to disassemble serious programs. Sometimes a solution comes while
you're on a train, or even asleep.
The analysis of library functions is a difficult aspect of disassembling. It's simply
wonderful that you have the option of identifying their names by the signatures.

Function Arguments
Identifying function arguments is a key part of the analysis of disassembled programs. So prepare yourself: This section may seem long and boring. Unfortunately,
there's no way around it — knowing the basics of hacking has its price!
There are three ways to pass arguments to a function: via the stack, via registers,
and via the stack and registers simultaneously. The transfer of implicit arguments
through global variables comes close to joining this list, but this is covered in another section ("Global Variables").

Arguments can be transferred by value or by reference. In the first case,
a copy of the corresponding variable is passed to the function; in the second case,
a pointer is passed.
Conventions on passing arguments. To work successfully, the calling function
should not only know the prototype of the called function, but also should "agree"
upon the method of passing arguments with it: by reference or by value, via registers or
via the stack. If arguments are passed via registers, it shows which argument is placed in
which register. If arguments are passed via the stack, it must define the order in which
arguments are placed. It also must ascertain who is "responsible" for clearing up the
stack of arguments after the called function is executed.
The ambiguity of the mechanism for passing arguments is one of the reasons
for incompatibility between various compilers. Why not force all compiler manufacturers to follow one method? Alas, this solution would pose more problems than
it would solve.
Each mechanism has its own merits and drawbacks, and each is interrethe observance
lated with the language. In particular, C's looseness concerning

Part |: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

192

of function prototypes is possible because the arguments are pushed out from the
stack not by the called function (child), but by the calling one (parent), which re-

members what it has passed. For example, two arguments are passed to the main
function: the count of command-line arguments, and the pointer to an array that
contains them. However, if a program doesn't work with the command line

(or receives the argument in another way), a prototype of main can be declared
in the following manner: main().
In Pascal, such a trick would result either in a compilation error or in the program crash. In this language, the stack is cleared by the child function. If the function fails to do this (or does this incorrectly, popping out a number of words different from the number passed to it), the stack will be unbalanced, and everything will
come crashing down. (More specifically, all addressing of the local variables of the
parent function will be impaired, and a random value will appear on the stack instead of the return address.)

The drawback of C's solution is the insignificant increase in the size of the generated code. We need to insert a processor instruction (and occasionally more than
one) to pop arguments from the stack after each function call. In Pascal, this instruction is used in the function directly, and consequently, occurs only once in the
program.
Having failed to find a suitable middle ground, compiler developers have decided
to use all possible data-transfer mechanisms. To cope with compatibility problems,
they have standardized each mechanism by adopting a number of conventions:
O

The C convention (designated as __cdec1) directs you to send arguments to
the stack from right to left in the order in which they are declared. It charges
the called function with clearing the stack. The names of the functions that observe the C convention are preceded with the "_" character, automatically in-

serted by the compiler. The this pointer (in C++ programs) is transferred via
the stack last.

O

The Pascal convention (designated as pascat') directs you to send arguments to
the stack from left to right in the order in which they are declared. It charges
the calling function with clearing the stack. ~

i Nowadays the PASCAL keyword is regarded to be out-of-date, and has gone out of use;
the similar WinAPI convention can be used instead of it.

Step Seven: Identifying Key Structures of High-Level Languages

193
ay”

O

The standard convention (designated as __stdcal1) is a hybrid of the C and

Pascal conventions. Arguments are sent to the stack from right to left, but
clearing the stack is performed by the calling function. The names of functions
that adhere to the standard convention are preceded with the "_" character and
end with the "@" suffix. This is followed by the number of bytes being transferred to the function. The this pointer (in C++ programs) is transferred via
the stack last.
OO The fastcall convention dictates that you transfer arguments via registers.
Compilers from Microsoft and Borland support the __fastcail keyword, but
they interpret it differently. Watcom C++ doesn't understand the __ fastcall

keyword, but it has a special pragma — "aux" — in its pocket that allows you to
manually choose the registers for transferring arguments (see the "Fastcall
Conventions" explanation further on for more details). The names of the functions that adhere to the __fastcall

convention

are preceded by the "@"

character, which is automatically inserted by the compiler.
OF The default convention. If there's no explicit declaration of the call type, the
compiler usually uses its own conventions and chooses them at its own discretion. The this pointer is the most influenced — by default, most compilers
transfer it via a register. For Microsoft, this is Ecx, for Borland it is EAx, and for
Watcom it is EAX, EDx, or both of them. Other arguments can be transferred via

registers if the optimizer considers this a better way. The mechanism of transferring arguments and the logic of sampling them is different in different compilers. It is also unpredictable — we have to figure it out from the situation.

Goals and tasks. When analyzing a function, a code digger faces the following
task: He or she must determine what type of convention is used for calling, count the
number of arguments being transferred to the function (and/or being used by the
function), and clarify the type and purpose of arguments. Shall we begin?
The convention type is roughly identified by the way the stack is cleared.
If it's cleared by the called function, we're dealing with cdecl; otherwise, we are
dealing with stdcall or PASCAL. This uncertainty occurs because, if the original
prototype of the function is unknown, the order for placing arguments onto
the stack can't be determined. But if the compiler is known and the programmer
has used the default types of calls, it's possible to determine the type of function
call. In programs for Windows, both pascaL and stdca11 calls are widely used, so
the uncertainty remains. However, nothing changes the order of transferring
arguments: If both calling and called functions are available, we can always establish
a correspondence between transferred and received arguments. In other words,
if the actual order of passing arguments is known (and it should be known —

194

Part I: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

see the calling function), we don't even need to know the sequence of arguments in
the function prototype.
Another matter is presented by library functions whose prototypes are known.
If you know the order in which arguments are placed into the stack, it's possible to
figure out their type and purpose from the prototype!
Determining the number of arguments and the way they are passed. As we
mentioned above, arguments can be passed via the stack, via registers, or via both
the stack and registers simultaneously. Implicit arguments can also be transferred
via global variables.
If the stack was only used for passing-arguments, it'd be easy to count them.
Alas, the stack is actively used for temporary storage of the data from registers, too.
Therefore, if you encounter the PUSH instruction, don't rush to identify it as an argument. It's impossible to determine the number of bytes passed to the function as
arguments, but we can easily determine the number of bytes that are popped from
the stack after the function is completed!
If the function obeys the standard or Pascal convention, it clears the stack using
the RET n instruction (n is simply the required value in bytes). Things are not as
simple with cdeci functions. In general, their call is followed by the instruction ADD
ESP,n (again, n is the required value in bytes). But variations are possible; there
could be a delay in clearing the stack, or arguments could be popped into any free
register. However, we'll defer optimizing riddles, being content with nonoptimizing compilers.
We can assume that the number of bytes placed onto the stack equals

the number of those popped out; otherwise, after the function is executed, the stack
will become unbalanced, and the program will crash. (Optimizing compilers allow
a misbalance of the stack in some parts, but we'll save this discussion for later.)
Hence, the number of arguments equals the number of transferred bytes divided
by the word size’. Is this correct? No, it isn't! Few arguments occupy exactly
one element of the stack. The type double, for example, consumes 8 bytes;
a character string transferred by value, not by reference, will "eat" as many bytes as
it needs. In addition, a string, data structure, array, or object can be pushed onto
the stack using the Movs instruction instead of Pusu. (By the way, the use of movs is
strong evidence that the argument was passed by value.)
Let's try to sort out the mess I've created in our heads. It's impossible to determine the number of arguments passed via the stack by analyzing the code
i The word is understood not only as 2 bytes, but also as the size of operands by default; in
32-bit mode, the word equals 4 bytes.

Step Seven: Identifying Key Structures of High-Level Languages

195

of the calling function. Even the number of passed bytes cannot be determined definitively. The type of transfer is also veiled in obscurity. In the "Constants and Offsets" section, we'll return
to this question.
For now,
we'll give
the following example: PUSH 0x40404040/CALL MyFuct:0x404040. What is this:
an argument passed by value (the constant 0x404040), or a pointer to something
located at the offset 0x404040 (passed by reference)? This problem can't be resolved, can it?
Don't worry; the curtain hasn't fallen yet, and we'll continue the fight.
The majority of problems can be solved by an analysis of the called function.
Having clarified how it treats the arguments passed to it, we'll determine
both their type and quantity. For this, we'll have to become acquainted with
addressing arguments on the stack. For an easy warm-up, let's consider the following example:
Listing 70.

A Mechanism of Passing Arguments

#include

<stdio.h>

#include

<string.h>

Struct

XL

char

s0[20];

lg91,4

};

void

MyFunc (double

a,

struct

XT xt)

{
DrIineeKsi

eth, kSON

eae

Sole pee

"Hello,

World!");

SOO)

er

wa

main

()

SELUCT

EXT Xt,

strcpy(&xt.sO[0],

xt.x
MyFunc (6.66,

}
ae

=

0x777;
xt);

a

ee

LO

eS

Ne

Part |: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

196
.

ree

-

The disassembled listing of this program compiled using the Microsoft Visual

C++ compiler with its default configuration looks like this:
___

2

Passing Arguments Using Visual C++
Listing 71. The Disassembled Code for
TS Sl EST
a
A
IE oa et
i ER ELE
SPT RIN
proc

main

var

18
ll

var4

near

; CODE

byte

ptr

-18h

dword

ptr

-4

push

ebp

mov

ebp,

sub

esp,

18h

The

first

PUSH

not

the

.
,

push

relates

arguments

edi

of explicit

that

they

probably

arguments.
not

only

and EDI

passed.

the

saved

on

if arguments

stack,

to

the

ESI

them

onto

the

stack

might

the

next

function.

aHelloWorld

; "Hello,

World!"

passing

(Strictly

"Constants

and

of the

speaking,

Offsets"

passing

section

Theoretically,

it's

possible

the

stack,

pop

it out

It's

also

then

to

into

possible

to directly

However,

I know

compilers

cunning

maneuvers.

is always

an

eax,

pointer
eax

no

Placing

indication

[ebptvar

argument
an

save

occurs.

the

See

the

a constant

temporarily
registers.

address

a constant

buffer

to

explanation.)

an

it in the

of

onto

the

argument.

is placed

stack.

these

18]

to a local

indicate

of available

capable

of passing

function

a pointer

probably

for

any

—

this

as

passed

to

is the

indicates

passed

via

be passed

offset

not

also

but

will

string.

push

registers

stack,

placing

Here

The

of

the

arguments

Ppush
Aha!

lea

prolog,

registers,

the

.

function

initialization

are

However,
via

that

uf

the

esi

lack

VE

to

being

The

°

start+AFYp

esp

push
,

XREF:

in EAX.

stack

on

Step Seven: Identifying Key Structures of High-Level Languages

; EAX

is

; The

series

saved
of

; the

first

argument,

7 onto

the

stack

cael

strcpy

; The

prototype

; us

to

the

all

is

of

looked

are

like

the

the

argument,

too.

strcpy

; extremely

unlikely,

use

otherwise,
as

are

; libraries

are,

; included,

practically

add

8

8 bytes

a

are

the

the

learn

out

of

and

PUSH

EDI

were

not

4],

What

data

sub

esp,

; Memory
; are

;

be

stored

; The

that

the

order
standard
codes

them.

we

the

can

conclude

function.

arguments

of the

that

Consequently,

function!

variable.

a pointer,

in this

source

to be

memory

because

in Windows

area.

18h

created

when

ourselves

ecx,

for

a temporary

arguments
for

the

are
next

variable.

passed

Temporary

by value.

"candidate"

variables

Therefore,

to be

an

let's

argument.

section.)

6

constant
esi,

; The pointer
; string

have

the

in a local

not

would

Although

stack,

to

(See the "Register and Temporary Variables"

mov

lea

can

is allocated

; prepare

is placed

a constant,

with

stdcall?

recompiles

the

ESI

user

changed?

ever

; PUSH

; no

is

has

passed

certainly

This

it would

were

; It's

the

as

where

delivered

initially
Could

placed

popped

0x777

such

code

World!").

itself

nobody

the

Thus,

strcpy

rule,

However,

left.

a conversion

allow

placed.

to

arguments

[ebptvar

doesn't

are

convention,

of

constant

function

cdecl

words

; The

char*)

arguments
the

; two

mov

pushed

obey

right

since

arguments

esp,

recognized

everything

(char*,

in which

from

Having

that

strcepy (&buff[0],"Hello,

instead

7 Since

sure

order

placed

; programmer

; in which

indissolvable.
be

C functions

this:

; recompiled;

is
can

we

an

library

; arguments

stack.

arguments

determine

; Since
;

on

197

we

0x6

is placed

in ECX.

We don't

yet

know

contains

the

the purpose.

[ebptvar_
18]

to the local

"Hello,

World!",

buffer,
is placed

which

in ESI.

copied

198

Part I: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

mov
.

,

repe
.

ef

edi,

The

esp

pointer

is copied

to

the

the

string

it

is — passing

copied on the stack,

swallowing

.

of the ECX

counter,

and

.

Hence,

argument

occupies

té

,

of the

stack

in EDI.

by value.

The

entire

movsd

Here

.

,

top

use

this

this

value

to determine

the

number

to

[ebptvar_18-0x14]

of bytes

to the stack.

But

6*4 bytes of it

4 is the

being

20

of the

double

(0x14)

bytes

of stack

popped out.

(that is,

var_4 contains

the constant

it will be passed to the function

This

allow

struct

us

data

from

from var_18 to var_4)

Therefore,

will

word — movsd).

of arguments

The

to reconstruct

the

is

(where 6 is the value

size

the number

string

space.

We'll

according

to

[ebptvar_18]

is copied

0x777!

together with the string.

initial

structure:

x{

char

s0[20]

Intex
_e

}

.
,

Pe turns

.
’

not

Oubl thae asseructurer
a single string!

push

401AA3D7h

push

0A3D70A4h

:
1

>

Ls nee ead to the
S

Two more arguments
are placed onto the stack.

-Ase 5.5 be apo

aoe

BENG ACE

,

vewie ae

Why two?
ora. double one.

e code which type it re
:

Bie

5 ald

aay area”

Step Seven: Identifying Key Structures of High-Level Languages

199
>

pop

edi

pop

esi

mov

esp,

pop

ebp

i

ebp

retn

sub

401022

endp

aHelloWorld

align

db

"Hello,World!',0

; DATA

XREF:

sub _401022+8To

4

The disassembled listing of this program compiled using Borland C ++ will be
somewhat different. Let's look at it as well:
Listing 72. The Disassembled Code of Passing Arguments Using Borland C++
_main

proc

near

var

18

=

byte

var 4

=

dword

; DATA

ptr

per

push

ebp
ebp,

esp

add

esp,

OFFFFFFE8h

; This

is addition
pressed

push

esi

push

edi

; For

now,

mov

esi,

; Here,

we

<->

offset

; The

strcpy

; the

function

; it

simply

lea

edi,

; The

with
in

everything

see

pointer

sign.

IDA,

obtain

we

is happening

just

ADD

as

; “Hello,

has

-18h.

in the previous

example.

World!"

vanished.
the

The

it where

compiler

didn't

even

expand

the

takes

place

—

call

call!

[ebptvar
18]

to the

ESP,

differences.

by replacing

excluded

—4

a minus

aHelloWorld

some

call

DATA:00407044\o0

-18h

mov

; Having

XREF:

local

id

buffer

is placed

in EDI.

Part |: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

200

mov

eax,

edi

; The

same

pointer

mov

ecx,

repe

movsd

is placed

in EAX.

3

:

'

movsb
; Note:

4*3+1=13

; judging
; This

is how

; It has

; The

push

ae

—

aioe

compiler

only

the

not

20 as we would

expect

declaration.

has

optimized

string

into

the

the

"tail."

code:

buffer,

—

[ebptvar
4], 777h

value

of the

constant

0x777

is assigned

to

a local

variable.

401AA3D7h

push

OA3D70A4h

; Same

here.

We can't

7 are

one

two

lea

ecx,

or

-

determine

whether

these

two numbers

arguments.

[ebptvar 18]

y¥

to the string's

beginning

is placed

in ECX.

;

es
BOW deenSax cate yits cee a a
; The constant: 5 iseoaced din EDX. “(thepurpose isn!"ten clear.)

ase

ae

are copied— 13,

structure

its uninitialized

; The pointer

a

the

copied

; ignoring
mov

bytes

from the

Fe

Fo

winks

Se

.

:

a

-

>

~

3: hi

Tas

alee

3
=

Step Seven: Identifying Key Structures of High-Level Languages

dec

edx

; Now

we

; that

we're

jns

short

loc

4010D3

; This

jump

works

until

; which

decrement

confirms

the

The
last

be

—

our

to

EDX

get

is

assumption
is

the

feeling

a negative
about

used

the

function

stack

isn't

cleared!

function

cleared

xor

eax,

; The

result

; In

a loop?

the

number,
loop.

by Borland

to

Yes,
pass

this
the

argument

—

by value!

MyFunc

; Look:

7 to

Do you

with

construction

; a Structure
call

EDX...

dealing

; unnatural

7

201
—_

—

pop
pop
; The

and

This

is

stack

doesn't

so

Borland

doesn't

returned

by the

function

need

bother.

eax

Borland,void

; Actually,

called,

the

functions

code

always

placed

after

is

zeroed.

return
their

zero.

call

zeroes

EAX.

are

edi
esi
EDI and ESI registers

mov

esp,

; ESI

is

+ upon

calling

pop

ebp

that

were

stored

previously

which

is why

the

stack

wasn't

last

function!

restored.

ebp

restored,

the

cleared

retn

_main

endp

Note that, by default, Microsoft C ++ transfers arguments from right to left,

and Borland C++ transfers them from left to right! There's no standard call type
that, while passing arguments from left to right, would make the calling function
clear the stack. Borland C++ uses its own call type, which isn't compatible with
anything.
Addressing arguments in the stack. The basic ee of the stack includes
two operations: pushing elements onto the stack, and popping the last element
off it. Accessing an arbitrary element is something new! However, such a deviation

202

Part I: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

from the rules significantly increases the operating speed. If we need, say, the third
element, why can't we pull it from the stack directly, without removing the first two
elements? The stack is not only a "pile," as popular tutorials on programming teach
us, but also an array. Therefore, knowing the position of the stack pointer
(as we must — otherwise, where would we put the next element?) and the size of

the elements, we can calculate the offset of any element, then easily read it.
The stack, like any other homogeneous array, has a drawback: It can store only
one type of data (double words, for example). If we need to place 1 byte (such as an
argument of the char type), we must expand it to a double word and place it as a
whole. If an argument occupies four words (double, int64), we need two stack

elements to pass it.
Besides passing arguments, the stack also saves the return address of the function. This requires one or two stack elements, depending on the type of the func-

tion call (near or far). The near call operates within one segment; we need to save
only the offset of the instruction that follows the CALL instruction. If the calling
function is in one segment and the called one is in another segment, we need to
remember both the segment and the offset to know where to return to. The return
address is placed after the arguments; therefore, the arguments appear behind it
relative to the top of the stack. Their offset varies depending on how many stack
elements the return address occupies — one or two. Fortunately, the flat memory
model of Windows NT/9x allows us to forget about segmented memory model just
as we would forget a bad dream; we can use only near calls everywhere.
Nonoptimizing compilers use a special register (usually, BP) for addressing ar-

guments that copies the value of the stack pointer register to the beginning
of the function. Since the stack grows from higher addresses to lower ones,
the offsets of all arguments (including the return address) are positive. The offset of
the Nth argument is calculated using the following formula:
arg_ offset

= N*size_ elementtsize return_address

The argument number w counts from the top of the stack beginning from zero;
the size of one stack element is size_element, generally equal to the bit capacity of
the segment element (4 bytes in Windows NT/9x); and the space taken up by the
return address in bytes is size return_address (usually 4 bytes in Windows
NT/9x). In addition, we often have to solve the opposite task: using a known offset
of an element to determine the number of the argument being addressed. The following formula, easily derived from the previous one, is helpful for this:
ix arg

offset—size returm_address
size

element

Step Seven: Identifying Key Structures of High-Level Languages

However,

since the old Esp value should be saved in the same

203

stack before

copying the current Esp value to EBP, we must correct this formula, adding the EBP

register capacity (BP in 16-bit mode) to the size of the return address.
From the hacker's point of view, there's a key advantage of such addressing of
arguments: Having seen an instruction like Mov EAX, [EBP+0x10] somewhere
in the middle of the code, we can instantly calculate which argument is being
addressed. However, to save the EBP register, the optimizing compilers address
arguments directly via Esp. The difference is basic! The ESP value changes during
the function's execution; it changes every time data is pushed onto or popped
off the stack. Thus, the offset of arguments relative to ESP doesn't remain constant
either. To determine exactly which argument is addressed, we need to know
the value of ESP at a given point of the program. For this, we have to trace all
of its changes from the beginning of the function. We'll discuss this "artful"
addressing in greater detail later. (See the "Local Stack Variables" section.) For now,
let's return to the previous example (it's time to complete it) and analyze the called
function:
Listing 73. The Disassembled Code of a Function Receiving Arguments
MyFunc

proc

near

; CODE

arg 0

= dword

ptr

8

arg

4

=

dword

Disiaen

OCH

arg

8

=

byte ptr

arg_1C

= dword

; IDA

recognized

XREF:

10h

ptr

24h

four

arguments

passed

; However,we

shouldn't

blindly

trust

;

example)is

passed

as

arguments,

not

one!

(int64,
as

for

several

; by IDA

should

; the

stack

; Perhaps
and

mainly

that

occur

: to take

passed

rushed

; This

into

results

because

into

parent

as

the

function.

If one

argument

several

words,

IDA will

Therefore,

follows:

no

the

less

again,

function

fram accessing

function

as

us

any

the

stack

from

such

than

everything

deeply as

result

accept

it

produced

four arguments

is not that easy!

it wants.

arguments,
and

programming

of confusion

account

to

IDA.

However,

the called

of the

nobody

we've

as

be interpreted

; were passed to the function.
; Nothing prevents

maint39tp

over

stolen

something

from

it.

errors
prototypes.

a possibility.

However,

we need

case,

you'll

(In any

it sometimes, so be informed). The number next to ‘arg’
; represents the offset of the argument relative to the beginning
encounter

204

Part I: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

; of

the

; by

8 bytes

stack

; return
; for

frame.

the

stack

frame

is

to

EBP —

4 bytes

hold

the

saved

and

an

additional

4 bytes

are

used

EBP

register.

address,

saving

the

push

ebp

mov

ebp,

lea

eax,

; A pointer

Note:

relative

esp

[ebptarg
8]

to

an

argument

; an

argument,

not

an

; for

which

argument

; calculated

that

is

obtained.

Attention:

a pointer

argument

pointer!

Now,

figure

out

IDA

already

we're

argument

the

stack

beginning

of

; the

bracketed

expression

disassemblers.

; to manually

looked

expression.

We'll

; What

pushed

the

; Let's

look

at

the

; variant

compiled

; were

two

the

; consisting

7; Onto

the

calling

stack.

“Thus,

push

eax

; The

obtained

pointer

; The

pointer

likely

mov

ecx,

have

function

to

Visual

is pushed
be

onto

to

it is

would

shown

have

had

each

to practice

this.

top.

what

we

pushed

(see

Aha!

The

last

items

them,

a structure

of

the

int

to

a string.

the

stack.

the

next

type

was

the

placed

function.

[ebptarg
1C]

argument

; You may

recall

that

the

0x14

bytes

from

the beginning,

int

; its beginning.Consequently,
; the value

to

as

we

find

Before

passed

relative

C++).

a variable

; The contents of the EBP+ARG_1C
; What does it point to?
; Of

on

to

code,

just

from

a chance

BBPFARG @ points

will

—

clever,

8 bytes
is

and

so

has

by 8 bytes

original

ebp+0x10

not

last

arguments.

of a string

pointer.

the

like

still

by Microsoft

unclear

In

subtract

stack

let's

displaced

frame.

and permanently
onto

is

this

If IDA were

; address
we

obtaining

this

; the

7 by most

shifted

of the

; of the

structure,

push

ecx

variable
and

is

type

is in the

placed

placed

in ECX.

structure

at an

and ARG 8 is simply

0x8+0x14
of the

are

int

==

0x1C.

type

in ECX.

That

is,

is a member

offset

Step Seven: Identifying Key Structures of High-Level Languages

205
a

>

; The

obtained

7; by value,

Mov

[ebptarg4]
one

; that

were

of

placed

the

onto

the

two

onto

the

onto

the

stack

and

; the

push

them

argument

mov

eax,

push

eax

; The

second

to

the

unclear

offset

call

see ci

7 Oops!

Here

; has

next

the

was

passed

pointer.

arguments

stack...

is pushed

PS

SNS SNe

we

have

the

printf

number

of

arguments,

are

specified

; that

we

first

placed

; The

rightmost

The

by this

the

specifier
Then,

the

output
type

the

comes

to placing

into

the

programmer's

guide

the

@f specifier

outputs

; which,

depending

call

the

calling

that

is,

cdecl

function.

arguments
C++

™

but

the

—

Alas,

can't

cleared

Microsoft

Visual

a floating-point

we've

B b)

Borland

stack.

the

order

be

the

the

using

of passing

(float)

occupies

reconstructed

stack

was

order

cleared

of

out.

Remember

that

the

calling

function,

parameters.

—
C++,

value,

it is:

original

figured

stack

4 bytes

the

integer

the

Thus,

struct

passing

onto

a double.

a,

onto

specifier

it obviously

(double

placed
an

can

Here

“ee

changed

occupy

stack.

of

case,

function.

know,

last

type,

of our
is

the

for

the

was

In this

(double).

type

on

output

two arguments

that

MyFunc

quantity

int

the

#@x —

it

and

the

of

Then

making

type

@s indicates

see

prototype

probably

string

is

the

you

the

specifier

on

a format

as

to

look

8 bytes

stack.

Remember

representation.

corresponds

The

the

string.

; we'll

; cdecl

onto

passing

; If we

8 bytes,

pass

function,

pointer

a variable

second

; in hexadecimal
; %#f— which

to

of printf,

The

a variable

a string.

call

string!

; of which

; stack.

again

function.

argument

aFxs

; specification

; the

not

It

[ebptarg
0]

push

; or

stack.

value,

unclear

last

the

edx

...

; of

placed

stores

take

we

7

is

ECX

edx,

; Now,

push

variable

because

by

Part I: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

206

; It

seems

; we

can

; it's
; of

that

if

a program

reverse

the

order

likely

simply

not

the

so

easy.

If

there

was

of arguments.

was

an

function

type

to

cdecl,

Borland

follow

orders.

Then,

reversing

; order

of

would

give

arguments

; original

order

; a role.
; the

passed

; Note:
; of

It's

and

This

the

was

called

; Analysis

of

only

of

possible

only

the

just

Never

; Since

the

; errors

sometimes

give

one

completely

specifiers

an

add

esp,

pop

ebp

of

are

with

prototype

we

have

the

doesn't

play

between

done.

combined

analysis

give

any

functions.
them

rely

wouldn't

on

are

formed

hard

to

extremely

However,

a correspondence

which

calling

result!

function

to establish

arguments,

and

the

incorrect

in the

important

conversion

C++

accepted

; Note:

; and

arguments

an

Ct+,

Unfortunately,

explicit

; would

its

by Borland

compiled

the

format

manually

us

results.

specification
by the

string.

programmer,

detect

mysterious

code

after

compilation!

14h

retn

MyFunc

endp

We've made some progress; we successfully reconstructed the prototype of our
first function. However, we have many miles to go before we reach the end of

the section. If you're tired, take a rest and clear your head. We're going to move
on to an important, but boring subject — the comparative analysis of various types
of function calls and their implementation in popular compilers.
Let's begin by learning the standard convention on calls — stdcall. Take
a look at the following example:
Listing 74.

A Demonstration of the stdcali Call

#include

<stdio.h>

#include

<string.h>

__stdeall

MyFunc(int

a,

int

{
return

atbt+strlen(c);

b,

char

*c)

Step Seven: Identifying Key Structures of High-Level Languages

main

207

>"

()

DEINEE ("SX\n",

MyFunc/(0x666,

Ox777,

"Hello,

World!"));

The disassembled listing of this example compiled with Microsoft Visual C++
using the default settings should look like this:
Listing 75. The Disassembled Code for the stdcali Call
main

proc

push

ebp

mov

ebp,

near

OLtses

7 The

pointer

akeiioworld

to

; By examining
find

; to

the

; or

cdecl

the

type,

UPS

(IDA,

j; const

char

string

source

code

rightmost

the

Therefore,

not

Pascal.

not

by value.

~

is placed

(fortunately,

we

we

argument

have

onto

have

the

stack.

it),

passed

a call

the

of

stdcall

Notice

that

string

is passed

onto

stack — a constant

WF seshe
argument

from

is placed

version

4.17,

666h)

| ant

; The

last,

leftmost

argument

of

int.

; a constant

type

the

automatically

push

call

start+AFYp

aHelloWorld

is

function.

; One more

;

the

this

7 by reference,

push

XREF:

esp

push

; we'll

7; CODE,

is passed

determines

to

the

of type

its

function

int.

type.)’*

—

MyFunc

+ Note

that

; for

clearing

; If the

function

call

isn't

the

from

the

compiler

; a delayed
; by the

the

stack
hasn't

cleanup,

called

decided

it is

function.

followed

arguments
on

by any

instructions

placed

siOn

aster

.

that

the

stack

is cleared

Consequently,

the

type

of

likely

call

208

Part I: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

; is

stdcall,

push

eax

; The

value

; to the

which

was

returned

following

what

by the

function

push
call

.printf

offset asc_406040

; OK,

this

is the

next

; that

the

passed

argument

add

espy

; This

popped

function

as

ee

printf

to prove.

is passed

an argument.

NDS
function.

has

the

the

stack.

The

format

string

shows

int type.

E

8 bytes

format

endp

wanted

8

; to the argument
; to the

we

from

Of these,

string.

:

4 bytes

relate

of type int, and 4 bytes to the pointer

‘

:

+ ine

Step Seven: Identifying Key Structures of High-Level Languages

push

ebp

mov

ebp,

push

esi

; This,

esp

apparently,

; It's

not

; been

explicitly

7 nor

mov

is

passing

called

esi,

[ebptarg

last

argument

; the

ESI

register.

esi,

contents

; onto

the stack.

on

the

stack.

function

the

register

because

the

register

neither

by the

calling

mov

eax,

hasn't

function,

one.

7 The

7 The

the

initialized,

by the

add

saving

it to

0]

pushed

onto

the

stack

is placed

into

[ebptarg 4]
of ESI are

added es the last. Sh

eens placed

pe
|

©—_—
=_——

209

ae
4

Seay

; The next-to-last

argument

is written

into

EAX...

7; const

char*

-

-vy).4i45,—..

|

—-

push

eax

} .-- and pushed onte. the stack.

Z

re!
=
2ato oe
i
:
ee
erg
call | Sstrler pie
ost
art: ‘Since strlen expects @ pointer to as

pai

pe
ere
Bea eae
sees.
an See asee
oe ee

210

Part I: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

retn
>

OCh

1

The

stack

is

; the

call’

type

,

; Then,
C

the

(shave

; Two

variables

; of

the

; was

placed

MyFunc

is

by

the

called

function;

stdcall

or

Pascal.

Let's

assume

prototype

should

look

like

function

stighe WiAnitoe

; pushed

cleared

stack.
on

el,

wlais ey.

of the

int

type,

Since

the

top

it

from right

last,

and,

to left,

(claeia

it"s

stdcall.

this:

tse),

followed
of

therefore,

the

stack

according

we obtain

by a string,

to

always

stdcall,

exactly

this

are

on

the

contains

what

the

order

arguments

top

are

of arguments.

endp

Now let's examine how the cdec1 function is called. Let's replace the stdcall
keyword in the previous example with cdec1:
Listing 76.

A Demonstration of the cdec1 Call

#include

<stdio.h>

#include

<string.h>

mEcacc

Myrune (intra,

inte

b, =charesc))

{
return

atb+strlen(c);

printf ("x\n",

MyFunc(0x666,

Ox777,

"Hello,

World!"));

The disassembled listing of the compiled example should look like this:
Listing 77. The Disassembled Code for the cdeci Call
main

proc

near

push

ebp

mov

ebp,

push

offset

7 CODE

XREF:

; const

char

start+AFp

esp

aHelloWorld

*

Step Seven: Identifying Key Structures of High-Level Languages

push

777h

push

666h

5 altel

Ge akialie

7 The

arguments

call

MyFunc

are

add

esp,

OCh

; The

stack

is

; This

means

that

7; conventions
push

push
calr

passed

cleared

charge

call

the

esp,

ebp

the

function

calling

type

called

is

the

stack.

the

other

two

the

stack.

function.

cdecl,

function

via

since

with

clearing

;

offset asc_406040
——printf

add

to

by the

the

eax

pop

_211

; "$x\n"

8

Sern

main
<

1

endp
reint ~~—cdecl-MyFunc (int,int,const char
*)
; This time, IDA has correctly determined the
; However,

as

7 So we still

previously shown,

it could

shouldn't

it.

proc near
~

-

<

Te rhe

rely on

soh-¢ CODE XRERG tainst2tp
ts

= dword ptr 8
= dword ptr OCh

= Solas ptr

=a vo
call type.
have made a mistake:

10h

-

Ce

A

~

;
©

=

er

“

oi oslie3

FROM

sete

<a

ces
a

ee

212

Part |: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

mov

eax,

; The

[ebptarg
8]

pointer

to

the

string

to

the

strlen

function

arg 8 is

added

push

eax

; It's

passed

call

strlen

add

esp,

4

add

eax,

esi

; The

string

pop

esi

pop

ebp

is

placed

P qeloinche

length

into

Wineba

to

EAX.

<

via

the

the

sum

stack.

of

arg0 and

arg 4.

retn

MyFunc

endp

Before we proceed to the really serious things, let's consider the last standard
type — PASCAL:
Listing 78.

A Demonstration of the pascat Call

#include

<stdio.h>

#include

<string.h>

// Attention!
// type.

Microsoft

Instead,

// defined

in the

Visual

it uses

the

windows.h

no

longer

supports

similar

C++

WINAPI

call

the

PASCAL

call

type

file.

#i£ defined (_MSC_VER)
#include <windows.h>
// We

include windows.h only when we compile using Microsoft
// Visual C++; a more effective solution for other compilers
// using the PASCAL keyword — if they support it (as Borland

is
does).

tendif
' // This

// but

kind

of programming

it allows

trick

us to compile

the

makes

the

listing

code with more

less

than

readable,

one

compiler.

Step Seven: Identifying Key Structures of High-Level Languages

#if£

213

defined (_MSC_VER)

WINAPI

#else

__pascal
#endif
MyFunc (int

a,

int

b,

char

*c)

{
return

at+tb+strlen(c);

PEmMen(s
x \a

My rune (Ox666,

Ox

J,

. Hel lope Worl
my\ Es

The disassembled listing of this program compiled with Borland C++ should
look like this:
Listing 79. The Disassembled Code for the pascat Call Using Borland C++
jet Nee

cde]

_main

main(int

proc

push

ebp

mov

ebp,

sarge const

near

push

666h
777h

push

offset

; The

arguments

; the

source

code,

; from

left

to

; it's

impossible

Camu

argv, const

; DATA

XREF:

char

ysenvp)

DATA:00407044\o

esp

push

; function

charox

ye amahe
me alghe
aHelloWorld

are

passed
we

right.

to

notice

However,

to establish

prototype

MyFunc

; s

is not

the

function.

that

the

Reviewing

arguments

if the source

code

this!

Fortunately,

of much

importance.

are

passed

isn't
the

available,
original

214

— Part I: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

; The

function doesn't clear the stack!
; If this is not the result of optimization,
; PASCAL or stdcall. Since PASCAL is already

; we'll

assume

we're

dealing

push

eax

push
call
add

offset unk 407074
_printé
esp, 8

xO

eax,

pop

ebp

with

type

the

call

out

of the

is

question,

stdcall.

; format

eax

|
.

Beer

_main

endp

int— Sedec! MyFunc(const char
*s,;int;int)
IDA has given an incorrect result again!
The call type is obviously not cdecl!

e
j .vet

Although

the order of arguments is the reverse,
everything else about the function Oe
Se

LS SS
Bie.
Ne.
Se
(Ne
Ne
sa

~

att

Ene use.
erm

>

ee

<6

my totes

Se

on

i

OM

i ea

me

ee

Step Seven: Identifying Key Structures of High-Level Languages

mov

edx,

; The

[ebptarg
8]

arg 8 argument

of

type

int

is placed

add

edx,

[ebptarg

4]

; It's

added

to

arg 4 argument.

eax,

edx

add

; The

string

pop

ebp

the

length

retn

OCh

; The

stack

is

; This

means

that

MyFunc

215

is added

cleared
its

to the

sum

in EDX.

of arg 8 and

by the

called

function.

type

PASCAL

or

is

arg 4.

stdcall.

endp

As you can see, the identification of basic call types and the reconstruction of

the function prototypes are rather simple. The only thing that might spoil the
mood is confusion between PASCAL

and stdcall. However, the order of placing

arguments onto the stack is of no importance, except in special cases. We'll give
one here:
Listing 80. Distinguishing Pascat from stdcall
#include

<stdio.h>

#include

<windows.h>

#include

<winuser.h>

//

CALLBACK

VOID

procedure

CALLBACK

for

receiving

timer

messages

TimerProc (

HWND

hwnd,

// Handle

UINT

uMsg,

// WM_TIMER message

of the

window

UINT

idEvent,

// Timer

DWORD

dwTime

// Current

for

timer

messages

identifier

system

time

aS

// Bll beeps
MessageBeep ((dwTime

% 5) *0x10);

// The

time

elapsed,

// is displayed

in seconds,

from the moment

Part |: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

216

// the
printf ("\r:=%d",

system

starts.

also

have

dwTime/1000) ;

}

main()

// This

is

a console

// a message

loop

and

application,

but

can

timer!

set

the

it

can

{
sige Gi
MSG

msg;

// The

timer

is set

// procedure

to it.

by passing

the

SetTimer

(0,0,1000,TimerProc)

// This

is the message

loop.

// press

<Ctrl>+<Break>

to break

while

(GetMessage(é&msg,

address

of the

TimerProc

;

When

(HWND)

you're

the

NULL,

fed

up with

it,

loop.
0,

0))

{
TranslateMessage
(&msqg) ;
DispatchMessage
(&msq) ;

Let's compile an example like this — cl pascal.callback.c

USER32.lib

and see what results:

Listing 81. The Disassembled Code for Distinguishing pascat from stdcall

main
; This

Msg

; IDA

proc near
time,

; CODE XREF:

IDA hasn't

determined

= "MSG ptr

—20h

recognized

one

local

variable

start+ARNp

the

function

and

even

prototype.

determined

—

Step Seven: Identifying Key Structures of High-Level Languages

7 its

217

type.

push

ebp

mov

ebp,

esp

sub

esp,

20h

push

offset

TimerProc

; The

pointer

is passed

push

1000

; The

timer

push

0

; The

niIDEvent

; lIpTimerFunc
to the

delay

is passed.
; niDEvent

argument

is always

; There

are no windows,

so we're

call

ds: SetTimer

; The

Win32

push

function.

; uElapse

a

time

TimerProc

)

ignored

in console

applications.

; hWnd

Knowing

; we can determine

;. In this case,

NULL.

Te

API functions

; convention.

passing

are

their

called

prototype

See oedsng to the
(described

stdcall

in the

SDK),

the type and purpose of arguments.

the source code looked like this: ©

oJ)
a

re!

=

theSetTimer (NULL, BULL, 1000, TimerProc) te.
—

ies wMisgFil

Max

:

pe < =<

eacnaen Mipieabcaageta

tony

PSs

< Shape steiiss shah¥msS Siac be

218

Part I: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

push

eax,>

; Pass

the

; lpMsg

call

ds:GetMessageA

; The

GetMessageA(&msg,

pointer

to msg.

test

eax,

4z

short

loc_40107B

; This

is

check

lea

ecx,

NULL,

NULL,

NULL)

function

is called.

eax

the

for

WM1 QUIT.

[ebp+tMsg]

; ECX contains

|

the pointer

push

ecx

;

7; ...

and passes

to the

filled MSG

'

structure...

; lpMsg

hi
a

ieallla

2

SS

|

.

Saee

lea

e

TranslateMessage

function.

Gs TranslateMessage

; The ype

i ‘

it to the

Ale (&msg) function = called.

MS

ete, Teanga

‘

,

2

3

;

;tox consi te pointeto msg... es

ee

es oe ee

ae

Step Seven: Identifying Key Structures of High-Level Languages

TimerProc

proc

; IDA

automatically

hasn't

7 a consequence

near

of

; DATA

to

7 system

—

we'll

have

7 passed

to

the

SetTimer

; Of

SetTimer

(SDK

7 its

prototype:

prototype

of

call

this

function

by the
TimerProc

this

ourselves.

We

know

Looking

into

the

function.
always

of

be

near

at

VOID

;

HWND hwnd,

// Handle

;

UINT uMsg,

// WM_TIMER

;

UINT

idEvent,

// Timer

identifier

7

DWORD

dwTime

// Carrent

system

just

to

the

call

type.

the

calling

we

have

of window

clarify

we

don't

have

the

code

of

located

deep

under

the

hood

7 we'll

be

to

; only

if we

; We

already

Pascal

know

that

by an

OK,

the

call

be

pushed

type

four

of them

only

one

passed.

CALLBACK

functions

functions

operating

obey

with

the

Win32

API

that

arguments

system,

the

stack

is

cleared

by the

should

make

sure

that

this

is

really

the

function

joa
argument

passed.

Why?

kind

Let's

see:

Its

offset
onto

not

is

judging

simple:

The

even

address

the rest

able

to

0xC.

it turns

out
the

On the

stack

case.)

determine

by the prototype,

function

used

of them.

them!

is this?
top

On the bottom,

dwTime was placed onto

means

hes

— although,

of argument

it last.

This

It's

It didn't

IDA was

that

are

PASCAL.

what

But

system),

is

that

; the opposite.

function

CALLBACK

by the

only one

are

pushed

important.

and

way,

was

it's

right,

By the
what

time,

to

left

(You

argument.

appears

they

all

This

types

called

of this

from

revealed

messages

operating

confuse

are

= dword

; IDA has

find

application.

function.

arg C

Don't

former

timer

the

argument

in which

; the

It

the

above

convention.

; called

out

order

The

aT

find

for

of

the

will

we'll

time

mentioned

; functions!

latter

is

message

;

able

as

operating

TimerProc(

7 Since
(it's

TimerProc

description

hand!),

7

; Now

CALLBACK

the

do

should

maint+é6fo

reconstructed

implicit

the

XREF:

219

first!

of the
we

stack,

should

we

find

see

(Since we have

the

source

code,

220

Part I: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

we know

for certain

requires

pushing

here...

The

that

arg_C is dwTime.)

arguments
works,

however

is an

analog

of FAR

with FAR — all

calls

are

the

inversion

of pushing

and

see

says

program

CALLBACK

how

the

PASCAL

#elif (MSC VER >= 800)

near

#define

WINAPI

Well,

who

would

as

PASCAL

as

stdcall.

is actually
At

last,

defined

check).

to

everything

is wrong

The

SDK

is,

clear

we

explain

. But

how

can

look

into

<windef.h>

there:

—_stdcall
--stdcalt

have

it

|| defined (_STDCALL_SUPPORTED)

__stdcall
_estdesis
_edecl

APIENTRY

Let's

convention

Something

So

in WinNT/9x

is

#define CALLBACK
#define WINAPI
#define WINAPIV

#define APIPRIVATE
#define PASCAL

PASCAL.

Pascal

order.

(launch

arguments?

type

The

reverse

in the

thought

-

it!

stdcall!
everything

The

And

call

declared

CALLBACK

is clear.

is also

defined

(Now, if someone

tells

you

that CALLBACK is PASCAL, you can smile and say that a hedgehog is
a bird, although a proud one — it won't fly until you kick it!)
It seems

likely

that

rummaging

in the jungle

of include

files

may

be beneficial. By the way, perversions with overlapping types
create a big problem when adding modules written in an environment
that supports call conventions of the PASCAL function to a C project.
Since PASCAL in Windows iscaer

nothing will work!
Su

bie

>.
es OG

Step Seven: Identifying Key Structures of High-Level Languages

Mov

; The

eax,

[ebpt+arg

dwTime

argument

; There

are

three

; Each

has

a size

edx,

edx

xOr

; EDX

Mov

is

ecx,

arguments

of

into

before

4 bytes.

EAX.

How

did

on

the

stack.

it

Consequently,

of

5 is

placed

(in EAX)

is

edx,

; EDX

contains

the

7 instruction,

we

get

this?

4*3=0xC.

in ECX.

edx

; The

obtained

; In the

SDK,

remainder

from

multiply

result

we'll

; the

constants
nothing

division;

it by 0x10

(or

using

the

42 degree

is passed

to

the

MessageBeep

find

that

such

as

NB

OK,

MB ICONASTERISK,

said

about

the

immediate

However,

the

is

constant.

; is described

in the

MB _OK using

; #define
; #define

by 5.

of

cyclic

shift

2).

; uType

; but

each

divided

4

push

the

MessageBeep

SDK

informs

WINUSER.h

file.

context

search:

Let's

MB ICONHAND,

values
us

that

open

MB OK
MB OKCANCEL

0x00000000L
0x00000001L

; #define

MB ABORTRETRYIGNORE

0x00000002L

MB YESNOCANCEL

0x00000003L

; #define

MB _YESNO

0x00000004L

; #define

MB RETRYCANCEL

0x00000005L

; #define
; #define
; #define

MB _ICONHAND
MB ICONQUESTION
MB ICONEXCLAMATION

0x00000010L
0x00000020L
0x00000030L

#define MB_ICONASTERISK

function.

accepts

; #define

‘Ne

we

5

shl

; for

is placed

ecx

; QwTime

; of

C]

zeroed.

; A value
div

221

0x00000040L

MessageBeep

it and

search

etc.,

+

222

~—sw~Part |: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

; All the

constants

that

; have

values

of

; get

a sense

of the

; from the

system

“ee

is a number

~

is multiplyed

call

; All

0x0,

we're

0x10,

program.

startup

belonging

interested

0x20,

0x30,

We divide

0x40.

Now

we

by 5 the

time

elapsed

(in milliseconds).

to the

interval

—

Ox0x10

by 0x10,

in

and

0x0,

The

from
—

can

remainder

0 to

4.

This

number

0x40.

ds :MessageBeep

possible

mov

eax,

; dwTime

types

of beeps.

[ebptarg
C]

is placed

xor

edx,

; EDX

is zeroed.

mov

ecx,

into

EAX.

edx

;

-

3E8h

; The decimal equivalent of 0x3E8 is 1000.
GLY

i

|

TOF

eh

SEMeCx®

lei

es nTime cis. dividedby LOdO;..

Se

x

sie

e~

pats

; that is, milliseconds are converted into sec onds ar
ang

Sl

Aare

Wie

a

. Serge!

diets

.

——

-

:

é

e

ihn

cf

d

Step Seven: Identifying Key Structures of High-Level Languages

223

An important remark on the types defined in <w1npows .H>! We spoke about
this in the comments on the previous listing, but repetition is justified; after all, not
all readers grasp the analysis of disassembled listings.
The CALLBACK and winapi functions obey the Pascal calling convention, but
PASCAL is defined in <WINDEF.H> as stdcall

(and as cdecl on some platforms).

Thus, on the INTEL platform, Windows functions follow the same convention:
Arguments are pushed onto the stack from right to left, and the stack is cleared by
the called function.
To make ourselves familiar with the Pascal convention, let's create a simple
Pascal program and disassemble it (PAscat calls occur in other programs, but it
makes sense to study PAscat calls in Pascal programs):
Listing 82.
USES

A Demonstration of the pascat Call

WINCRT;

Procedure

MyProc(a:Word;

b:Byte;

c:String);

begin

Writtelm (ath, ws, Cc):
end;

BEGIN

MyProc ($666,$77,

"Hello,

Sailor!");

END.

The disassembled code of this program compiled using Turbo Pascal for Windows should look like this:
Listing 83. The Disassembled Code for the pascat Call Compiled Using Turbo
Pascal for Windows
PROGRAM

proc
Gana

near

INITTASK

; INITTASK

is

called

from

call

@ SystemInit$qv

; The

SYSTEM

call

@WINCRTInit$qv

module

is

KRNL386.EXE

to

initialize

; __SystemInit (void)
initialized.

; __WINCRTInit (void)

a 16-bit

task.

224

~—swParrt |: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

; The

WinCRT

jowbisial

lejos y=

module

is

initialized.

mov

bp,

; The

function

«sp

‘

7, This

isefusbos,Pascalk!

xor

ax,

call

@ StackCheck$q4Word ; Stack

prolog

is in the middle

of the

function.

ax

push

666h

; Note

that

the

pushs

77h

7 "Ww?

mov

di,

offset

overflow

check

(AX)

Ag:
arguments

are

passed

from

left

to

right.

‘

~

aHelloSailor

~

; "Hello,

Sailor!"

; DI contains a pointer to the string "Hello,

F

Sailor!"

P

i

\

push

ds

a

¢

pushed

;

t

; The

:

‘oe haeaaey

FAR pointer

i oe —
*

:

aa

si

is passed,

both segment

not

NEAR —

and offset
"

|

:

of the string.
~

oe tppree
46
RES
anaes.
9A See,
wsfsThestack is cleared
re called function.

yn
—

“¢

ee

Step Seven: Identifying Key Structures of High-Level Languages

* This

is a local

variable.

Since

it's

located

7 above

the

frame,

seems

to

an

array

is

OxFF

;

stack

(the maximum

# It's

likely

string

to be

it

length

the

buffer

arg 0

= dword

ptr

arg

= byte

ptr

4

arg_6
; The

accepted

push

bp

Pascal

allocated

bytes

0x100

the

string.

arguments.

bp,

sp

stack

frame

mov

ax,

100h

call:

ee StackCheck$q4Word

; Here,

we find

is opened.

out

if there

for

local

;

Stack

are

100

overflow

bytes

variables.

check

SN
<=

ei

sub
Bop 00h
a
7 Space is aipeated for local variables.
-

;
|

te

bytes

bytes).

OAh
three

; The

need

0x100
of

4

mov

; which we

for

at

8

= word ptr
function

in

be

225

ae Seto 0]

; The etaaes to the See

argument is obtained.

(AX)

on the

stack,

226

Part I: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

ai

; The

maximum

call

string

length

is pushed.

@Sbasg$qm6Stringt1l4Byte

; The

string

; arg 0 is

is

copied

a string).

; seems

a little

7 Tuxbo:

Pascal

; the

This

are

Lee

local

string
buffer

(consequently,

of

Why

not

use

a reference?

by value

in

Pascal.

us

passed

; Store

the

way

strange.

wont

strings

into

achieving

the

goal,

however,

=

De Bom
mov

di,

offset

; A pointer
; Here,

; of

is

we

need

Pascal

; system.
; onto

—

strikingly

different

left-side

order

stack

doesn't

to

organize
number

of

; of parameters,

isn't

; No,

it's

not

; At

compile

time,

the

calls

to

; Therefore,

in the

first

one

; to

output

; and

the

the

7 to output
; because

(without

procedures

It's

compiler

code,

each

be

be used

to

output

two

numbers
one

a character

(WriteChar),

the

string

into

require

(WriteString) .

the window

and forget

about

it,

redrawing.

in a graphic

7>xresolution.

code

that

outputs

output

on

save

its

contents

the

—

string

should

If you

have

remember

that

output

all

Turbo

as a console.

this

environment

request.

WM_PAINT message handler.

; the window under Windows

case:

second

space

; into the

a fixed

our

of

output

likely

takes

of them-in
the

impossible

you

several

sum

to

directly

into

the

one

the

number

procedure

three

doesn't

; to repeat

have

separately.

; The operating system
; require a big memory

; in Windows,

additional

that

procedure),

it's

may

it

argument

will

as

The

using

operator.

There

string

C output

arguments

a variable

divides

WriteLongint

window

with
an

each

space

the
the

the

us

blank

last

; In Windows,

from

of pushing

system

it?

compiled

will

by the

output

arguments.

output

of arguments.

the

for

a procedure

a procedure!

; procedure

(accepted

allow

support

just

7

buffer.
with

is

is

; The

output

the

WriteLn

+ number

the

acquainted

it

+ a variable

7 But

to

to become

First,

the

; tricks)

unk _1E18

obtained

ever

Pascal

In this

a high

know

how

programmed

should

allows

case,

would

with

be placed

us to treat

Step Seven: Identifying Key Structures of High-Level Languages

™

~

everything

displayed

earlier

should

be

stored

somewhere.

Since

variables

cease

to

as

soon

as

are

local

executed,

they are

not

Either

the heap or the data

we've

just

to

boost

received

for

remains.

the pointer

to such

output

performance,

Turbo

Pascal

creates

a simple

and

WriteString

of WriteLn
The

functions

by characters

follows,

run-time

and, if necessary,

repeats

=e

without

the

push

ds

pushy

“di

The

mov

involving

buffer

cache.

merge

address

their

uses

the latter —

In addition,

WriteLingint,

results

procedures

the buffer.

Pascal

a buffer.

of their

buffer.

In the

the buffer

contents

the redrawing
the

storing

The

the

in this

which outputs

system track

~~

—F

suitable

segment

the

represented

,

exist

227

end,

WriteChar,
activity,

the

call

into the window.

of the window,

output

programmer.

is pushed

onto

the

stack.

en,

al,

(oprarg

A412

The type

of the

arg 4 argument

is byte.

aie
i

xOr —

ah, ah

; The higher byte
of the AH register

is zeroed.
ee

add
LA

ax, [bptarg_6] _

a Eee

gel ae

ee

This suited aE ara oe arg_ 6. ReneS ae was Pregiousty. extended

228

_— Part |: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

push
.
Ui

One

0
more

zero!
\

call
The

“ee

QWriteSqm4Text7Longint4Word

; Write(varf;

WriteLongint

the

function

has

following

WriteLongint

(Text

far

&,

a:

Longint,

Text

the

pointer

to

the

far

& —

a — the

long

count

how many

—

(if zero

—

integer

one

output

variables

should

be

Longint;

width:

Word)

prototype:

count:

output

being

v:

Word).

buffer

output

variable)

;

™

Consequently,

in our case,

arguments.

A small

follow

Pascal

the

one variable

WriteLongint

function

convention,

since

it doesn't

the

completely,

but

developers

leaves

the

pointer

accepted

this

If other

functions

need

performance:

buffer

(at least one of them does — WriteLn),

then push it back again each time?

pops

WriteLongint

two arguments

function,

clear

to the buffer

have

better

of the

— the sum of two

— the

The

compiler

we output

addition

on

solution
the

doesn't
stack

the

stack.

to achieve

pointer

to the

why should we pop it,

If you look into the end

you'll

see

RET

from the stack — two words

6. The

aee

function

for Longint,

and one word for count. Such a lovely technical detail! It's
small,
Se

but it can lead to great

confusion,

especially if a code

; digger is not familiar with Hie Pascoe pegs cates system!

pnetipges. $4) Rar

a)

a ‘nee.

ie a poh

fe

«

iene

ae

Vea

“es ties
Teer

akz

Step Seven: Identifying Key Structures of High-Level Languages

push

ss

push

di

; Its

address

push

0

; This

is

call

is

the

pushed

output

of

onto

the

stack.

only

one

string!

@WriteSqm4Textm6String4Word ; Write(var

call

; It

229

@WriteLnSqm4Text

seems

likely

; Actually,

prand

the

wattsitor

no

pointer

parameters

to

the

buffer

f:

Text)

are

passed

lays

on

String;

width:

to

functions.

the

the

the

Word)

top

of

stack

from

the

have

everything

itse"hourcofveriumphs,"

; Upon

completion

call

@ _I0Check$qv

; Check

if

the

; WriteLn(var

that

f; s:

of

WriteLn,

it will

; Exit

output

is

be

removed

stack.

if. error.

successful.

leave
; The

stack

retn

8

; Since

8 bytes

+ we

need

et

LOOKS mekee

to

; MyProc(a:
MyProc

frame

is

are

closed.

popped

reconstruct

from

the

the

stack,

prototype

of

we

now

our

procedure.

Laus's

Byte,

b:

Word,

c:

String)

endp

Turbo Pascal turned out to be very artful! This analysis has taught us a good
lesson: We can never be sure that the function will pop all arguments passed to it
from the stack. In addition, it's impossible to determine the number of arguments

by the number of machine words popped from the stack!
Fastcall conventions. However unproductive the transfer of arguments via

the stack might be, the stdcall and cdec1 call types are standardized, and they

should be observed. Otherwise, the modules compiled by one compiler
(libraries, for example) will be incompatible with modules compiled by other compilers. However, if the called function is compiled by the same compiler

230

Part |: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

as the calling one, we don't need to follow the standard conventions. Instead, we

can take advantage of the more effective passing of arguments via registers.
Beginners may wonder: Why hasn't the passing of arguments via registers been
standardized? Is anyone planning to do so? The response is: Who would standardize it? Committees on the standardization of C and C++? Certainly not! All platform-dependent solutions are left to compiler developers — each developer is free
to implement them as desired, or not to implement them. Readers still may ask:

What prevents the compiler developers for one specific platform from reaching
common agreements?

Developers have agreed to pass the value returned by the function through
[E] AX: [ [E] Dx], although the standard doesn't discuss specific registers. At least, they
have a partial agreement: Most manufacturers of 16-bit compilers have observed
conventions without making compatibility claims. But the fastcall is so named
because it is aimed at providing maximum performance. The optimization technique doesn't stand still, and introducing a standard is equivalent to anchoring
a ball and chain to your leg. On the other hand, the average gain from passing
arguments via registers is slight, and many compiler developers forsake speed for
simplicity of implementation. If performance is crucial, we can use the inline functions.

|

This reasoning likely will interest programmers, but code diggers are worried
about the reconstruction of function prototypes, not about performance. Is it possible
to find out what arguments the fastcal1 function receives without analyzing its code
(that is, looking only at the calling function)? The popular answer, "No, because
the compiler passes arguments via the most 'convenient' registers," is wrong, and
the speaker clearly shows his or her ignorance of the compilation procedure.
In compiler development, there is a translation unit: Depending on the
implementation, the compiler may translate the program code in its entirety,
or it may translate each function separately. The first type incurs substantial overhead, since we need to store the entire parse tree in memory. The second type saves
in the memory only each function's name and reference to the code generated for
it. Compilers of the first type are rare; I've never come across (although I have
heard about) such a C\C++ compiler for Windows. Compilers of the second type
are more efficient, require less memory, and are easier to implement; they are good
in all respects except for their intrinsic inability to perform pass-through

optimization. Each function is optimized individually and independently. Therefore, the compiler can't choose the optimal registers for passing arguments, since
it doesn't know how they're handled by the called function. Functions translated
_ independently should follow conventions, even if this isn't advantageous.

Step Seven: Identifying Key Structures of High-Level Languages

231
ss

Thus, knowing the "handwriting" of the particular compiler, we can reconstruct
the function prototype with minimal effort.
Borland C ++ 3.x passes arguments via the AX (AL), DX(DL), and Bx(BL) registers. When no free registers remain, arguments are pushed onto the stack from left
to right. Then they're popped by the called function (stdcal1).
The method of passing arguments is rather interesting. The compiler doesn't assign
each argument its "own" registers; instead, it provides each argument easy access to the
"pile" of candidates stacked in order of preference. Each argument takes as many registers from the pile as it needs, and when the pile is exhausted, the stack is used. The only
exception is arguments of the long int type, which are always passed via Dx:Ax
(the higher word is passed via Dx) or, if that's impossible, via the stack.
If each argument occupies no more than 16 bits (as is often the case), the first
argument from the left is placed into Ax (AL), the second one into Dx (DL), and the
third one into Bx (BL). If the first argument from the left is of the long int type, it

takes two registers from the pile at once: px:ax. The second argument gets the
BX (BL) register. Nothing remains for the third argument, so it is passed via the
stack. When long int is passed as the second argument, it is sent to the stack, since
the Ax register it needs is already occupied by the first argument. In this case,
the third argument is passed via px. Finally, if long int is the third argument from
the left, it goes onto the stack. The first two arguments are passed via AX (AL) and
DX (DL), respectively.
Floating-point values and far pointers are always passed via the main stack (not
via the stack of the coprocessor, as common sense would tell us).
Table 2. The Fastcall Preferences of Borland C++ 3.x for Passing Arguments
Argument type

=
s

pis iceaeea |Seaoul, al eae
DX

BX

232

Part |: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

Microsoft C++ 6.0 also behaves much like the Borland C++ 3.x compiler, except
that it changes the order of preferences of the candidates for passing pointers —
namely, the BX register has priority. This is logical because the early 80x86 microprocessors didn't support indirect addressing via ax or Dx. In those’ microprocessors, the value passed to the function had to be moved to Bx, SI, or DI.

Table 3. The Fastcall Preferences of Microsoft C++ 6.0 for Passing
Arguments

Borland C++ 5.x is similar to its predecessor, Borland C++ 3.x. However, it prefers the cx register to Bx and places arguments of int and long int types in any suitable 32-bit registers, not in Dx: Ax. This is the result of converting the compiler from
16-bit to 32-bit mode.
Table 4. The Fastcall Preferences of Borland C++ 5.x for Passing
Arguments

dechifnentiype

Bae ae

Step Seven: Identifying the Key Structures of High-Level Languages

233
a

Microsoft Visual C++ 4.x-6.x, when possible, passes the first argument from the
left via the ECx register, the second one via the EpDx register, and the rest via the
stack. Floating-point values and far pointers are always transferred via the stack.
The argument of the __int64 type (a nonstandard, 64-bit integer introduced by
Microsoft) is always passed via the stack.
If __inté4 is the first argument from the left, the second argument is passed via
ECX, and the third one via Epx. If __int64 is the second argument, the first one is
passed via Ecx, and the third one via EDx.
Table 5. The Fastcall Preferences of Microsoft C++ 4.x—6x for Passing
Arguments
Argument type

Watcom C greatly differs from compilers from Borland and Microsoft. In particular, it doesn't support the fastcall keyword. (This results in serious compatibility
problems.) By default, Watcom always passes arguments via registers. Instead
of the commonly used "pile of preferences," Watcom strictly assigns a certain
register to each argument: The zax register is assigned to the first argument,
EDx to the second one, =Bx to the third one, and Ecx to the fourth one. If it is
impossible to place an argument into the specified register, this argument,
and all other arguments to the right of it, are pushed onto the stack! In particular, by
default, the float and double types are pushed onto the stack of the main processor, which spoils the whole thing.

234

~—s«—Part |: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

Table 6. The Default Method Used by Watcom for Passing Arguments
Argument type

eae
Long

int

Double

| mone

|

FPU stack

FPU stack

FPU stack

FPU stack

The programmer may arbitrarily set his or her own order for passing arguments using the aux pragma, which has the following format: «pragma aux
function

name

parm

[the

list

of

registers].

The list of registers allowable for

each type of argument is given in the following table.
Table 7. The Registers for Passing Arguments in Watcom C

ia a
ea
ee
Cee ee
rex [ee [eae [er [ese fae
a
Far

pointer

DX:EAX

| CX:EBX

| CX:EAX

| CX:ESI

DX: EBX

DI: BAX

CX: EDI

DX: ESI

DI:EBX

| SI:EAX

| CX:EDX

DX: EDI

FS:ECX | FS:EDX
Gs:Ecx | GS:EDx
DS:ECX | DS:EDx

FS:EDI
GS:EDI
DS:EDI

ES:ECX

ES:EDI

DI:ESI | ST:EBX
FS:ESI | FS:EBX
GS:ESI | GS:EBX
DS: ESI

DS:EBX

| DS:EAX

ES:ESI

| ES:EBX

| ES:EAX

| ES:EDX

continues

Step Seven: Identifying the Key Structures of High-Level Languages

235
<i

Table 7 Continued

Argument type

Permitted registers

=e
Double

EDI:EAX

| ECX:EDI

| EDX:ESI

EDX:EDI

| EDI:ESI

| ESI:EBX

Hts

ECX: EDX

| EBX:ERAX

I'll give a few explanations. First, arguments of the char type are passed via
32-bit registers, not via 8-bit ones. Second, the unexpectedly large number of possible pairs of registers for passing far pointers is striking. Third, the segment
address may be passed not only via segment registers, but also via 16-bit, generalpurpose registers.
Floating-point arguments can be passed via the stack of the coprocessor — just
specify 8087 instead of the register name and compile the program using
the -7

key (or -fpi, or

-fpu87) to inform the compiler that the coprocessor's

instructions are allowed. The documentation on Watcom says that arguments
of the double type can also be passed via pairs of 32-bit, general-purpose
registers, but I have failed to force the compiler to generate such a code. Maybe
I don't know Watcom well enough, or perhaps an error occurred. I also have never
encountered any program in which floating-point values have been passed via
general-purpose registers. However, these are subtleties.
Thus, when analyzing programs compiled using Watcom, remember that arguments can be passed via practically any register.
Identifying arguments sent to and received from registers. Both the called and
calling functions must follow conventions when passing arguments via registers.
The compiler should place arguments into the registers where the called function
expects them to be, rather than into those "convenient" for the compiler. As a re-

sult, before each function that follows the fastcal1 convention, a code appears that
"shuffles" the contents of registers in a strictly determined manner. The manner
depends on the specific compiler. The most popular methods of passing arguments
were considered above. If your compiler isn't in the list (which is quite pistes_compilers spring up like mushrooms after a rain), experiment to figure out its"
ture" yourself or consult its documentation. Developers rarely disclose such Ses
ties — not because of the desire to keep it secret, but because the documentation for
each byte of the compiler wouldn't fit into a freight train.

236

Part I: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

Analyzing the code of the calling function does not help us recognize passing arguments via registers unless their initialization is evident. Therefore, we need to analyze the called function. In most cases, the registers saved on the stack just after the

function receives control did not pass arguments, and we can strike them off the list
of "candidates." Among the remaining registers, we need to find the ones whose contents are used without obvious initialization. At first, the function appears to receive
arguments via just these registers. Upon closer examination, however, several issues
emerge. First, implicit arguments of the function (the this pointer, pointers to the
object virtual tables, etc.) often are passed via registers. Second, an unskilled programmer might believe the value should be equal to zero upon its declaration. If he or
she forgets about initialization, the compiler places the value into the register. During
program analysis, this value might be mistaken for the function argument passed via
the register. Interestingly, this register accidentally may be explicitly initialized by the
calling function. The programmer, for example, could call some function before this
one, whose return value (placed into EAx by the compiler) wasn't used. The compiler
could place the uninitialized variable into EAx. When, upon the normal completion of
the execution, the function returns zero, everything may work. To catch such a bug,
the code digger should analyze the algorithm and figure out whether the code of the
successful function's completion is really placed into Eax, or if the variables were
overwritten.
If we discard "clinical" cases, passing arguments via registers doesn't strongly
complicate the analysis.
A practical investigation of the mechanism of passing arguments via
registers. Let's consider the following example. Note the conditional compilation
directives used for compatibility with various compilers:
Listing 84. Passing Arguments via Registers
#include

<stdio.h>

#include

<string>

#if defined(_

BORLANDC__)

// This

of

branch

// or Microsoft

the

C++

|| defined

program

should

compilers

that

(_MSC_VER)
be

compiled

support

the

only

by Borland

fastcall

C++

keyword.

__fastcall

#endif

te

// Next is the MyFunc function, which has various types
// for demonstrating the mechanism of passing them.

of arguments

Step Seven: Identifying the Key Structures of High-Level Languages

My Punc(Chamta,

anu),

elonge

nec,

nt

id)

237

{

#if

defined(_

WATCOMC_ )

// This

branch

is

specially

intended

for

//

The

aux

pragma

forcefully

sets

order

// wia

the

following

registers:

#pragma
#endif

aux

MyFunc

[EAX]

return

parm

the

EAX,

[ESI]

Watcom
of

C.
passing

ESI,

EDI,

[EDI]

[EBX];

arguments

EBX.

at+b+c+d;

Princre (sx\n,
return

Myrune (Oxi

0x27)

0x3,

0x4);

0;

The disassembled code of this example compiled using the Microsoft Visual
C++ 6.0 compiler should look like this:
Listing 85. The Disassembled Code for Passing Arguments Compiled Using
Microsoft Visual C++
main

proc

push

ebp

MOV

ebp,

push

4

push

3

; If you

near

; CODE

XREF;

start+AFlp

esp

run

out

of registers,

the

arguments

; from

right

to

left,

to

the

calling

function,

; then

cleared

by the

called

function

from

passed
the

stack

; everything

is done just as if the stdcall

mov

2

6x,

; EDX

is used

for

; It's

easy

determine

; It's

certainly

;

(A value

to

passing

not

of 2 is

the

argument

its

type —

are

pushed

onto

the

(that

stack

is,

convention were

observed).

second

left.

from

this

is int.

not

a pointer.

char,

and

it's

strange

for

a pointer.)

the

=

.

238

~—Part |: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

mov

(ul ee Al.

; The

CL register

; first

from

the

; only variables
call

we

of the

passing

is,

char

of

type

can reconstruct

; Myrune (Chan

We've

; but

made

the

these

int

int,

char

types

identical

are

have

a size

C++

obtained

is passed

eax

result

just

offset

asc_ 406030

toclveal BS

the

Visual

; The

long

eee

of

—

\

8 bits).

function:

int type

for

int,

to the

printf

function.

; "$x\n"

Sprints

$58
a?

ute solace

eax, eaxgoles?»we lc?

ee

of the

compiler.

OePak en espn 8
eaatl xox

type

sine).

by taking

push

push

a

argument

the

the prototype

a mistake

; in the Microsoft

Slini

for

(that

MyFunc

; Already,

~

is used
left

pity

ie

beldieesapsid

*

0.8

44)"

endl .6f conte

tecriacehl deincehacesct vER

Step Seven: Identifying the Key Structures of High-Level Languages

; This

allocates

Mov

8 bytes

[ebp+var

; The

EDX

8],

were

; Therefore,

it

not

explicitly

loaded

into

the

is

for

used

program

was

; and,

as

probably

; the

ECX:EDX
with

; of

the

function.

; a

reference

; of

the

to

Visual

C++,

it passes

arguments

via

can

that

Therefore,

Somewhere
(although

[ebptvar
4],

might

necessarily

of

function

argument

; the

the

lower

reference

function

byte

of

; However,

looking

; make

that

sure

to

the

the

the

only

char,

the

arguments

into

local

; It's
movsx

even

hard

describe

eax,

[ebpt+var
4]

; EAX

is

loaded

with

; via

CL,

which

is

; a double

word.

Hence,

add

eax,

: The contents

’

function).

us

from

waiting

is passed

long

via

for

it.

CL,

char.

(for

example,

of

of the

calling

function,

int,

is passed

to

via

the

the

— was
them

After

all,

of the

a call

as

char

it's

for Microsoft

type

signed

Visual

can

function.

to

send

type).

we

compiler

it really

addressing
fastcall

convention!

"fast."

first-from-the-left

of the

the

int

of the

benefits
such

the

registers

variables?

all

; by default,

across

—

by the

is probably

stupidity

negates
to

type

not

note

memory

kept

code

pass

; the

CL
char

argument

at

; necessary

; immediately

used

come

argument

simply may be accessing

; Incidentally,
to

we're

cl

argument

first

probably

be

the

; However,

we'll

first-from-the-left

not

; Since
; the

infer

argument

not

, Actually,
the

we

below,

the

its

arguments!

second-from-the-left

argument

before

variable.

by Microsoft

know,

ECX — to

function

first

mov

the

initialized

var 8 local

passing

compiled

registers.

; Gealing

; the

variables.

was

; This

you

local

edx

register

; contents

for

239

=

argument

with

a signed

char

(that

passed

extension

to

is, char,

Ct+)-~«

[ebptvar8]
of EAX are added with the argument

second

from the left.

—_—

add

eax,
[ebptarg
0]
from the left,
third
argument
; The
; is added to the previous sum...

passed

via

the

stack,

>

Part |: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

240

add
>

eax,

...

and

[ebptarg4]
all

this

is

added

; also

passed

via

the

stack.

to

mov

esp,

pop

ebp

; The

stack

is

closed.

the

fourth

argument,

ebp

frame

retn

8

; We

cleared

up

+ as

required

by the

the

stack,
fastcall

MyFunc

convention.

endp

Now, let's compare this with the result of disassembling the code generated by
the Borland
C++ compiler.
Listing 86. The Disassembled Code for Passing Arguments Compiled Using
Borland C++
Pane

weecdecl

main(int

arge,

Tconst

_main

proc

near

argc

= dword

ptr

8

argv

= dword

ptr

OCh

envp

=

ptr

10h

dword

push

ebp

mov

ebp,

push

4

; Arguments

char

**arqv,,

; DATA

XREF:

conse

chan

“envp)

DATA:00407044\o0

esp

are

; we

discover

; and

AL

passed

explicit

registers.

mov

ecx,

3

edx,

2

mov

Evie

Beit

; All

this

code

can

do

the

stack.

initialization

There

; argument, so it had
; Hence, the argument

MOV

via

were

no

Glancing
of

the

registers

downward,

ECX,

EDX,

to be passed

via

the

left for
stack.

fourth

the

left

of the

from

is pass

arguments

via

the

fourth

function

registers.

is

0x4.

Step Seven: Identifying the Key Structures of High-Level Languages

call

MyFunc

push

eax

push
call”

offset unk_407074
~printr

add

esp,

8

XOr

eax,

eax

pop

ebp

retn:

endp ©

MyFunc

proc

7 Only

MEE

near

; CODE

= dword
one argument

the stack.

~~

; format

:

_main

arg 0

Be

has

been

_

push-—-ebp-—=—~

moy

XREF:

Bas

So

'

movsx

_maintlitp

3

Hits

passed to the

ae.

function

7,

.- ~

—

Schiceansionisins

ebp, esp: 91)

2

;

; The stack frameis opened.
ee

241

eax, al

7

—

’

t

is

(5

WEE

=
‘et

DRG

aN

; Borland has generated a code that =

og

eS

eS

wy

SIS Rey

ore

optimized

;

ST

=

Des

- han ies.

tia

242

Part |: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

>

mov

edx,

; EDX

is

; passed

[ebptarg0]

loaded
via

with

the

add

ecx,

;

...

Summed

again,

eax,

CX

...

and

MOV
;

the

last

function

argument

(EAX

is

the

register

result

of

its

stack...

edx

passed

; the

function

pop

ebp

retn

4

; The

stack

is

to

EAX.

places

the

in which

execution.)

cleared.

MyFunc

endp

And last, the result of disassembling the same example compiled with Watcom C
should look like this.
Listing 87. The Disassembled Code for Passing Arguments via Registers
Compiled Using Watcom C
main_

proc
push

near

7; CODE

XREF:

__CMain+40Vvp

18h

eal

CHK

; Checking

for

stack

overflow.

are

pushed

onto

are

passed

via

push

ebx

push

esi

push

edi

; The

registers

mov

ebx,

4

mov

edi,

3

mov

esi,

2

mov

eax,

1

; The

arguments

; Note

that

the

first

; is passed

via

the

argument

32-bit

EAX

the

stack.

the

registers

of the

char

we

specified!

type

register.

; Watcom's behavior significantly complicates
; the reconstruction of function prototypes. In this

case,

Step Seven: Identifying the Key Structures of High-Level Languages

; the values are placed into the registers in
; in which the arguments were declared in the

the

; beginning

relatively

from

cali

MyFunc

push

eax

push

offset

Cali.

s pnintt-:

add

esp,

8

eax,

eax

pop

edi

esi

pop

ebx

right.

Alas,

this

; CODE

XREF:

order

function

happens

prototype,
rarely.

unk
_420004

xor
pop

the

243

retn
main _

endp

MyFunc
; The

proc
function

near

doesn't

push

4

Cailsi=

jS2CHk

and

eax,

; Zeroing

receive

higher

; initializing

esi,

we

.
,

Therefore,

.
tf

We

.

in the

can

an

and

referencing

that

the

char type

can't

say what

kind

from

the

the

stack.

register

before

is passed via HAX,

of argument

of the

it's

argument

function

are

has not been initialized

argument

assume

function

bits

+21Tp

argument

it is.

eax

The ESI register

,

24

it suggests

,

.

a single

OFFh

the

; Unfortunately,

add

main

even

the

prototype,

initialized

int

type
second

since

the

in the prototype

(if nothing hinders

the

right),

and

expressions

=e

The

original

order

are

of arguments

function.

from

the

registers

in the order

“

by our

is transferred

calling

in which they are listed

calculated

; it's nice if we succeed in determining

it.

left
in the

this beginning

is not

via

from

from

left

crucial,

but,

it.

to

right.

+Part I: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

244

lea

eax,

[esitedi]

; Oops!

Do

you

; the

pointer

believe

that

is being

loaded
are

; passed

to the

function,

; type

becomes

similar

; is

too

artful,

and

to
it's

into

also

an

EAX?

index.

easy

to

programs

compiled

using

that

is

to

; the

sense

neither

the

; the

memory

by this

; arguments

are

add

ebx

eax,

; Similarly,

LEA

the

7 The

function

contains

than

the

and

its

Watcom

EDI,

char
compiler

errors

when

EAX

is

a pointer

sum

of

ESI

called

one

the

the

Therefore,

rather

the

nor

ESI

gross

Yes,

calculate

function

pointer.

constants,

EDX

7 to

used

calling

The

into

it.

that

EAX with

Alas!
run

; analyzing

; But

And

pointers?

and

in
EDI.

access

function

pointers!

argument

that

was

passed

function.
prototype

My Pune (Chara,

; However,

the

should

look

nite)

iby

D,

2niiwe,.

order

of

arguments

like

might

this:

differ.

retn

MyFunc

endp

As you can see, passing arguments via registers isn't especially complex;
it's even possible to reconstruct the original prototype of the called function. However, we've considered a rather idealized situation. In real programs, passing im-

mediate values only is rarely done. Now, having mastered fastcall, let's disassemble a more difficult example.
Listing 88. A Difficult fastcal1 Example
#i£ defined(_ BORLANDC__)

|| defined

.~fastcall

(_MSC VER)
=F

#endif >
MyFune(char

a,

int

*b,

int

$c)

{
#if defined(_
#pragma

aux

WATCOMC_ )

MyFunc

parm

[EAX]

[EBX]

[ECX];

Step Seven: Identifying the Key Structures of High-Level Languages

245
~~

A

#endif
return

atb[0]+c;

int

a=2;

Prince
Ul th

My nunc (Strlen(
li

a.Ga

Sserilen( "333i,

The result of disassembling the compiled code of this example should look like
this:
Listing 89. The Disassembled Code of the Difficult factcal1 Example
main

proc

var 4

=

near

; CODE

dword

ptr

push

ebp

mov

ebp,

esp

; The

stack

frame

push

eCcx

push

esi

; The

registers

mov

is

are

[ebp+var_4],

XREF:

-4

opened.

pushed

onto

the

of 2 is placed

into

the

; The

is determined

from

the

type

(See

; for

details.)

push

more

offset

; A pointer
; The

the

call

.strien

add

esp,

4

"Local

a333

to the

arguments

stack.

2

; A value
; 4 bytes.

start+tARp

Stack

string

local

fact

that

Variables"

p Comise
"333"

var_4

the

variable

occupies

section

Amene

is passed

of MyFunc are passed

variable.

from

to the

right

strlen

to left

as

function.
required.

246

_— Part I: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

push

eax

; Here,

the

; onto

the

lea

esi,

value
stack

offset

; The pointer

by the

function

to

next

al

is

either

saved

function.

variable

WaCconStachate

to the

al

string.is

Callens

cvern
esp,

4

mov

(oll

yaaa

7 The

returned

value

is

; initialized.

Since

ECX:EDX

=e
™

the

to the var_4 local

add

; fastcall

Se

passed

s

[ebptvar_4]

; The pointer
push

returned
or

is placed

into ESI.

>

passed

to

the

strlen

function.

:

functions,

prior

to calling

We can

assume

the

the

that

copied

to the

are

CL register,

used

for passing

initialization

functionis not

the

transferred via CL.
_e is

leftmost

of these

and EDX is

arguments
two

to

registers

accidental!

argument

of the

char type

~

i.

hb
>
L

t

FE

mov

Se esi

a

Step Seven: Identifying the Key Structures of High-Level Languages

; This

is not necessarily

; code,

throwing

out

the case

the

7 However,

judging

+ compiler

works

without

; returned

by the

strlen

7 of MyFunc,
7 obscures

assigning

the

_

it's

more

se

than

to

from

the

— the compiler

variable

code

of the

functions

them

to

essence

of the program.

to understand

its

source

push

eax

push
call

offset asc_406038
_printt

add

esp,

.|

pop

esi-

|

mov

esp,

pop

= ebp

optimize

called

used

function,

In addition,

are

local

might

if it isn't

optimization.

important

restore

; The stack

local

used

only

once

as

simply

Moreover,

for a code

algorithm

the

anymore.
the

if the values

variables

the

247

arguments

digger,

of a program

code.

; "%x\n"
:

8

=
ebp

ae

ld

Somes
frame

:

es

is closed.

;

ea

retn—

:

main
i SOE 5s5,

-

endp

aes-3 Bee. ee

.
e pe te eee

eh

ee

eee

oS reas, eae eerie ite Pax Bs a3

See

eater = ae

248

‘Part I: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

; This

allocated

mov

[ebp+var_8],

edx

EDX

without

; Since

is

; the

function

; via

it

; Visual

used

argument

(according

C++

; function,

; Therefore,
Mov

8 bytes

know

to the

Having

that

variables.

explicit

from

fastcall

EDX

var_8 contains

initialization,,

the

leftmost

; and

then

movsx

eax,

analyzed
contains

the
the

the pointer

is passed
of the Microsoft

code

of the

calling

pointer

to

var 4.

CL,

to var 4.

;

argument

of the

immediately

placed

function

is passed

via

into

var 4 local

variable.

the

[ebptvar
4]

; var_4 is extended
ecx,

left

convention

lebprvarn
4), ex

; The

mov

local

second

compiler).
we

for

to signed int.

[ebptvar_
8]

7 ECX is loaded

with

the

contents

; via EDX.As you may remember,

; to the function via EDX.

of the var_8 pointer

passed

the pointer was passed

F

Step Seven: Identifying the Key Structures of High-Level Languages

249

Simple? Yes, it is! Then let's consider the result of creative work with Borland C++,
which should look like this:
Listing 90. The Disassembled Code for fastcall Compiled Using Borland C++
Se Shahe __cdecl

main(int

_™Main

proc

var4

=

dword

ptr

-4

=

argc

push

argc,

const

near

dword

ptr

8

= dword

ptr

OCh

=

ptr

10h

dword

char

**argv,

; DATA

XREF:

ebp,

esp

; The

stack

frame

is

opened.

push

eCcx

; ECX is saved...

Just

a moment!

; examples,

Borland

; It

likely

seems

never

that

via

ECX,

and

this

functions

via

the

a solution

; allocates

4 bytes

; Look:

IDA

; for

it was

; no

SUB ESP,

; of the

might

look,

one

it's

local

strien

it
compiler

simply
this?

— var4. But memory

In any
PUSH

Oh, this

The

ECX

case,
results

there

a333

into

a local

variable.

as

"333"

string

is passed

was

in a decrease

optimization...

2

of 2 is placed

to the

the

Why? How did we determine

variable
wait:

to

convincing

incorrect!

But

by four!

In previous

a function.

passed

is passing

4 instruction.

register

been

However

allocated.

offset

ecx

function
stack.

new!

entering

has

not-explicitly

[ebptvar
4],

; A pointer

ECX when

for local variables.

recognized

ESP

; A value

Cali
pop

*envp)

DATA:004070441o0

is something

argument

; function
+ such

This

saved

some

; to other

push

char

ebp

mov

mov

const

to the function.

*

250

_—~PPartt |: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

The argument

.

,

push
Ie

we

are

returned

.
,

to the

we
~~ or

push

by the

are

it will

offset

caline

ec emlen
ecx

The

argument

lea

edx,

the

stack.

pop

the

function

function

become

value

as

the

stack

saving

EAX

onto

clear

that

the

argument,

the

stack.

latter

assumption

is true.)

fas

to the AL string

is passedto the

is popped

the

from

strlen

function.

stack.

[ebptvar_4]

The offset

,

strlen

al

pop
,

passing

temporarily

The pointer

.

of the var_4 local

variable

is loaded

is popped

stack,

what

into EDX.

ecx

, “Something
z

either

following

(Later,

,

from

eax

Here

.

is popped

from the

but

“a

,

the screen

of the disassembler upward,

°
,

last onto

the stack and contained the value

- ("333")

exactly?

we find that

Scrolling

EAX was pushed

returned by the strlen

function. i is now located in the ECX register.

(Borland passes: the ar gument second from the left via it.)

: ww Gaute

:

OL

as
7"

; Incidentally, whee: for Seton Ts fans: fastcall

—are
ch

ri

:

copier the Geiss callacceleration -_
Rcee:

ae

He

a

S, ;

5

na

Step Seven: Identifying the Key Structures of High-Level Languages

*# Note

that

7 doesn't

Borland

handle

C++,

arguments

; Instead,

it computes

; out

right

7 This

from

stands

unlike

the

values

then proceeds

reason:

Functions

Gada:

eax .
offset asc_407074
sprintf

add

esp,

push

xor

; The

oe
_ pop
; The

retn
_Main

C++,

functions,

to variables

change

Until the last
via registers

;

and

the values

eax
value

is

returned.

—

,

secenc

rine

frame

=a

ae

of many

is closed.

eae

eS

_endp
; CODE

XREF:

_naint26tp

them

constants.

function is called,
should not begin.

8

eax,

in the list.

"pulling"

format

zero

stack

of all

to left,

to

Visual

in the order in which they appear

# general-purpose registers.
; the passing of arguments
push

Microsoft

251

252

Part I: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

; The

third

argument

mov

eax,

eCxX

; The

result

is

; What

a stupid

; to

the

swap

pop

ebp

; The

stack

of

placed

the

int

type

back

into

EAX.

compiler

arguments

frame

is

is

this

is!

in the

previous

added

Wouldn't

to

it be

the

previous

sum.

simpler

instruction?

closed.

EEN

MyFunc

endp

Now let's consider the disassembled code of the same example compiled using
Watcom C, which always has something new to teach us.
Listing 91. The Disassembled Code for fastca11 Compiled Using Watcom C
main

proc

var

=

C

near

; CODE

dword

push

18h

call

__CHK

; The

stack

push

ebx

overflow

push

ecx

; The

registers

; OY maybe

per

is

being

memory

sub

esp,

; This

is certainly

__CMain+40vp

—OEeh

checked.

modified

are

saved

—

is allocated

for

local

variables?

4

; Therefore,

the

the

two

allocation

PUSH

of memory

for one

instructions

we

into

variable.

saw

above

registers.

; Save

the

Mov

[esp+OCh+var
C], 2

; A value

XREF:

of 2 is placed

the

local

local

variable.

Step Seven: Identifying the Key Structures of High-Level Languages

Mov

Giebe

call.

«strien.

; Note

that

7 to the

mov

ecx,

knows
eax,

| strien_

and

eax,

that

offset

strlen

explicit

mov

by the

to the

string

register!

function

the next

call

al

eee

-

ebx,

returns

type

the

int

conversion:

is copied

into

of strlen

won't

type,

we

the ECX register.

spoil this

MyFunc

©

int

‘Which arguments

(probably

the pointer

here

->

have

char.

were passed

the leftmost

to the var_C variable.
SS

=

& initialized prior

to the

function?

argument),

to calling

the

EBX

(explicitly.

function),

and eer

5 (although this is not necessarily the case).

——

register!

esp

asd, Coa
kiss< loaded with

Be

the

OFFh

7 an

Z EAX

the pointer
via

eax

call

call

i Welepe

passes

function

returned

mov

; Since

Eisicish

Watcom

strlen

; The value
+ Watcom

enaumsleic

253

; ECX might contain a register variable,
but in that case
«3 the called, functiona ahold, not access: ah
.

Lo

peo

254

Part |: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

proc

MyFunc

push

near

Cal
; The

XREF:

main

+33tp

Cis
stack is checked.

and

eax,

; The

24

; if

Watcom

OFFh

higher

; Operation

—

such

the

add

; EAX

are

more

certain

in the

called

repeatedly.

about

where

function

simplifies

It

to

would

not

perform

this

or

in the

the

reconstruction

calling

int,

is added

be

bad

one.

prototypes.

[ebx]

type

; variable

zeroed

doubling

function

eax,

of

bits

were

; However,
; of

; CODE

4

char,

of the

now

extended

int type

add

eax,

eCX

; Aha!

Here

is

; that

this

register

the

passed

reference
was

to

to

used

by reference

via

ECX.

know

for

We

now

passing

with
the

EBX

the
register.

arguments.

retn

; The

function

EAX,

; Notice

it was

; only

that

int

by performing

; of the
MyFunc

prototype

+ MyFunc(char

called

and

should

look

as

this:

*EBX,

int

ECX)

possible

to

reconstruct

the

combined

calling

it

analysis

functions!
endp

Passing floating-point values. Most code breakers don't know the particulars of
floating-point arithmetic and avoid it like the plague. There's nothing terribly complex
about it, and mastering the coprocessor takes only a couple of days. However, it's
much more difficult to master the mathematical libraries that emulate floatingpoint calculations (especially if IDA doesn't recognize the names of the library
functions). But what contemporary compiler makes use of such libraries?
The microprocessor and coprocessor are integrated within the same chip.
Therefore, the coprocessor, starting from 80486DX (if my memory doesn't fail
me), is always available; there's no need to programmatically emulate it.

Step Seven: Identifying the Key Structures of High-Level Languages

255

Until the end of the 1990s, many hackers thought it possible to live their entire
lives without coming across floating-point arithmetic. Indeed, in the good old days,
processors were as slow as turtles, few people had coprocessors, and the tasks
computers had to solve allowed hackers to use tricks and solutions that employed
integer arithmetic.
Today, everything has changed. Floating-point calculations performed by the
coprocessor at the same time as the execution of the main program are completed
even faster than the integer calculations processed by the main processor. Programmers, inspired by such prospects, began to use floating-point data types even
where integer ones had been more than sufficient. Contemporary code diggers can
hardly do without knowledge of coprocessor instructions.
80x87 coprocessors support three types of floating-point data: short 32-bit,
long 64-bit, and extended 80-bit. These correspond to the following types of the
C language: float, double, and long double! (see Table 8).
Table 8. Basic Information on Floating-Point Types of the 80x87 Coprocessors
Type

Size

Value range

Preferred types of transfer

Float

4bytes—

10~°...10°8

CPU registers, CPU stack, FPU stack

Double

Sbytes

10-°8...10%%

CPU registers, CPU stack, FPU stack

Longdouble

10bytes

10-49%,..104994

CPU stack, FPU stack

Real!

6 bytes

2.9*10-*°...1.7*10%

CPU registers, CPU stack, FPU stack

Arguments of the float and double types can be passed to the function in
three ways: via general-purpose registers of the main processor, via the stack of the
main processor, or via the stack of the coprocessor. Arguments of the long double
type require too many general-purpose registers to be passed using this method.
In most cases, they are pushed onto the stack of the main processor or that of the

coprocessor.
The first two ways are already familiar to us, but the third one is something
new! The 80x87 coprocessor has eight 80-bit registers (designated as sT(0), ST(1),
i Attention: The ANSI C standard doesn't require a precise representation of the types mentioned above. This statement is valid only for some implementations of the PC platform.

ii The Turbo Pascal type.

256

Part |: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

ST (2), ST(3),-ST(4), ST(5), ST(6), and sT(7)) organized as a wraparound stack.
This means that most of the coprocessor instructions don't operate with the register indexes; their destination is the top of the stack. For example, to add two float-

ing-point numbers, we need to push them onto the stack of the coprocessor. Then

we must call the addition instruction that adds the two numbers lying on the top
of the stack and returns the result via the stack again. We have the option
of adding the number that lies on the stack of the coprocessor to the number
located in the RAM, but it's impossible to directly add two numbers located in
the RAM!
Thus, the first stage of floating-point operations is pushing the operands onto
the coprocessor stack. This operation is performed by the instructions of the FLDxx
series (listed with brief explanations in Table 9). In most cases, we use the FLD

source instruction, which pushes a floating-point number from the RAM or the
coprocessor register onto the coprocessor stack. Strictly speaking, this is not one instruction; it's four instructions in one package, which have the opcodes 0xD9 0x0?,
OxDD 0x0?,

OxDB

0x0?, and 0xD9

Oxci for loading the short, long, and extended-real

values and the FPU register, respectively. The ? character is an address field that
specifies whether the operand is in the register or in memory, and the i character is
an index of the FPU register.
The impossibility of loading floating-point numbers from CPU registers makes
it senseless to use them for passing float, double, or long double arguments. In
any case, to push these arguments onto the coprocessor stack, the called function
would have to copy the contents of registers to the RAM. No matter what you do,
there's no way to get rid of memory calls. Therefore, passing floating-point types
via registers is rarely done. They are passed predominantly via the CPU stack or via
the coprocessor stack along with the usual arguments. (This can be done only by
advanced compilers — Watcom, in particular — and not by Microsoft Visual C++
or Borland C++.)

However, certain "peculiar" values can be loaded without addressing the memory; in particular, there are instructions

for pushing numbers’ (zero, one,

17,

and certain others — the complete list is given in Table 9) onto the coprocessor
stack.
An interesting feature of the coprocessor is support for integer calculations.
I don't know of any compiler that uses this capability, but sometimes it's used in assembly inserts; therefore, it's unwise to neglect learning the integer coprocessor
instructions.

Step Seven: Identifying the Key Structures of High-Level Languages

257

Table 9. The Coprocessor Instructions for Sending/Receiving Arguments
Instruction

Purpose

FLD source

Pushes a floating-point number from the source onto the top of the
coprocessor stack

FSTP destination

Pops a floating-point number from the top of the coprocessor stack
into the destination

FST destination

Copies a floating-point number from the top of the coprocessor stack
into the destination

FLDZ

Pushes 0 onto the top of the coprocessor stack

FLD1

Pushes 1 onto the top of the coprocessor stack

FLDPI

Pushes z onto the top of the coprocessor stack

LDL2T

Pushes the binary logarithm of ten onto the top of the coprocessor stack

FLDL2E

Pushes the binary logarithm of the number e onto the top of the
coprocessor stack

FLDLG2

Pushes the decimal logarithm of two onto the top of the coprocessor
stack

FLDLN2

Pushes the natural logarithm of two onto the top of the coprocessor stack

FILD source

Pushes an integer from the source onto the top of the coprocessor
stack

FIST destination

Copies an integer from the top of the coprocessor stack into the destination

FISTP destination

Pops an integer from the top of the coprocessor stack into the
destination

FBLD source

Pushes a decimal number from the source onto the top of the coprocessor stack

FBSTP destination

Copies a decimal number from the top of the coprocessor stack into
the destination

FXCHST (index)

Exchanges values between the top of the coprocessor stack and the
ST register (index)

The double and long double types occupy more than one word, and transferring them via the CPU stack takes several iterations. As a result, we can't always de-

termine the type and number of arguments passed to the called function by analyzing the code of the calling function. Instead, investigate the algorithm of the called
function. Since the coprocessor can't determine the type of the operand located

258

Part I: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

in the memory (that is, the coprocessor doesn't know how many bytes it occupies),
a separate instruction is assigned to each type. The assembler syntax hides these
distinctions, allowing the programmer to ignore the subtleties of implementation.
(Nevertheless, some people say that the assembler is a low-level language.) Few
people know that FADD
[float] and FADD
[double] are different machine
instructions having the opcodes 0xD8 277000727? and OxDC ??000???, respectively.
Analyzing the disassembled listing doesn't give us any information on the floatingpoint types; to obtain this information, we need to get down to the machine level
and sink our teeth into hexadecimal dumps of instructions.
Table 10 presents the opcodes of the main coprocessor instructions that work
with memory. Note that performing arithmetic operations directly over floatingpoint values of the long double type is impossible; they must first be loaded onto
the coprocessor stack.
Table 10. The Opcodes of the Main Coprocessor Instructions

(The second byte of the opcode is presented in binary form. The ? character
denotes any bit.)
A note on floating-point types of the Turbo Pascal language. Since the C language is machine-oriented, its floating-point types coincide with the coprocessor
floating-point types. The main floating-point type of Turbo Pascal is Real; it occu-

pies 6 bytes, which is not "native" to the computer. Therefore, for calculations

Step Seven: Identifying the Key Structures of High-Level Languages

carried out using the coprocessor,
Extended type (long

259

Real is programmatically converted to the

double in terms of C). This takes up the lion's share of the

performance. Unfortunately, the built-in mathematical library, intended to replace
the coprocessor, does not support other types. When a "live" coprocessor is available, pure coprocessor types — Single, Double, Extended, and Comp — appear that
correspond

to float,

double,

long

double,

and -_inté4.

The mathematical library functions that provide support for floating-point calculations receive floating-point arguments from the registers. The first argument
from the left is placed into ax, Bx, Dx; the second argument, if there is one, is placed

into Cx, SI, DI. The system functions that implement the interface to the processor
(in particular, the functions for converting the Real type into the Extended type)
receive arguments from registers and return the result via the coprocessor stack.
Finally, the application functions and procedures receive floating-point arguments
from the CPU stack.
Depending on the settings of the compiler, the program may be compiled either using the built-in mathematical library (the default), or by employing direct
calls of the coprocessor instructions. (This is the /ns+ key.) In the first case, the
program doesn't use the coprocessor's capabilities, even though it's installed in the
computer. In the second case, if the coprocessor is available, the compiler uses its
computational capabilities; if the coprocessor isn't available, any attempt to call
a coprocessor instruction results in the generation of the int 0x7 exception by the
main processor. This will be caught by the software coprocessor emulator, the same
thing as the built-in library supporting floating-point calculations.
Now that you have a general outline of how floating-point arguments are
passed, you are burning with the desire to see it "live," right? To begin with, let's
consider a simple example.
Listing 92. Passing Floating-Point Arguments to a Function
#include

float

{

<stdio.h>

MyFunc(float

a,

double

b)

#if defined(_ WATCOMC__)
#pragma

aux

MyFunc

parm

[8087];

// To be

compiled

using

the

#endif
return
ae?

ath;

-7 key

Part |: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

260
>

a

main()

Dine

(soa,

My Eunicl (Ono G7

umienln)na:

The disassembled listing of this code, compiled with Microsoft Visual C++,
should look as follows:
Listing 93. The Disassembled Code for Passing Floating-Point Arguments
main
var

proc
8

=

; A local

variable,

near

; CODE

qword

per

this

push

ebp

mov

ebp,

esp

; The

stack

frame

push

is

likely

is

opened.

to

start+AFYp

—sc
occupy

8 bytes.

401F147Ah

; Unfortunately,

IDA can't

; number.

Besides

which,

; whether

or not

this

; It

be

any

can

of

push

OE147AER14h

push

40D51EB8h

; A draft

represent

we can't

number
type:

int

of

the

prototype

looks

ap,

ime

-c)

call

as

a floating-point

is floating-point.

either

oP, Ina

an operand

determine

PoMVEUnNeC (ine

or

like

a pointer.

this:

MyFunc

add

esp,

; Here

we

; whereas

fstp

XREF:

4

go!

Only

three

one

words

machine
are

word

pushed

is taken

from

the

stack,

there!

[esp+8+var_
8]

; A floating-point
; To find out
; select Text

number is pulled from the coprocessor
which one, we need to press <ALT>+<O>,
representation from the pop-up menu,

stack.

Step Seven: Identifying the Key Structures of High-Level Languages

261
»~

;

Choose

;

the

the

Number

number

of

; To

the

; DD

1C 24 —

; type

left

of

opcode

characters

of

FSTP,

appears.

for

machine

Using

Table

which

this

; Therefore,

the

function

the

coprocessor

; Since

the

; that

it

7 assumption

push
; which

returns

them

without

offset

; A pointer

orders

the

to

; How

this

be?

; Closely

7 let's

Let's

examining

figure

out

has

; the

equivalent

the

of

/ESP]

—

and

not

popped

machine

pop

ebp

store

top

of

the

string,

floating-point

solving

result

of

the

its

problem.

work.

Therefore,

is,

the

floating-point

of

the

stack.

that

were

passed

the stack.

It hasn't

bothered

to

used

the

function

arguments

popped

off

the

it

create

data!

OCh
words

are

stack.

retn

main

endp

MyFunc

proc near

var 4

= dword ptr -4

; CODE XREF:

number.

window

ptr-8.

arguments

off

compiler!
and

one

disassembler

qword

that

; to MyFunc

variable,

specification

ways

it places

var_8 as
the

esp,

possible

this

of MyFunc.

[ESP+8+var_
8] instruction,

Two

; Three

it's

FSTP

onto

add

data

value

confirm

analysis

the

top?

“printf

values,

the

the

call

an

scroll

on

temporarily

the

double.

can't

stack!

directly

to

We

to output

what's

“

determine

It's

example) .

a floating-point

in the

pushed

; a local

out

format

; And

artful

for

over

where

determined

an

can

floating-point

7 is

; What

we

works.

function

it

thinking

; IDA

—

arguments.

the

printf

placing

while

(4,

pele TNT

passed

not

can

as

aF

is

instructions

returned

carrying

; But we're
; upward

has

enter

representation

10,

instruction

and

stack.

function

receives

item,

opcode

its

with

; via

bytes

—
me

sub 401011+12Tp

[ESt+8-8]
variable

is

262

_— Part I: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

arg_0

.

dword

ptr

8

arg 4

qword

ptr

OCh

; IDA detected

only two

; were

to the

passed

7 occupy

arguments,

function!

One

while

three

machine

of the

arguments

words

is likely

to

8 bytes.

push

ebp

mov

ebp,

esp

; The

stack

frame

is opened.

is not

saving

push

ecx

; No,

this

; a local

variable,

; where

the

saved

Lid

[ebptarg_
0]

; The

floating-point

; (the leftmost

ECX — it's

since
ECX

is

the

allocating

var_4 variable

memory

for

is

ald
i

located.

variable

at the

/ebp+8]

address

argument),

; is pushed onto the coprocessor stack.
; To learn the type of this variable, let's look at opcode

4

; of the instructions FLD — D9 45 08. Aha! D9 — hence, float.

:

; It turns out that the argument first from the left is float.
j
———

second from the

feiss

%

=

_

Step Seven: Identifying the Key Structures of High-Level Languages

pop

263

ebp

; The

stack

frame

is

closed.

retn

MyFunc

endp

The result of compiling with Borland C++ 5.x is almost identical to that of the
example we just considered using Microsoft Visual C++ 6.x. Therefore, we'll proceed to the analysis of an example compiled using Watcom C (as always, Watcom
is highly instructive).
Listing 94. The Disassembled Code for Passing Floating-Point Arguments
Compiled Using Watcom
main_

proc

var

8

=

7 A local

variable,

near

; CODE

qword

10h

eel

— =CIS

; Checking

ptr

this

push

fld

~

for

ds:db1

is

stack

likely

XREF:

__CMain+40Vp

-8

to

occupy

8 bytes.

from

overflow

420008

; A variable

of

the

double

type

taken

; is

onto

the

top

the

coprocessor

loaded

of

; successfully

determined

; having

added

the

; If

IDA

hadn't

determined

; the

opcode

£id

ds:f1t_420010

dbl

the

prefix
the

variable

to

the

data

stack.

segment
IDA

has

type,

it.

type,

we

would

have

to

examine

loaded

onto

the

top

of the

of the FLD instruction.

; A variable

of the

float

called,

and

type

is

; stack.

call

MyFunc

; MyFunc

is

two

arguments

are

passed

via

264

~—sv—pPaart I: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

; the

coprocessor

; MyFunc(float
sub

esp,

; Memory
fstp

a,

stack.

The prototype

double

b).

looks

like

this:

8

is allocated

for

a local

variable

of

8 bytes.

eeea

[esp+8+var8] ©

; A floating-point

; of the

stack.

variable

The

type

push

offset unk 420004

call

sprincr |

; This

is a trick

; to the printf
add

esp,

we

of the double type

is determined

is popped off the top

by the variable's

size.

2

already

know — passing

var8

function!

OCh

retn

main_

.

|

einels

MyFunc

2

:

ae
sip

proc near

var_C
vari,
Bing
hie

;

:

«7

— ee

cm

3

; CODE XREF:

= qword ptr -0Ch
SeNES ee 7
-

tax

eetee

IDA has found two local variables.
‘
Oe

main _+16Tp

9

_

a
er

ae

of

Ape
2a

i FeOcies SPR
tape cons(Fg 4 haee pS,
git 2sie
Ce a Pe
ey
——
flares

s

hee

i

eee,

~

.

;

ah

—

— ae
oe

9

Step Seven: Identifying the Key Structures of High-Level Languages

265
>

; A floating-point
; 1s
;

popped

(AS

+ To

you

of

the

top

of

the

coprocessor

stack.

remember,

it

was

placed

before

FSTP

instruction.

off

may

variable

the

be

on

the

; check

Ehe

opcode

Pelt

of

float

fadd

float.)

the

It

is

DD

1C 24.

4]

pushed

back

onto

the

top

of

the

stack...

double.

They

dare

to

say

that

[esp+O0Ch+var
C]

...

; is

is

there

LGemuSt.boencouble.

[esp+O0Ch+var

; The

type

side,

wOxDDAaSMEhere-

fld

;

safe

double

and

an

; when

added

difficult

the

compiler

doesn't

know

that

swapping

the

terms

change

sum!

for

local

variables

is

released.

esp,

; Memory

agree

C

It's

the

to

Watcom

compiler!

; doesn't

add

to

optimizing

with

this

OCh

that

was

allocated

reer

MyFunc

endp

db1_420008

ager 17

; DATA XREF: main +AfTr

f£1t_420010

dd 6.6599998

; DATA XREF:

main

+10tr

Now comes Turbo Pascal for Windows 1.0. Let's enter the following example in
the text editor:
Listing 95. Passing Floating-Point Values Using Turbo Pascal
USES

WINCRT;

Procedure MyProc(a:Real) ;
begin
WriteLn
(a) ;
end;
VAR

a:

Real;

b:

Real;

266

Part |: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

~~”

BEGIN

a:=6.66;
b:=7.77;

MyProc (a+b) ;
END.

Now, we'll compile it without coprocessor support. (This is the default.)
Listing 96. The Disassembled Code for Passing Floating-Point Values
PROGRAM

pEOC

call

nea

INITTASK

call

@SystemInit$qv

; The

System

unit

is

; __SystemInit

call

@ WINCRTInit$qv

; The

WINCRT

push

bp

; _ WINCRTInit (void)

unit

is

initialized.

frame

is

opened.

mov

lojo),

; The

stack

xOIG

aX,

call

@ StackCheck$q4Word

; This

checks

mov

word 2030,

OEC83h

mov

word

2032,

OB85lh

mov

ye

word

2034,

551Eh

ax

; A variable

; We

know

(void)

initialized.

if there

of the

that

; only

from

; It's

it's

the

are

; Stack
at

least

overflow
0 free

type

is

initialized.

Real

source

code

of the

program.

impossible

to visually

distinguish

from three

variables

mov

word

2036,

3D83h

mov

word

2038,

OD70Ah

mov

word 203A,

78A3h

variable

(AX)

in the

;

Real

; of instructions

; Another

check

bytes

of the

Real

type

this

of the

series

Word type.

is initialized.

stack.

Step Seven: Identifying the Key Structures of High-Level Languages

mov

ax,

word 2030

mov

bx,

word

2032

mov

dx,

word

2034

mov

cx,

word 2036

Mov

si,

word 2038

mov

di,

word 203A

; Two variables

call

Real

€@SbrpluSq4Realtl

; Fortunately,
; in this
; If

of the

IDA

It has

helped

|

»

push

“dx
bx

the

even

us,

passed

function

registers.

Real (CX:SI:DI)

addition

prompted

via

operator

us

as

it would be difficult

7; what this long and intricate

pushy

are

; Real (AX:BX:DX)+=

recognized

function.

IDA hadn't

type

to

=

~

e

eo

ee

:

ax

; The

returned

; the

stack.

gt

value

pe

is passed

Consequently,

=i

wee

.

pop

prototype.

does.

<a

push

call

its

to understand

ak

ie

to the MyProc

the MyProc

procedure

prototype

looks
‘

; MyProc(a:Real).
=

267

>

via
like

this:

“

MyProc
:

bp

ta

Birt.+.

San

a

~a

af

o>)

eS

Soe

ee

vdThe stack Frame 3sclosed. ie ssieie sereeme
es 2 geben

es ae

=

ieee
4 room i

|

"

oe

Aes

:

ee

268

Part I: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

push

ye bp

‘

mov

bp,

; The

stack

xXOrs
call
; Are

ax, ax
@ StackCheck$q4Word ; Stack
there 0 bytes in the stack?

mov

di,

push

ds

sp

frame

offset

is opened.

unk

overflow

=

+ The pointer

to the

push

[bptarg
4]

push

[bptarg 2]

push

[bptarg_0]
three

(AX)

2206

push “= di

; All

check

received

string

output

buffer

is pushed

onto

the

stack.

:

.
arguments

are pushed

onto

the

stack.

|
j

MOV: | ex,

push

11h

OSa

ax

; The output widthis 17 characters.

:

,

ee

Step Seven: Identifying the Key Structures of High-Level Languages

S
a a
c le
a
Listing 97. The Disassembled Code for Passing Floating-Point Values
Compiled to Use Coprocessor Instructions
PROGRAM

proc
call

INITTASK

call

@ SystemInit$qv

; The

System

call

module

is

@ InitEM86Sqv

; The

coprocessor

;

; Initialize

@ WINCRTInit$qv

; The

WINCRT

pushes

OP

is

software

turned

emulator

on.

initialized.

frame

opened.

lejayo

; The

stack

xor

aX,

call

@ StackCheck$q4Word

8

is

ax

; Checking

for

stack

word

21C0,

mov

word

21C2,

OB851h

mov

word

21C4,

551Eh

21C6,

3D83h

mov

word

word _21C8,

OD70Ah

mov

word

21CA,

78A3h

; We're

not

yet

able

They

overflow

check

(AX)

OEC83h

mov

; variables.

; Stack

overflow

mov

to determine

could

mov
MOV
mov

ax,
bx,
dx,

call

@Extended$q4Real

be

Word

or

the

type

of

initialized

Real.

word 21C0
word 21C2
word 21C4

; Now we transfer
function

to

.
,

loading

.
’

word _21C0 through

the

; Convert

word_21C0,

.
,

ax,

is

; __WINCRTInit (void)

module

mov

mov

(void)

initialized.

emulator

call

the

near

__SystemInit

that

latter

word _21C6

to

converts
the

Real

word_21C2,
Real

to

coprocessor

word_21C4

to Extended

and word_21C4
Extended,
stack.

is a variable

269

—

Therefore,

of the Real type.

Se

270 _ _—swpPart |: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

mov

bx,

word_21C8

mov

dx,

word 21CA

call

@Extended$q4Real

; Similarly,

; Convert

Real

to

Extended

the word_21C6 through word_21CA variable

is of the Real type.

wait
; Now

we

wait

for

caddy,

ssi(i)pe

st

; Two

numbers

; of the

the

of the
saved

type

added;

on

call

@Real$q8Extended
is converted

; The

argument

is passed

; and

returned

into

dx
bx
ax

work.

are

located

the

coprocessor

stack

BX,

and

are

the

its

=

stack

result

push
push
push

finish

Extended

; the

; Extended

to

‘s

coprocessor
is

coprocessor

that

same

on

the

top

stack.

to Real.
via

the AX,

;

4

DX registers.

;

=
a

‘oo
sk

Oc

:

_4, The eee BX, ae DX registers: contain |fala value of the Raae type.
Soe

_ 5 mi
o px

meh

see

er

ree ie

Step Seven: Identifying the Key Structures of High-Level Languages

push

bp

MOV

bp,

; The

stack

XOX
call

ax, ax
@ StackCheck$q4Word

sp

frame

; Checking

for

mov

da,

OLEsee

push

ds

push

di

; The

pointer

is

opened.

stack
UnK

to the

string

ax,

[bptarg
0]

bx,

[bptarg
2]

Mov

dx,

[bptarg
4]

cali

@Extended$q4Real

; Real

is

converted

mov

abd

wilTie

push

ax

; The

output

mov

ax,

push

ax

check

(AX)

; This

is

output

to

Extended.

is

0x17

buffer

is pushed

onto

the

stack.

characters.

OFFFEh

for

; Everything

call

overflow

2396

mov

width

; Stack

overflow

mov

the
we

number

have

is

of digits
to be

after

the

decimal

point.

outputted.

@WriteSqm4Text 8Extended4Wordt3

; Write(var

; width
; The

271

f;

v:

decimals:

Extended{st(0)

Word)

floating-point

; is outputted

into

number

the

call

@WriteLn$qm4Text

; The

string

call

@ I0Check$qv

from

the

from

the

coprocessor

stack

buffer.
; WriteLn(var

buffer

f£: Text)

is printed.

7; EXit

22 Gryor

Pop
bp
retn = —6
MyProc

endp

|
|

ee

aa,

272

Part |: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

The conventions on thiscall usage, and the conventions on default calling.
In C++ programs, each function of the object implicitly accepts the this argument —
a pointer to the object instance from which the function was called. We already discussed this topic in detail in the section "The this Pointer."
As far as I know, all C++ compilers use the combined calling convention by default, passing explicit arguments via the stack (if the function isn't declared as
fastcall). The this pointer is passed via the register that has the greatest preference. (See Tables 2—7.)

In contrast, the cdecl and stdcall conventions require that you transfer
all arguments via the stack — including the this implicit argument, placed
on the stack after all explicit arguments. (In other words, this is the leftmost
argument.)
Let's consider the following example:
Listing 98. Passing the this Implicit Argument
#include

class

<stdio.h>

MyClass{

public:
void

demo (int

// The

prototype

// demo(this,
void

int

__stdcall

// The

of

actually

2(int

int

b);

of demo_2 looks

like

// demo_2(this,

int

weid

demo 3(int

-,cdecl.

// The

prototype

// demo_3(this,

looks

like

this:

a)

demo

prototype

a);

demo

a,

a,

this:

int b)

of demo_3

a

;qint: by-int

looks

like

.c)>

this:

int a, int b, int c)

};
// To

save

space,

the

// and demo_3 functions
main()

{

implementation

of the

is not given here.

demo,

demo_2,

Step Seven: Identifying the Key Structures of High-Level Languages

MyClass

*zzz

=

new

273

MyClass;

ZZz—->demo
() ;
zzz->demo _2();
zzz—>demo_3();

The disassembled code of this example, compiled using Microsoft Visual C++
6.0, is given in the following listing. (I show only the main function; the rest of the
program isn't of interest now.)
Listing 99. The Disassembled Code for Passing the this Implicit Argument
main

proc

push
.
,

ESI

is

push

.

.

ESI

,

An

esi,

.
.
,

esp,

ecx,

As

you may

the

ECX

stack.

7; Operator

1 byte

for

the

pointer

is popped

the

this

the

new(uint)

object

to the

off

pointer

remember,

register
case,

The

Borland

the

EAX

the

greatest

push

the

to pass

the
C++

this

5.x

register,

instance.

object

instance.

the

stack.

is passed

Microsoft
the

first

since

this

preference.

demo

C++

function.

compiler

argument

of the

just

argument.

would

pass

compiler

(See

the

is

pointer

compiler

to

Visual

Table

that
this

gives

uses

function.

via

it

4.)

1
explicit

Ld

If this

.
vA

would

.
v.

It turns

.

the

esi

ECX,

In this

a

start+ANp

4

argument

Via

The

XREF:

eax

contains

MOV
,

in

allocates

add
.

saved

? ?2@YAPAXI@Z

This

mov
,

; CODE

dds

call
,

near

esi

argument

of the

function

was

the

fastcall

function,

have

been

placed

the

out

that

we

into

are

dealing

is pushed

this

onto

the

stack.

argument

EDX register.

with

the

type

of the default

274

Part |: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

; calling
call

convention.

Demo

push

2

; The

rightmost

push

is

pushed

onto

the

stack.

dl

; The

argument

push

esi

; The

this

+ Such

a method

; has

taken

+ we

can

second

implicit

+ conversion
see

; Therefore,

(enh

argument

of

the

argument

of passing
the

place.
that

it

from

Scrolling
stack

complies

is

is pushed

arguments

function

the

right

onto

the

to

the

stdcall

disassembler

cleared

the

onto

indicates

type
is

with

pushed

by the

stdcall

the

stack.

that

or

stack.

an

explicit

cdecl

screen

downward,

called

function.

convention.

~~ Clete.2

push

S)

push

2

push

1

push

esi

call

sub_401020

add

esp,

; If’a

function

10h
clears

the

stack

up

after

completion,

it has

; the default

type or cdecl.

Passing the

this pointer via the stack

; allows

us

to

the

assumption

xor

eax,

eax

pop

esi

think

that

second

is

correct.

retn
main

endp

Default arguments. To simplify calling functions that have a "crowd" of arguments, the C++ language provides the capability of specifying default arguments.
Two questions arise: Does calling functions with default arguments differ from
calling other functions? Who initializes the omitted arguments — the called function, or the calling one?

Step Seven: Identifying the Key Structures of High-Level Languages

275

If functions with default arguments are called, the compiler adds the missing
arguments on its own. Therefore, the calls of such functions don't differ from the

calls of other functions.

Let's prove this in the following example.
Listing 100. Passing Default Arguments
#include

<stdio.h>

MyFunc(int

a=1,

int

b=2,

int

c=3)

MyFunc
() ;

The result of disassembling the example is shown in the following listing. (Only
the calling function is given.)
Listing 101. The Disassembled Code for Passing Default Arguments
main

proc
push

ebp

mov

ebp,

push

3

push

Zz

push

al

near

the

all

omitted

arguments

function

by the

compiler

call

MyFunc

add

esp,

pop

ebp

OCh

rern

main

XREF:

start+AFYp

esp

; Apparently,

; to

7; CODE

endp

on

have

been

its

own.

passed

276

Part I: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

Analyzing how an unknown compiler passes arguments. The diversity of
existing compilers, and the continual emergence of new ones, doesn't allow me

to give a comprehensive table for the features of each compiler. What should you
do if you come across a program compiled by a compiler not covered in this
book?
If you can identify the compiler (for example, using IDA or the text strings
contained in the file), you need to get a copy of it. Then, you should run a series
of test examples on it, passing arguments of various types to an "experimental"
function. You also might want to study the compiler's documentation; all
mechanisms that pass arguments and are supported by the compiler could be de-

scribed briefly.
If you can't identify the compiler or get a copy of it, you'll have to investigate
carefully and thoroughly the interaction of the called and calling functions.

Values Returned by Functions
The value returned by a function is traditionally a value returned by the return
operator. However, this statement is only the tip of the iceberg, and doesn't give
a complete picture of the functions’ interactions. The following example, taken
from real program code, illustrates this.
Listing 102. Returning a Value via an Argument Passed by Reference
InMtexciy (int. a,

einte,

sant

-e=0))

{
Te

ceturn

iv

LEMS)

(ib)S

ClO l=ant:

be

return

a / b;

The xdiv function returns the result of integer division of the a argument by the
b argument, but it also assigns the remainder to the c variable, passed to the function
by reference. How many values has the function returned? Why is it worse or less
permissible to return a result
by reference than by the classical return?
Popular editions tend to simplify the problem of identifying the value returned
by a function, considering one case that uses the return operator. In particular,

Matt Pietrek, in his book "Windows 95 System Programming Secrets," follows this

Step Seven: Identifying the Key Structures of High-Level Languages

277
~~

ail

approach, leaving all other options out of the frame. Nevertheless, we will consider
the following mechanisms:
QO Returning values using the return operator (via a register or coprocessor stack)
Returning values via arguments passed by reference
Returning values via the heap
Returning values via global variables
so
OOO
Returning values via CPU flags

"Returning values via the disk drive and memory-mapped files" could be included in this list, but that's beyond the topic of discussion. (However, if you consider a function as a "black box" with an input and an output, the result of the function's work written into a file is actually the value returned by the function.)
Returning values using the return operator. According to convention, the value
returned by the return operator is placed into the Eax register (Ax in 16-bit mode).
If the result exceeds the register's bit capacity, the higher 32 bits of an operand are
loaded to EDx. (In 16-bit mode, the higher word is loaded to px.)
In most cases, float results are returned via the coprocessor stack. They also

may be returned via the EDX: EAX registers (Dx: Ax in 16-bit mode).
If a function returns a structure that consists of hundreds of bytes, or an object
of similar size, then neither the registers nor the coprocessor stack will be sufficient.

This is true for results larger than 8 bytes.
Table 11. The Mechanisms for Returning Values Using the Return Operator
(16-Bit Compilers)

aoe paaa inf Get a aloes ce ae
ee

ee

AX

ee

Part I: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

278
>

al

Table 12. The Mechanisms for Returning Values Using the Return Operator
(32-Bit Compilers)

Coprocessor stack

eA

EDX: FAX

OnE eee LOTS ae

More than 8 bytes

Implicit argument by reference

If there is no room for the return value in the registers, then the compiler,
without telling the programmer, passes an implicit argument (the reference to the
local variable storing the return result) to the function. Thus, the functions struct
mystruct

MyPune-

(int

a,

int-

b)

and void

My BURG

s(Struce

MYSErUCL

amy,

int a, int b) are compiled in nearly identical code, and it is impossible to extract the original prototype from the machine code.
Microsoft Visual C++ is the only one that gives a clue. In this case, it returns
the pointer to the variable being returned; the reconstructed prototype looks like
struct

mystruct*

MvFune

(struct

mystruct*

my,

int

®a,“ant)

b). It seems

strange that the programmer, despite having just passed the argument to the function, would return the pointer to the argument. In this situation, Borland C++ returns a void result, erasing the distinction between an argument returned by value
and an argument returned by reference. However, the "original prototype" asserts
that a function returns a value, when it actually returns a teterence — rather like
seeing a cat and calling it a mouse.

A few words about identifying the returned value are necessary. If a function
explicitly stores a value in the EAX or EDX register (AX or Dx in 16-bit mode)
and terminates its execution, the value's type can be determined roughly by
Tables 11 and 12. If the registers are left undefined, the most likely result is a
void-type value (i.e., nothing will be returned). An analysis of the calling function

will produce more accurate information about how the called function accesses

Step Seven: Identifying the Key Structures of High-Level Languages

279

the EAX [EDX] registers (AX [Dx] in 16-bit mode). For example, char types typically
address the lower half of the EAx [Ax] register (i.e., the AL register), or zero the
higher bytes of the EAx register using the logical anp operation. It would seem that,
if the calling function doesn't use the value left by the called function in the EAx
[EDX] registers, its type is void. However, this assumption is incorrect. Programmers often ignore the returned value, confusing code diggers.
The next example shows the mechanism used to return the main value types.
Listing 103. Returning the Main Value Types
#include

<stdio.h>

#include

<malloc.h>

// A demonstration

// by the

return

char

func

char

return

int

returning

a value

of

a char-type

operator
(char

a,

char

b)

atb;

// A demonstration
// by the

of

return

of returning

an

int-type

variable

an

int64-type

operator

int_func(int

a,

int

b)

{
return

atb;

// A demonstration
// by

the

__inté4

func(__int64

variable
=

operator

return

int64

of returning

a, __inté4

b)

{
return

ath;

Sap

// & demonstration

// by the
int*

return

of returning

operator

near _func(int*

a,

inte)

a pointer

to int

variable

Part |: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

neohe,

se

c=(int

*)malloc(sizeof
(int) );

c[0]=a[0]+b[0];
return

sigue,

tel

TMS

Loy

C;

a=0x666;

b=0x777;

Suaabaene (U6: \wal
char

func (0x1, 0x2) +

int

func (0x3, 0x4) +

inte4

func (0x5, 0x6) +

near func(é&a,
&b) [0]);

The disassembled code of this example, compiled using Microsoft Visual C++

6.0 with default settings, will give the following result:
Listing 104. The Disassembled Code for Returning the Main Value Types
Complied Using Visual C++
char func

proc

arg 0

= byte

ptr

8

arg

= byte

ptr

OCh

4

near

; CODE

push

ebp

mov

ebp,

esp

; The

stack

frame

movsx

eax,

[ebptarg
0]

is opened.

XREF:

main+1Avp

——-”.-)hC<;
3ERhmh

Step Seven: Identifying the Key Structures of High-Level Languages

; The

arg 0 argument,

of the

signed

7 and,

incidentally,

extended

to

281

char

type,

is

loaded

into

FAX

char

type,

is

loaded

into

ECX

int.

MOvsx

ecx,

; The

arg 4 argument,

[ebptarg4]

of the

signed

7 and,

incidentally,

extended

to

add

eax,

; The

arg 0 and arg 4 arguments,

extended

to int,

7 and

saved

producing

the

value

to be

Unfortunately,

its

type

is impossible

; returned

eCxX

int.

:

in the

by the

register,

“ee

to

™

Of the

two

options,

_

of two

char

arguments

™

for

pop

determine

EAX

function.

precisely.

safety reasons;

— ebp

;

retn
char_func

—
endp >

int_func

proc near

It

int

could’be

is more

should

int

be placed

otherwise,

or

probable:

sum

int

is possible.

ones
ae
:

a

$252 -th => at Gis bre = Pong

Fe etnsongee

added

char.

The

into

an overflow

are

>

Part I: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

282

int_func

endp

inte64 func

proc

arg 0

= dword: ptr

6.

arg 4

= dword

ptr

OCh

arg 8

= dword

ptr

10h

arg C

= dword ptr

14h

¥

near

push

ebp

mov

ebp,

esp

; The

stack

frame

Mov

eax,

; The value

; CODE

XREF:

main+40vp

:
F

is opened.

~

lebptarg 0]

of the

arg 0 argument

A

is loaded

into

EAX.

;

add

eax,

[ebptarg
8]

; The arg0 and arg 8 arguments

=

;

are added.

.

:

edx, [ebptarg_4]

mov

+ The value of the
arg
4 argument
is loaded
into EDX. _—
Sly
sent
1X
pl-ancas
eee
1

iv

+4

ad xe

|
a

‘

Step Seven: Identifying the Key Structures of High-Level Languages

push

ebp

mov

ebp,

esp

; The

stack

frame

push

eCx

; ECX

is

4

call

_malloc

add

esp,

; Four

bytes

; The

is

opened.

saved.

push

mov

283

fp Size£
4
are

allocated

on

the

heap.

[ebptvar
4], eax
pointer

+ is placed

to the memory

into the

just

allocated

var4 variable.

mov

eax, [ebptarg 0]

; The

value

of the-arg 0 aeons

mov

eCx,

ry

is

loaded

into

EAX.

TY

3
-

;
:

45

3-The: int value

referenced

by the ECX register

7 is loaded

SntS ECX.

Hence, the arg_ a argument is an1 int os type.

mov

oe

Ag

ae

A ., ears rte
a

’

Part |: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

284

; Its

prototype

might

look

as

follows:

int* MyFunc(int

*a,

int

*b)

s

mov

esp,

igo
retn

ebp

ebp

near func

endp

main

proc

var8
var4

ll dword

push
mov

; The

near

; CODE

ptr

-8

dword ptr

-4

XREF:

start+AFYp

ebp
ebp,

stack

esp

frame

is opened.
~

sub

esp,

&

; Space is allocated

Seige!

F

for local variables.

Tt),

See

5 are saved on the stack.
es

OS

7

apis

=

=

;

Step Seven: Identifying the Key Structures of High-Level Languages

; Hence,

it has

push

4

push

3

returned

call

int_func

add

esp,

+ The

signed

285

char.

8

int_func(3,4)

add

eax,

+ The

contents

7 the

function.

function

esi

is

called.

It

returns

the

int

value.

:

of ESI

are

added

to

the

value

returned

by

cdq

; The

double

word

in the

EAX register

is converted

placed

the

7 a quadruple

word,

then

; This

proves

that

the value

; from

int was

converted

; of this

“mov
mov

; The
push
push

push

action

esi,

eax

edi,

edx

is,

into

as yet,

into

EDX:EAX

to

register.

returned

by the

function

_

int64,

although

the purpose

unclear.

extended quadruple word is copied to the EDI:ESI registers.
0
6

—

:
e

=

io

ALOE
a

eo

286

Part |: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

~~”
; The

var_8 pointer

lea

ecx,

; The pointer
push

is passed

as

an argument

func.

[ebptvar_
4]

to the var_4 variable

is loaded

into ECX.

ecx

; The var 4 pointer is passed as an argument
eaulal

near

func

add

esp,

8

; The

to near

near func function

mov

eax,

is called.

[eax]

; As previously
; to an

to near func.

mentioned,

int variable

; of this variable

into

the
the

function

has

EAX register.

returned

the pointer

Now,

value

the

is loaded into the EAX register.

cdq

; EAX is extended
add

to a quadruple

=—s esi, eax

ade.
edi, edx
; Two quadruple words

word.

SRI

are added.

a

&

a

+

ee

2
—

;

EY

Step Seven: Identifying the Key Structures of High-Level Languages

287
al

As you can see, identifying the type of value returned by the return operator is
rather straightforward. However, consider the following example. Try to predict
what will be returned, and in which registers.
Listing 105. Returning a Structure by Value
#include

<stdio.h>

#include

<string.h>

SEmUGE

XL

{
charesouair

sihsyey

Bier

Sscruce

XT

//

function

returns

SEpuce

ce,

The

Mybune(char

oh

*a,"

int

jo)

a value

of

the

XT

structure

by

value.

Strepy (sx. s010],- a);
xE.xX

main

= b;

return

xt;

Se GUC

eh

()

ex

xt=MyFunc("Hello,

Sailor!",

jonenaarers (Vins Een,

ebemistOn/
Olly. oeee9ee

0x666);

The disassembled listing of the compiled code is as follows:
Listing 106. The Disassembled Code for Returning a Structure by Value

MyFunc

proc near

var 8

dword

ptr

-8

dword

ptr

-4

var 4
; These

=
local

variables

; CODE XREF: sub 401026+10\p

are

the

elements

of the

"split"

288

Part |: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

; XT structure.
; "Objects,
; to access
; not

via

As mentioned

in the

and Arrays,"

the

of a structure

elements

the

base

pointer.

; a structure

from

independent

; is not

an easy

arg0
arg4
; The

section

Structures,

function

Therefore,

sometimes

dword

ptr

8

adword

ptr

OCh

takes

two

push

ebp
ebp,

esp

; The

stack

frame

sub

esp,

8

compiler

always

tends

by their

actual

addresses,

distinguishing

variables

task;

mov

the

it is an

impossible

one.

arguments.
=

is opened.

=

; Space is allocated for local variables.
mov

eax,

—

[ebptarg
0]

; The arg 0 argument is loaded into EAX.
push
eax
; The arg0 argument

a
is passed to the stropy function;

; hence, arg0 is a pointer to a string.

_

;

y

Step Seven: Identifying the Key Structures of High-Level Languages

; The

arg_4

argument

mov

eax,

[ebptvar8]

; The

contents

; are

loaded.

mov

edx,

of var_4

EDX:EAX

; var 4 has

; the

(not

the

the

buffer

to)

string

exiting

the

function.

returns

two

the

type

; not

via the pointer

char/4]
were

be returned

of the

indicates

Unexpectedly,

of different

program.

is returned

or the

declared

three

variables

function

types

and not __int64, which might seem logical

; that

as

Loading

by the

analysis

7; structure

into EDX.

before

a cursory

would

variable.

returned

; after

or

var 4 local

value

; into EDX and EAX,

as many

pointer

is loaded

registers

the

function

=“

to the

[ebptvar4]

; The value
; the

of

is copied

as

The

second

“mov

3

-

esp,

the

register,

reference.

This

is fortunate:

struct XT SiShore

variables

of two types

into

the

EAX.

:

=f

int

MyFune
-

mest
tied

ia(steiay

;

endp

2= ocnear

car

-

“59 sees

r?
*

ins

a ne

oa

'
ers

is

If the

a, char JO, CEES

ebp

Ok
i

surprise

via

i

:

289

Gy

290

Part I: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

; An

int

argument

; Therefore,

; from the

called

; be

the

pointer.

; an

int

type

push

function.

which

wasn't

function's

code — arg 4 easily
function

the

the

Sailor!"

is passed

to MyFunc.

string

string

recommend

occupies

making

more

this

obvious

could

returns

; "Hello,

to the

esp,

MyFunc

type,

aHelloSailor

The

Myiune

int

register.

; Caution!

calls

to the

the

EDX

; A pointer

add

of

Hence,

into

offset

; I don't

is passed

arg 4 is

than 4 bytes;

example

therefore,

"live."

8

; The

MyFunc

function

; the

EDX

EAX

-;

and

is

are

already

; that

the

known,

mov

{ebptvar_
8], eax

calling

called.

registers.

so

The

it only

function

uses

Somehow,

it modifies

returned

value

types

to make

sure

remains

them

<3

%

"correctly." —

~

; The contents of the EAXregister are placed
; into the var_@ local variable.

=
;

Step Seven: Identifying the Key Structures of High-Level Languages

291
oe ee

; or

at

lea

least

ecx,

; The

its

higher

pointer

to

the

var 8 variable

pointer

stores

; via

the

register.

EAX

; indicates
; returned

; With

it's
via

a little

Char

push

eCx

push

offset

EDX.

thought,
the

Sprantet
esp,

OCh

mov

esp,

ebp

returned

into

ECX.

function
string

a string.

registers

it

loaded

by the

are

Thus,

the

of

different

values
types.

is possible

original
int

is

format-specification
to

spi

aSX

call

; The

value

The

EDX:EAX

ral4ij

add

pop

the

a pointer

the

reconstruct

WOSELUCE

into

[ebptvar
8]

; This

; to

part,

‘a

prototype:
My biuine (Cha tcaC pal lite cl)yp

eS

SNe

ebp
stack

frame

is

closed.

retn

main

endp

Now, let's modify the xT structure slightly, replacing char
s0[10]

s0[4] with char*

(which won't fit into the EDx:AaAx registers), then see how the code

changes.
Listing 107. The Disassembled Code of the Modified and Compiled Version
for Returning a Structure by Value
proc

main
var 20

= byte

var

10

= dword

var _C
var

8

; CODE

near
ptr

XREF:

-20h
.

Der

-L0n

= dword

ptr

-0Ch

= dword

per

=o

start+Arlp

Part I: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

= dword

var4

ptr

push

ebp

mov

ebp,

esp

; The

stack

frame

sub

esp, 20h

; Here,

0x20

is opened.

bytes

push

666h

; The

rightmost

7 cow the MyFunc

-4

int

are

allocated

argument

for

local

variables.

is passed

function.

E

push

offset

aHelloSailor

; "Hello,

Sailor!"

; The

second

argument

the

(a pointer

; to the

lea

string)

eax,

; The address

from

is passed

right

to the MyFunc

[ebptvar
20]

of a local variable

is loaded into EAX.
~

push

fo

function.

eax

_

—

~

;

; A pointer is passed to the var 20 variable.
; This argument

was not present

in the

function's

prototype!

; Where has it come from? The compiler has sneer ee ae

it2

Step Seven: Identifying the Key Structures of High-Level Languages

; At

first

; However,
mov

; The
mov

glance,

this

is

an

it is unwise

to

draw

hasty

conclusions.

saved

in the

var_10

second

double

word

pointed

likely

has

[ebptvar

contents
edx,

10],

the

int

type.

local

variable.

[eax+4]

loaded

7 by the

EAX pointer.

with

the

to

lebptvar
C], edx

7; It is copied to the
; The

of

ecx

of ECX are

; EDX is

mov

element

293

second

element

var_C variable.
of the

structure

the

7 int type as well. A comparison with the source code of the
# program under consideration shows something is wrong.
—

mov

.

ecx,

[eaxt8]

; The

third

double

mov

[ebptvar_
8], ecx

—_——

word

using

the

EAX pointer

is loaded,

:

Se cit is copied to var8. Yet another element of the
; Where are they coming from? The original had one! —

; And where

3 =e

ee

aa

is the string?

mov Po eb ot+var_4], edx

r

and...

ae

_

=

cae.

en

int type?

=

Saeea Seager

elementof the int type is

moved

—

he seats

:

294

Part |: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

; ...it
; the

is passed

format-specification

+; hence,

var_10

; suggests
;

to the printf

(i.e.,

is the

that

of calling

; to

the

; Never

; structures!
used.

The

; are

not

push

offset

cali

~printf

add

esp,

OCh

mov

esp,

ebp

that

looking

below

contain

to

char

for.

* type;

Intuition

var_10

strings.

has

decided

it would

has

caused

confusion.

check

operations

The

be

compiler,

faster

the

types

of elements

how each

byte

is initialized

of transfer

to

local

of

variables

alone

informative!

aSX

pop

ebp

+ The

stack

frame

cas

eae

re

PSs

2 OS SpA. 6 in

ex\ nee

is closed.

+ ape

main

ECX is of the
are

also

identifying

Carefully

and

™“e

when

According

var 8, located

strcpy,

structure

be hasty

we

addresses),

; instead
copy

string,

string

var_C and

at higher

function.

-

oaOF

é

2

2

gion

ce

4

a

:

a

ofan
:

>

=

a

Eber b

ree eae

oa

:

="

f
ei

f

Par

_
oP
“"

~

ie

de

Step Seven: Identifying the Key Structures of High-Level Languages

; The

stack

sub

esp,

; Memory
Mov

is

frame
10h

eax,

push

eax

; The

pointer

loaded

with

to

ecx,

push

ecx

; The

pointer

; to

the

strcpy
esp,

argument

from

to

the

strcpy

function.

the pointer

to the

var_10

local

var_10

local

variable

MyFunc

function,

string

; via

the
edx,

; EDX

is

right.

variable.

is passed

variable.

passed

to

the

arg 4 argument,

mov

the

8

; The

is

copied.

[ebptarg8]

loaded

with

the

value

of the

rightmost

argument

copied

to

var_4

local

variable.

is loaded

into

EAX.

to MyFunc.

[ebp+var
4], edx

; The

arg 8 argument

mov

eax,

; The value
you

arg_0

know,

to the

function

; in this

is

the

[ebptarg
0]

of the

already

; a pointer

local

places

argument

the

compiler

variable

the

uses

without

structure

this

argument

notifying

to pass

the programmer.

returned
by value

variable.

mov

ecx,

; The

contents

[ebptvar_10]

; As previously

,

second

10]

to the

add

The

variables.

arg 4 is passed

with

strcpy

call

; As

local

the

[ebptvar

; ECX is loaded

mov

for

[ebptarg
4]

is

; passed

opened.

allocated

; EAX

lea

is

295
i”

of the

var_10

mentioned,

local

a string

variable
has

been

are

loaded

copied

into

to the

ECx.
var 10

Part I: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

296

mov

[eax],

mov

edx,

mov

[eax+4],

mov

ecx,

mov

[eax+8],

; Exactly!
; to

edx

[ebptvar
8]
ecx

var_10

local

*arg 0 local

is

copied

"manually"

variable,

variable

without

using

strcpy!

copied;

hence,

12 bytes

have

element

of the

structure

source

code

char

first

s0f[12].
the

; by the
; the

The

compiler

addresses

second

; a "hole"

second

; the

structure's

=

the

string

looks

'char

elements

of the

that

multiples

are

int

the

length

at

the

of the

It is not

actual

only

x,

end

of four,

address

line

that

possible

s0 falls

can

in the

be

this:

s0[10]'.
structure
it placed

base+012,

creating

and the beginning
to

form by analysing

thing

like

contained

the

element.

The

been

aligned

element,

between

; the

; listing.

copying!

eECx

; the
“ee

double-word

likely

; In total,

; When

stated

range

edx,

[eax+O0Ch],

edx

of

reconstruct
the

disassembled

for

sure

is that

of 9 to 12.

2d

~

[ebptvar_4]

Ws
mov

; The var_4 variable,
—

is

[ebptvar
C]

The

the

this

thus,

variable;

; local

3
.-

>

which contains the arg 8 argument,

ais. copied into [EAX+0C].

.

The second element of the ;St ructure,

ge ant xy is at an offset of 18 bytes from the

start.

Step Seven: Identifying the Key Structures of High-Level Languages

297

How are structures that contain hundreds or thousands of bytes returned?
They are copied to the local variable, which the compiler, using the movs instruction, has implicitly passed by reference. This can be confirmed by replacing char
s0[10] in the source code of the previous example with char s0[0x666]. The result of recompiling the example should look like this:
Listing 108. The Disassembled Code, Remodified and Recompiled, for
Returning a Structure by Value
MyFunc

proc

near

7 CODE,

var

66C

=

byte

ptr

-66Ch

var

4

=

dword

ptr

-4

arg

0

=

dword

ptr

8

arg

4

= dword

ptr

OCh

=

ptr

10h

arg 8

dword

push

ebp

mov

ebp,

esp

; The

stack

frame

sub

esp,

; Memory
push

is

is

XRE Ee

main+iCctp

opened.

66Ch

allocated

for

local

variables.

esi

push

edi

; The

registers

mov

eax,

push

eax

lea

ecx,

push

eCxX

are

saved

on

the

stack.

[ebptarg4]
[ebptvar_66C]

call

strcpy

add

esp,

; The

string

8

passed

to the

function

; to the var_66C local variable.
mov

edx,

mov

[ebptvar
4], edx

[ebptarg
8]

is copied

ak a

298

Part |: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

is

; The-arg 8 argument
mov

; The

ecx,

19Bh

0x19B

value

is placed

lea

esi,

[ebptvar_66C]

; ESI

is

to

set

mov

edi,

; The

EDI

movsd

; The

ECX double

; address.

is

by the

repe

mov

to

the

ECX;

the

purpose

var _66C local

variable.

of this

is unclear.

variable.

[ebptarg
0]

register

; referenced

; Thus,

point

into

local

var_4

the

to

copied

set

to point

pointer

words

In bytes,

are

this

passed

copied

is

eax,

the

variable

to

the

arg 0 argument.

from

0x19B*4

both the var_66C variable

to

the

=

and the

ESI

address

to

the

EDI

are

copied.

Ox66C.

var 4 variable

[ebptarg
0]

; The

pointer

to

the

; 1s

returned

to

EAX.

pop

edi

pop

esi

mov

esp,

pop

ebp

; The

stack

returned

structure

ebp

frame

is

closed.

retn
MyFunc

endp

Note that many compilers (such as Watcom) use registers, rather than the
stack, to pass the pointer that references the buffer allocated for the return value of
the function. Furthermore, these compilers use the register intended for this purpose (Watcom, for example, uses the ESI register), rather than choosing registers
from the queue of candidates in the order of preference. (See Table 7.)
Returning floating-point values. The cdecl and stdcall conventions require
floating-point values (float, double, long double) to be returned via the coprocessor stack. The Eax and EDx registers may store any values when the function exits

Step Seven: Identifying the Key Structures of High-Level Languages

299

the execution. (In other words, the functions that return real values leave the EAX

and EDXx registers in an uncertain state.)
Theoretically, fastcali functions can return floating-point variables via registers as well. In practice, this rarely occurs. The coprocessor can't read the main
processor's registers directly. They should be pushed through the RAM, which
brings no benefit from the fastcall.
The following example illustrates this:
Listing 109. Returning Floating-Point Values
#include

float

<stdio.h>

MyFunc(float

a,

float

b)

{
return

atb;

main ()

Drink
i (tet \n™

My Pune (6.66,
del daa

The disassembled listing of this example, compiled using Microsoft Visual
C++, looks as follows:
Listing 110. The Disassembled Code for Returning Floating-Point Values
Compiled with Visual C++
main

proc

var_ 8

= qword ptr -8
push

near

; CODE

XREF:

start+AFYp

ebp

mov

ebp,

esp

; The

stack

frame

push

40F8A3D7h

push

40D51EB8h

5 Arguments

are

is

opened.

passed

to

the MyFunc

function.

%

Part |: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

300

.
LA

Their

call

type

yet

[esp+8+var_ 8]

The

floating-point

.
Ui

to be determined.

MyFunc

fstp
;

stack

value,

by the MyFunc

,

the

.
,

According

.
Me

Is it really double?

.
,

In theory,

_e

instruction's
to

placed

function,

.

se

type,

Table

10,

look
its

implicitly

when

the

function,

which

is expecting

of the

It

allocated

is

< -printt
esp, OCh

pop

= ebp

Eee en

=

—* AR ot

the

of pushing

call
add

coprocessor
To

at its

DD 1C 24.

opcode:

must

However,

argument

function
on

the

be

double.

determine
But

wait!

The function should return float!

is true.

value

into

is retrieved.

type

this

equivalent

main

has

the

type

is passed
double.

is converted

to the printf

Note

where

the

==

[esp].

is placed:

[esp+8-8]

top

stack,

the

PUSH

instructions.

of the

it using

the

return

ease
=

Sendo

oA Le ei

PINAR

A

AO

OOO

mee
ROE

NN

Me

a GAiiocencay > Cities| 7 CODE XRE: main+Dtp: nai oT
ne

oe

ae

bein

|

:

a

|

eshashagen bates ie Be

Step Seven: Identifying the Key Structures of High-Level Languages

; of

the

coprocessor

; The

result

pop

ebp

is

stack

placed

on

is

added

to

the

same

stack,

301

arg 4.
and...

retn

;

...it

is

returned

from

the

floats

is

left

on

the

; Strangely,

the

same

code

would

function

had

been

declared

; two

;

MyFunc

if

the

function.
top

of

the

have

The

result

of

coprocessor
been

adding

stack.

obtained

double.

endp

Returning values in Watcom C. Watcom C allows the programmer to choose
manually the register or registers in which the function will return the value. This
seriously complicates the analysis. Conventionally, the function should not spoil
the EBX, ESI, and EDI registers (Bx, SI, and DI in 16-bit mode). When you see, next

to the function call, the instruction for reading the ESI register, it is tempting to
conclude it was initialized before the function was called — as is typical in most
cases. Watcom, however, may force the function to return the value in any generalpurpose register except EBP (BP). Because of this, it is necessary to analyze both the
calling and the called functions.
Table 13. The Valid Registers for Returning Function Values in Watcom C

continues

Part |: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

302
>.

Table 13 Continued

DX: EAX

CX: EDI
DI: ESI

Far pointer

FS:ESI
GS: ESI

DS: ESI
ES:ESI

eee

EDX: ESI

EDI: EBX
ESI: EAX

ECX:

EDX

The register or registers used by default are marked in bold. Note that
only the size of the returned value can be determined by the register used. The type
of this value cannot be determined directly. In particular, the EAx register may be
used to return an int variable, as well as a structure consisting of four char vari-

ables, two char variables, or one short int variable.
What does this mean? Consider the following example:
Listing 111. Returning a Value via Any Valid Register
#include
int

<stdio.h>

MyFune{int

a,

int

b)

{

#pragma

aux MyFunc value

[EST]

// The

AUX pragma,

with

along

// to define manually

the

the

value

keyword,

register via which

allows

us

Step Seven: Identifying the Key Structures of High-Level Languages

//

the

//

In

result
this

will

case,

return

be

303

returned.

the

result

will

be

MyFunc

(0x666,

returned

via

ESI.

atb;

main ()
prInte ("Sx\n",

0x777)) >;

The disassembled code of the compiled version of this the example should look
as follows:
Listing 112. The Disassembled Code for Returning a Value via Any Valid Register
main_

proc
push

call

7- CODE

is

push

edx

push

esi

; ESI

and

; This

is

a

check

EDX

for

are

ESI.

register

the

given

no

instruction

isn't

mov

Cebien

Wii tiink

mov

eax,

666h

arguments

Cake

MyFunc

; The MyFunc
> values

that

; Generally,
esi

of

modified
no

the

function

function,

overflow.

that

there's

; Two

stack

There's

; therefore,

push

__CMain+40Vp

saved.

evidence

saving

; This

; the

XREF:

CHK

; This

; on

near

14h

EAX,

need

int

by this

for

save

it.

type

are

passed

and,

obeyed

the

saving-

ESI,

particular

to

is called.
EDX,

compiler

to

By convention,

the

convention

however.

function;

MyFunc

after

exiting

sometimes,
ECX may contain

are

uncertain

or

the

remaining

registers

returned

by the

must

function.

be retained.

function.

Part |: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

304
,

—

the

ESI

register

impossible

to

know

; The

value

; It

is

of

; returned

by the

function,

to

Calling

the"

7 prELOr

offset

call

Pr Lntie

add

esp,

pop

esi

pop

edx

it

or

it was

the

to

contains

printf

the

function.

value

initialized

function:

asc_ 420004

push

passed

is

whether

; "%x\n"

8

retn

main_

endp

MyFunc

proc

near

push

4

Cay

sec.

; The

stack

+ CODE

overflow

lea

esi,

[eaxtedx]

; Here

is

familiar,

; The

a

pointer

to

is

main

+16Tp

checked.

artful

EAX+EBX

is

trick

with

addition.

loaded

into

ESI.

; However,

the

; the

sum

of them

(i.e.,

this

instruction

is equivalent

; ADD

EAX,

EDX/MOV

ESI,

EAX).

This

value

; by the

pointer

XREF:

function

; As

required,

; the

sum of 0x666

; the.

PUSH

EST

the

as

to EAX+EBX.also

ESI was

calling

and

is

the

modified,

not

function

0x777

is

to

returned

saved!

passed

to printf,

using

instruction.

retn

MyFunc

endp

Returning values by inline assembler functions. The creator of the assembly
function is free to return values in any register. However, because the calling functions of a high-level language expect to see the computation result in strictly defined registers, the creator must observe certain conventions. Internal assembly

Step Seven: Identifying the Key Structures of High-Level Languages

305
ee

functions are another matter — they may not follow any rules, as shown in the following example:
Listing 113. Returning Values by Inline Assembler Functions
#include

<stdio.h>

//

is

This

// the

a naked

programmer

__declspec(

function

that

should

take

) int

MyFunc()

naked

has

care

no

prototype;

of everything!

{

__asm{
lea

ebp,

[eaxtecx]

; The

sum

7 SUCH

as erick

of EAX

ican

; the

function

to be

; function

knows

; will

be

used

; and

into

which

to

; the

computation

and

ECX

is

besused
called

returned

into

from

the

which

registers

pass

arguments,

assembly

registers
result

will

be

returned.

main()

{
int

a=0x666;

int

b=0x777;

Bune

ey

__asm{
push

ebp

push

edi

mov

eax, [a];

mov

ecx, [b];

lea

edi,c

call

MyFunc;

; The

MyFunc

; The

arguments

:

function
are

is called

passed

to

it

from

the

EBP.

onllysit

assembler

function.

>

Part I: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

306

; via

mov

whatever

registers

it

"wants."

[edi],ebp

> The

value

; in

a

pop

edi

pop

ebp

returned

local

is

received

into

EBP

and

saved

variable.

}
jopestiogene
(Ue AGa,

yp

The disassembled code of this example, compiled using Microsoft Visual C++
(other compilers will fail to compile it because they don't support the naked keyword), looks as follows:
Listing 114. The Disassembled Code for Returning Values by Inline
Assembler Functions
MyFunc

proc
lea

ebp,

near

7 CODE

XREF:

main+25)p

[eaxtecx]

; Arguments

are

received

via

the

is

returned

via

EBP.

; Their

sum

; This

example

; but

illustrative.

-EAX and

ECX

registers.

is artificial,

ret

MyFunc

endp

main

proc

var

near

C

= dword

var_ 8
var 4

= dword

ptr

; CODE
-0Ch

= dword ptr -8
ptr -4

push

ebp

MOV

ebp,

esp

XREF:

start+AFYp

Step Seven: Identifying the Key Structures of High-Level Languages

7 The

stack

sub

esp,

+ Memory

is

push

ebx

push

esi

push

edi

; The

frame

is

opened.

OCh
allocated

modified

for

registers

mov

[ebptvar
4],

mov

[ebptvar
8], 777h

; The

ebp

push

edi

“ee

This

are

the

variables.

saved.

666h

var_4 and var_8 variables

push
; Are

local

are

initialized.

re
registers

question

saved,

cannot

or

passed

to

the

function?

be answered yet.

———

:

_ mov

eax,

[ebptvar4]

mov

ecx,

[ebptvar_ 8]

; The value of the var 4 variable is loaded into EAX,
)
os

Bess

——

7 and the value of var_8 is loaded into ECX.
>

“Hex

;

.

edi je febptvar =C].

;The

ea

—

—
to ‘the var_ C variable is
sa

SAU
ye 8 etre peteme mem

A= gram

8 body OC

vari

307

Part I: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

308
>

se

pop
; The

ebp
modified
is

; the

stack;

mov

registers

are

restored.

that

the

registers

evidence

; This

they

were

previously

saved

not

passed

to

the

function

var_C

variable

are

loaded

were

as

on

arguments.

C]
[ebptvar

eax,

; The

contents

push

eax

push

offset

call

Sigksisene

add

esp,

of

the

into

EAX.

unk 406030
8

pacallingsprinee

pop

edi

pop

esi

pop

ebx

; The

registers

mov

esp,

pop

ebp

; The

stack

are

restored.

ebp

frame

is

closed.

retn

main

endp

Returning values via arguments passed by reference. The identification of
values returned via arguments passed by reference is linked closely with identification of the arguments themselves. (See the "Function Arguments" section.) Let's de-

tect pointers among the arguments passed to the function and include them on the
list of candidates for returned values.
Now, let's see whether there are any pointers to uninitialized variables among
them; obviously, they're initialized by the called function itself. However, pointers
to initialized variables, especially those equal to zero, should not be discounted;
they also may return values. An analysis of the called function can clarify the situation: All operations that modify the variables passed by reference will be of interest,
and should not be confused with modification of the variables passed by value.
These automatically cease when function execution is completed (or, more pre-

cisely, when the arguments are eliminated from the stack). They are local variables
of the function, which may change them as it sees fit.

Step Seven: Identifying the Key Structures of High-Level Languages

Listing 115. Returning Values via Variables Passed by Reference
#include

<stdio.h>

#include

<string.h>

void

Reverse(char

*dst,

const

char

*src)

{
SEC on/ (Clie 7 etaey)

Strrev(.dst);

¥

}

// The

sre string

// into

the dst string.

void

Reverse (char
.sStrrev(.s

}

:

is reversed

*s){
)s

;

Se

é

ah

// The s stringis reversed.
//

(The result

and written

te

Se

is written into

the same $s string.)

Te
-:
»~&
©

int sum(int
//This

a,int
b)

function

returns

the

sum of two arguments.

309

Part |: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

310

// The

sl string

printf ("$x\n",

// The

sum

is rewritten

sum(0x666,

of two

and,

therefore,

reversed.

0x777));

numbers

is printed.

The disassembled code of the compiled version of the previous example should
look as follows:
Listing 116. The Disassembled Code for Returning Values via Variables
Passed by Reference
main

proc

near

; CODE

S ‘ ~~ Ps

ll

var_10
var €
var_8

= dword ptr -10h
= dword ptr -0Ch
= dword ptr -8

var 4

= word

XREF:

start+AFYp

byte ptr -74h

push

ebp

mov

ebp,

ptr

é

-4

Re

y

g
esp

;

+ The stack frame is opened.
; 3
A

-

Mapes
ri Memo

esp,

“TAR

y

allo

is

>
i

j
3

-<

iE
=

th

al

é

Va

mig
ables

bid es

.

‘

:

™
nae

m

SY

ae *
in

Step Seven: Identifying the Key Structures of High-Level Languages

311
il

PeLhoesesings
;

local

variable

; The

0x10

; Of

bytes

; in each
lea

HellopuSailor!

has

of

copied

make

ecx,

char

been
—

a total

of

; the

"Hello,

Sailor!"

push

ecx

; The

pointer

; to

the

; the

type

the

number

4 bytes

variable,

is

loaded

which

into

contains

ECX:

7; elite

to

the

"Hello,

Sailor!"

Reverse 1 function.
incorrectly:

; clarifies

why

lea

[ebptvar
74]

edx,

; The

pointer

7 is

loaded-into

push

edx

; The

pointer

how

IDA made

to the

IDA

has

What

kind

of

the

string

string

is

passed

determined
int
was

has

char

*?

copied

a mistake.

uninitialized

var_74

local

variable

variable

s1/[100]

The value

100 was

ECX.
P= COar

; is passed

to

the

to the

; by subtracting

uninitialized

the

offset

var_10 variable,

; in decimal

suggests

value

in

cal?

Reverse1

add

esp,

it —

of

which

the

var_74

is next

string:-0x/¢

representation.

; some

char

Reverse 1 function.

"Hello,—-Sailor!"

that

the

=

Passing
that

from

eax,

; The pointer

function

will

should

to

“which

the

offset

return
be noted.

[ebptvar_
74]

is loaded

is

100

unassigned

is called.

to the var_74 variable

obtained
the

to it and contains

0x10-=90x64,

a pointer

function

something

variable

8

; The Reverse_1

eax

with

local

string,

recalling

push

expected.

16!

var_10

; However,

lea

as

var 10

[ebptvar
10]

to the

; variable

type

Eosthe

by counting

4 iterations

pointer

; the

s[0x10]

obtained

; The

; of the

"is Copied

into EAx.

Part |: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

312

ore
The pointer to the var_74 variable is passed to the jouebifel
; function. Because the calling function has not initialized this
“

; variable,

it can

; its

value

via

be assumed

that

the

variable.

The

Reverse_1 function

; the

var_10

variable

called

function

has

returned

‘

; about

this

the

before

as

the

well,

but

function's

it

is

code

impossible
is

might

modify

to

certain

be

studied.

push
offset unk_406040
cal Kaa prantia
add

esp,

; The printf

lea

8

=

function

is called

for the

ecx,_[ebptvar_74]

;

; ECX is loaded with the pointer
; apparently
push

contains

string output.

the value

ecx

to the
returned

var_74 variable,
by the

which

Reverse_1 function.

pechane.

; The pointer to the var_74 variable

; function.

is passed to the Reverse2
Reverse_2 also may return its value into the var_74

|
~

; variable,

may

ES

modify

the variable,

or

may not

return

any value!

; Analyzing the code of the called function will clarify this.

SOG Le Ss

byes

_

esp,

AS

eet orest

2

eecess

ee

SO2ate

Shy

4

;

Step Seven: Identifying the Key Structures of High-Level Languages

; The

WaT eat

; The

0x777

push

666h

7 The

0x666

call

Sum

add

esp,

7 The

Sum

type

is passed

to the

Sum

function.

value

of the

int

type

is passed

to

Sum

function.

mov

‘

function

is

called.

register

contains

eax

to the

the value

printf

function

offset unk_406048
— jpranret

esp,

a

the

8

is passed

; The

hae

int

; It

add

called.

of the

EAX

Call

is

value

; The

push

~

function

push

push

.

printf

313

esp,

ebp

; The

stack

as

an

;

by the

Sum function.

argument.

ee

a

8

printf

pop

returned

function

is called.

ebp

or

ee

frame

is closed.

—

©

Laos

3.

aa

.

;

Part I: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

314

arg 4

.
push

= dword

ptr

OCh

ebp

mov

ebp,

esp

; The

stack

frame

MOV

eax,

[ebptarg4]

; The

arg 4 argument

is opened.

push

eax

; The

arg 4 argument

Mov

ecx,

+ The value

is

loaded

is passed

to

EAX.

the

strepy

function.

is loaded

into ECx.

{[ebptrarg0]

of the arg 0 argument

push

eCx

; The

arg 0 argument

Calli

cereny

add

esp,

; The

contents

is passed

to the

strepy

function.

8

of the

string pointed

; are copied to the Lee

ee

into

edt,_lebprars.o}

pointed

i

to by arg4

to by arg_0.

:

btfer that contains thei
_—
><

- 7

Kits

Sri
ust

'

a

‘a

Step Seven: Identifying the Key Structures of High-Level Languages

; Clear

;

the

; disassembler

listing,

; time

forgotten

and

have

pop

ebp

; The

stack

pointer

references

considerably

especially
the

if you

algorithm

facilitates

return

of the

to

work

with

it after

analyzed

a

some

program.

;
frame

is

closed.

;

time,

(apart

given

This

endp

int __cdecl

; This

that

variable.

retn
Reverse 1

_

evidence

7 a read-only

315

for

Reverse

2(char

the

function's

the

returned

*)
prototype

type

REVeESess

proc hear

—

arg_0

= dword ptr8

being

-

is defined
void,

not

correctly

int).

+ CODE XREF:

maint+4Ftp

oe

=

<a

~~———a

push

ebp

mov.
;The
Avi

-

7

ebp, esp
stack wee
j

mov

eax,

ae

RR
0}

we =
*<3 oie

Sugdeweeds 7 The contents: of the arg.nme
a

:

isis

*s

ola

,

a

i

o

Arig.

eae loadediS ED gre cence

e243 ee

be

Dasoer

aie

Part I: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

316

; the Reverse 2 function
Reverse

2

like

this:

void Reverse_2(char

endp
proc

arg_0

= dword ptr

8

arg 4

= dword

OCh

near

; CODE

ptr

push

ebp

mov

ebp,

esp

; The

stack

frame

mov

eax,

main+721p

[ebptarg0]
of the

add

[ebptarg
4]

; The arg 0 and
result

XREF:

is opened.

; The value
eax,

*s)

:

Sum

; The

looks

arg_0 argument

arg 4 arguments

is placed

into

is loaded

are

into

EAX.

added.

EAX.

£

Poy

J

Gf

mov

[ebp+arg 0],

eax

:

%

; The sumof arg_0 and arg_ 4,18. copied back nies arg 0.

; Inexperienced hackers may think that this is the return of

a2 values via an argumer

iowe

neeFess pein

x

se is incorrect.

Step Seven: Identifying the Key Structures of High-Level Languages

317

Returning values via the heap. Returning values via an argument passed by
reference barely decorates the function prototype. Such an argument is not
intuitive; it demands detailed explanations such as, "You don't need to pass anything with this argument; on the contrary, be ready to receive something from it."
(Who said that being a programmer is easy?) Clarity and aesthetics aside, there is
a more serious problem. The size of the returned data is unknown beforehand
in some cases; it often is figured out only at the run time of the called function.
Should the buffer be allocated a surplus? This is an ugly and inexpedient solution;
even in systems with virtual memory, size is limited. It would be much simpler if
the called function were able to allocate itself as much memory as it needed, then
return a pointer to it. This is, actually, very easy. Many novice programmers make
the mistake of trying to return pointers to local variables; unfortunately, these variables "die" as soon as the function is completed, and the pointers end up pointing at
nothing. The correct solution to this problem is to allocate memory on the heap (dynamic memory) — for example, by calling the malloc or new functions. Memory
thus allocated "survives" until it is released forcefully by the free or delete function.
This memory-allocation mechanism is not essential for analyzing the program;
the main role is played by the type of the returned value. It is easy to distinguish
a pointer from other types: Only a pointer can be used in an address expression.
Let's consider the following example:
Listing 117. Returning a Value via the Heap
#include

<stdio.h>

#include

<malloc.h>

#include

<stdlib.h>

char*

MyFunc(int

a)

{
chaae

x

x =

(char.*)

.malloe(100),;

-itoa (a, %)-.16)3
return

main

()
Charmekx3

x;

Part |: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

318

x=MyFunc
prints

(0x666) ;

(VOxtS \niy

eco

free (x);

The disassembled code of the compiled version of the previous example looks
as follows:
Listing 118. The Disassembled Code for Returning a Value via the Heap
main
var

proc
4

=
push

near

dword

; CODE

ptr

ebp,

esp

; The

stack

frame

push

eCx

; Four

bytes
a

-4

is

opened.

of memory

local

push

666h

7 The

666

eal:

MyFunc

add

esp,

are

variable.

value

MyFunc

; has

been

of the

function

passed

to

[ebp+var
4],

int

eax

; The value

to

the

Note

no

argument

function

MyFunc

function.

The

back

by the

value

into

returned

that

by reference!

eax

[ebptvar
4]

; Outstanding!

push

is passed

called.

mov

loaded

type

4.)

is

returned

; is

var

the

; The value
eax,

allocated

(See

4

; The

mov

start+AFYp

ebp

mov

; for

XREF:

function

returned

is copied

by the

to var 4.

function

EAX!

by the

function

is passed

to the printf

|

;

Step Seven: Identifying the Key Structures of High-Level Languages

; function.
; of

the

The

char

; to MyFunc

; on

its

; What

qualifier
* type.

function

own,

then

if one

wrote

to

7 could

modified,

; However,

example,

7 to

the

MyFunc

function,

or

mov
Ee a

not

one

of

could

return

the

to

string

that

the

value

were

could

memory

that

memory.

by

these

arguments.

of returning

be passed

pointer

the

to

contained
pointer

:

7 Oxes\ne

)

<

function

is

function

called;

——
the

string

Parurned

is printed.

ecx, [ebp+var_4]

; ECX is. loaded with the ee
was the ‘-MyFune function.

is

passed

occur.

strings

of modification.

+ by the MyFunc

returned,

to two

is a sign

; The printf

to

function

case

a0xS

string

The

“ee

offset

allocated

function?

not

\.prinkt
esp, 8

it

returned

passed

Therefore,

Cail...
add

arguments

been

se

push

every

the

the

received

could

which

string,

that

of

had

then

pointers

shorter

the

arguments

modification

; For
; the

the

none

by reference,

or more

+ reference
have

indicates

Since

319

of the pointer returned
Reese

more

vowels.

Part I: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

320

>.

> char*

MyFunc(int

main

endp

MyFunc

proc

a)

near

; CODE

var4

dword

ptr

-4

arg_0

= dword

ptr

8

push

ebp

mov

ebp,

esp

_;7

The

stack

frame

push

eCx

; Memory

XREF:

maint+9Tp

:

is opened.

is allocated

push

64h

eall

— malloc

add

esp,

for

:

local

variables.

Ey

ae
>

4

; On the heap, 0x64 ae are allocated, either for the needs
mor the function, or. for returning the result. Be

; the analysis of the calling function’ Ss code has shown |

i that Bee returns a pointer, “malloc pith anes

:

Step Seven: Identifying the Key Structures of High-Level Languages

; for
MOV

; The

returning
ecx,

of

push

ecx

; The

int

; the

ltoa

Call

mee eoa

the

arg 0 argument

esp,

; The

ltoa

is

loaded

into

EAX.

the

string

A 2 soheeye
argument,

add

MOV

result.

[ebptarg
0]

value

; writes

the

321

it

arg0, is

passed

to

function

converts

the

into

buffer

referenced

function.

OCh

eax,

the

number

into
by the

returned

and
pointer.

[ebptvar
4]

; The

pointer

; that

has

been

is

returned

to memory

area

allocated

by MyFunc

on

; and

that

contains

the

heap

of work

of

Iltoa.

mov

esp,

ebp

pop

ebp

; The

stack

frame

the

is

result

closed.

retn
MyFunc

endp

Returning values via global variables. In general, the use of global variables
is bad style. Such a programming style is indicative mainly of programmers whose
minds have been irreversibly crippled by the ideology of BASIC, with its poor
mechanism for calling subroutines.
The identification of global variables is considered in more detail in the "Global
Variables" section of this chapter. Here, you'll learn the mechanisms of returning
.
values via global variables.
All global variables can be implicit arguments of each called function and, at the

same time, returned values. Any function may arbitrarily read and modify them.
Neither passing nor returning global variables can be revealed by an analysis of the
code of the calling function; instead, a careful investigation of the code of the called

function is required. In particular, it is necessary to determine if the called function
manipulates global variables, and which ones are modified. The problem can be

322

Part |: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

approached from the other side: By reviewing the data segment, it may be possible
to find all the global variables and their offsets, then, via a context search on the
whole file, to reveal the functions that reference them. (See the "Global Variables"

section for more details.)

Besides global variables, there are static ones. These also reside in the data segment, but they are directly accessible only to the function that has declared them.
This limitation is not imposed on the variables, but rather on their names. To give
other functions access to their own static variables, it is enough to pass a pointer.
Fortunately, this trick doesn't create any problems for hackers (although some
spoilsports call it "a hole in the protection"). The absence of immediate access to
the static variables of "another," and the necessity for cooperation with the function
owner via a predictable interface (a returned pointer), allows a program to be divided into independent units that may be analyzed separately. The following example provides an illustration of this:
Listing 119. Returning Values via Global and Static Variables
#include
char*

<stdio.h>

MyFunc(int

a)

{

static char x[7][16]={"Monday",
"Tuesday",
"Wednesday",\
S"Thursday",
"Friday",
USacurdayy,
aounday
return

&x[a-1]

printf ("%s\n",

[0];

MyFunc (6) );

}

ER
ee

The disassembled code of this example, compiled using Microsoft Visual C++
6.0 with default settings, looks as follows:
Listing 120. The Disassembled Code for Returning Values via Global and
Static Variables
SS

S

MyFunc

proc

arg 0

= dword

near
ptr

; CODE
8

XREF:

main+5p

Step Seven: Identifying the Key Structures of High-Level Languages

push

ebp

mov

ebp,

esp

+ The

stack

frame

MOV

eax,

is

of the

sub

1

eax,

opened.

[ebptarg0]

; The value

arg 0 argument

by one.

This

although

mathematical

a pointer,

pointers

shl

are

eax,

allowed

and

used

is

evidence

operations

that

arg_0

over

in ¢C language.

4

(arse)

sce mulve noleied by shor

of 4 bits

to the

; raising

2 to

4th power,

or 16.

aMonday;

"Monday"

add

eax,

_; The

obtained

; the

table

the

offset

value

of strings

either

# contains

|

7 JO chesarg: 0 argument

case,

right

is added

,

(in this

indirect

actively

; A shift

;

into EAX.

.

7 is not

Sy Here

me

is loaded

; EAX is decremented
;

323

in the

static

is the

equivalent

to the base
data

of

i=

pointer

segment.

or global variables.

The

that

data

Since

is multiplied by some value

by 16), you can assume this is yo’.
array of fixed length Be

- ; a two-dimensional

E-DENE EAXeSRRER SEES=% cen

oes
mare string

references

segment

the value
_

324

Part |: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

push.

ebp

mov

ebp,

esp

; The

stack

frame

is

opened.

’

push

6

; This

value

of the

int type

;

sixth

day

Saturday. )

(The

call

MyFunc

add

esp,

.
ig

fd

to the MyFunc

function.

4

The MyFunc

push

is

is passed

function

is called.

eax

The value

returned

by MyFunc

is passed

; The

format-specification

string

; this

is a pointer

string.

pushy

= offset

callie

eprinté

add

esp,

as

to the
la.

to the

indicates

printf function.

that

; "s\n"

8

Va
E-

+ The stack frameis closed.
3.

oad

-

tL.”

Fab

oe

eS

PIS
I PEI OF AAR:
=
&f:
stwhy

:

Sis

~

t.0 sage

<

tea the>

lk

Ty

Step Seven: Identifying the Key Structures of High-Level Languages

325

Compare that example with one that uses true global variables.
a
a
a
a
Listing 121. Returning a Value via a Global Variable
#include

<stdio.h>

amie
int

b;

see,

Gi

MyFunc()

c=atb;

main ()

a=0x666;
b=0x777;

MyFunc ();
PEINCE(UsxNn

C="

The disassembled code of the compiled version of the previous example looks
as follows:
Listing 122. The Disassembled Code Returning a Value via a Global Variable
main

proc

near

push

ebp

mov

ebp,

esp

; The

stack

frame

call

MyFunc

; The

MyFunc

; to

the

; the

preliminary

like

call

Sum

; The

Sum

this:

function

XREF:

start+tANp

is opened.

function

function,

; looks

7; CODE

and

is

called.

nothing

conclusion

Note
is

that

returned.

is that

its

nothing

is passed

Therefore,

prototype

void MyFunc()

is

called.

This

function

doesn't

receive

.

326

Part |: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

.
,

or return

any values.

Its

.

looks

this:

void

Sum/()

of the

c global

,

mov

like

eax,

Now,

examine

data

zero.

because

previously

called

about

c local

should

functions

modification

is

variable

be

could

EAX.

questioned

have

changed

strengthened

one

of which

ends

the

cross-reference

indicates

value

to

the

c variable,

can

some

the

code

of the

points
to the

Sum

which

Sum

it.

by a pair

that

w suffix

ats

function.

that

Sum

be worked

out

function.

eax

The value

returned

by the

Sum function

is passed

; to the printf function via the c global variable.

:

; The

format-specification

:

; the

argument

is of the
~

Lacan

eaeail
white Die TES add

Bas

The

value

into

cross-references,

push

‘

this

is loaded

The

by analyzing

micieaseticeweapnmieicoasi

variable

segment.

However,

assumption

assigns

.
,

the

equals
The

prototype

Cc

The value
~~

preliminary

Sc

OS

sagorints
esp, Bas a

string

indicates

that

int type.
|

sn

:
:

;

SS

ancien

x

boidinseassth afl

—

a
va

ae

5 -

oa
=
wail spleens Si in shes

_} The result returned by Sum is printed.

a

Step Seven: Identifying the Key Structures of High-Level Languages

MOV

eax,

a

; The

value

of

; Now,

find

a in

; to MyFunc

the

a global

the

; Since

MyFunc

; MyFunc

presumably

add

eax,

; EAX

the

Cc,

; The

result
you

called

to

into

EAX.

A cross-reference
the

prior

loaded

to

a variable.
call

of

has

returned

some

value

into

the

value

the

a global

stores

contents

MOV
; As

was

segment.

something

is

the

Sun,
a.

b

(which

; to

data

assigns

variable

327

of

of

the

b global

variable.

a + b is

assigned

to

variable)

is

added

eax
of

already

know

(from

; the

Sum

function

uses

; now,

it

is

clear

which

frame

is

pop

ebp

; The

stack

the

the

the

c variable.

analysis

c variable

of

to

the

main

function),

return

its

results;

results.

closed.

retn
Sum

endp

MyFunc

proc
push

ebp,

esp

stack

frame

mov

a,

; The

0x666
Vrs

; The

0x777
you

a and

=e

First,

global

is

value

;

opened.

is assigned

to

the

a global

variable.

value

is

to the

b global

variable.

discovered

clarified.
_e

maint+3tp

MT Le.

; the MyFunc
; the

XREF:

666h

mov

; As

; CODE

ebp

MOV

; The

near

assigned

by analyzing

function

returns

b variables.

Now,

the

calls

variables.

computation

the

result

MyFunc(),

Then,

previous

its

You also know how these

main()

two

main()

which

calls

into

question

has

functions

interact.

in

three

functions,

result

initializes

Sum(),

the

placing

been

a and

b

Part I: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

328
>

ai

; the
; Even

c and

takes

: main()
an

elementary
can

What

; problem!

; order

and

pop

ebp

passes

it

example

of

said

about

a

of

such

functions,

be

thousands

; incorporates

behavior

stack

the

via

are

far

three

from

Finally,

variable.

c global

the

b into

a and

of

sum

to printf.

functions

creates

program

real

whose

a

knotty

that

calling

obvious?

retn

MyFunc

endp

a

dd

0

b

dd

0

c

dd 0

; DATA

XREF:

MyFunct+3w

Sumt3tr

; DATA

XREF:

MyFunc+Dw

Sum+8tr

; DATA XREF:

Sum+Ew main+Dfr

; The

cross-references

indicate

that

all

three

; each

can

by more

than

one

function.

be

accessed

variables

are

global;

Returning values via processor flags. Assembly functions typically use the
CPU flags register to return the result (success or failure) of the function execution.
By convention, the carry flag (cr) indicates an error. The zero flag (zF) is the next
most popular one. Other flags practically are not used.
The carry flag is set by the stc instruction, or by any mathematical operation
that results in a carry (for example, cMP a, b, where a < b). This flag is reset by
the cLc instruction, or by any appropriate mathematical operation.
The carry flag is usually checked by the sc xxx and gNC xxx jump instructions, executed, respectively, depending on whether the carry is present or not.
The JB xxx and JNB xxx branches are their syntactic synonyms, which give identical code after assembling.
Listing 123. Returning Values via Processor Flags
#include

Err(){

<stdio.h>

printf("-ERR:

DIV by Zero\n")
;}

// This

function

gives

Oki(ant

a) (prince
("es

a division-error
Nola)

message.

Step Seven: Identifying the Key Structures of High-Level Languages

// The

result

of division

is printed.

__declspec (naked)
{

MyFunc()

// This

function

assembler

implements

division.

// It divides

EAX by EBX,

then returns

// the

result

into

the

// An

attempt

to divide

// the carry

— 329

EAX and

remainder

by zero

flag.

into

EDX.

causes

the

function

to

set

zeroed.

That

is,

div

instruction

.

asm{

_xor

edx,

edx

; EDX
“ee

test

ebx,

ebx

4%, sere

is

expects

ebx

divisor

is

checked

for

pelt

thevdivisor

is equal

torzero,

toO.njern:

B EDX:EAX

eras

43

ane

; Upon

3

equal

iEOuZerOn)

the

quotient

exiting,

; and the remainder

655:
ort

= feos

Mysises

+
Sy

2)

Tiwi

aad neem aisPages Se Pai

zero.

is divided by EBX.

; (EBX is not
ee

the

to be in EDX:EAX.

; The
7, jump

div

the dividend

This Soe ta—

is returned into

is Beruined ae
=

control

ies

LS. Pale

EDX.
tee

EAX

Part |: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

330

mov

ebx,

[espt+8]

;

call

MyFunc

jnc _ok

call

Err

ret

loaded

; This

is

an

; Df

the

; the

result

;

of

the

into

EDX.

contents

The

; are

...the

attempt

carry
is

error

flag

b argument

to

divide

2s°

reset,

displayed;
message

is

a by b.

otherwise,...
displayed.

; Returning

nok:
push

eax

; The

of

division

call

Ok

; displayed

on

the

add

esp,

; The

is

cleared.

4

ret

result
stack

is

passed

and

screen.

; Returning

}

main() {MyFunc_2(4,0);}

Local Stack Variables
Local variables are placed onto the stack (also known as automatic memory), then
removed when the function completes execution. First, any arguments passed to
the function are placed onto the stack. The cat instruction that calls this function
places the return address-on top of the arguments. Upon gaining control, the function opens the stack frame (i.e., saves the previous value of the EBP register and sets
it equal to the ESP register, which points to the top of the stack). The free stack area
is above EBP (i.e., at a lower address); the service data (the stored value of EBP and

the return address), as well as the arguments, are below it.
The stack area above the stack-top pointer (the ESP register) can be erased or
distorted. For example, it can be used by hardware-interrupt handlers called at unpredictable places in the program and at unpredictable times. If the function uses the
stack (to save registers or pass arguments), stack corruption will result. The way to avoid
this is to move the stack pointer upward until it occupies this area of the stack.

The integrity of the memory "below" Esp is guaranteed (against unintentional
distortions): The next call of the PusH instruction will place the data on top of the
stack without erasing local variables.

——
>

Step Seven: Identifying the Key Structures of High-Level Languages

331

At the end of execution, the function is obliged to return the Esp value to its
former place. If it does not return this value, the RET function will be unable to read

the return address off the stack; rather, it will read the value of the "uppermost" local variable, and will pass control nowhere.

Pe

Note
The left part of Fig. 15 shows the stack at the moment the function is called. The function
opens the stack frame, saving the old value of the EBP register and setting it equal to ESP.
The right part of Fig. 15 represents the allocation of 0x14 bytes of the stack memory for local variables. This is done by moving the ESP register upward — into the area of lower addresses. Local variables are allocated in the stack as if they were pushed there by the
PUSH instruction. After execution, the function increases the value of the ESP register and
returns the value to its former position, releasing memory occupied by local variables. Then,
the function restores the EBP value from the stack, closing the stack frame.

Free

ESP

Free

ESP.EBP

EBP

PUSH EBP/MOV EBP.ESP

SUB ESP.0x14

Fig. 15. Themechanism for allocating local variables in the stack

332

Part I: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

Addressing local variables. Local variables and stack arguments are addressed
similarly. (See the "Function Arguments" section.) The only difference is arguments
are located "below" EBp, and local variables reside "above" it. In other words,

arguments have a positive offset relative to EBP, and local variables have a negative
offset. Therefore, they can easily be distinguished. For example, [EBP+xxx] is an
argument, and [EBP-xxx] is a local variable.
The register that points at the stack frame serves as a barrier: The function's
arguments are on one side of it, and the local variables are on the other (Fig. 16).

It's clear why ESP is copied to EBP when the stack frame is opened: If copying didn't
occur, the addressing of local variables and arguments would be complicated considerably. Compiler developers are humans (strange as it may seem), and they
don't want to complicate their lives unnecessarily. However, optimizing compilers
are capable of addressing local variables and arguments directly via Esp, freeing the
EBP register for more useful work.

Free

EBP-14
n

n

2 |@

EBP-10

2 | 2
8 | @

EBP-oc

Z

EBP-08

o& | =°

Soe:
i

EBP-04
—

EBP+00

EBP

2|FS 2re)

2

EBP+04

oa

EBP+0C

i=

5|

@. EBP+08 -

he

—

Fig. 16. Addressing local variables

Step Seven: Identifying the Key Structures of High-Level Languages

333

Implementation details. There are plenty of ways to allocate and clear memory
for local variables. For example, suB ESP, xxx can be used at the input, and app
ESP,xxx can be used at the output. Striving, perhaps, to be distinguished, Borland
C++ and some other compilers allocate memory by increasing Esp, not decreasing
it... by a negative number! By default, most disassemblers interpret this as a large
positive number. When allocating a small amount of memory, optimizing compilers replace SUB reg with PUSH reg, which is shorter by a few bytes. This creates
identification problems: Is this saving registers on the stack, passing arguments,

or allocating memory for local variables?
The algorithm for clearing memory is also ambiguous. In addition to encountering an increase in the register of the stack-top pointer due to the ADD ESP, xxx
instruction (or a decrease in it due to a negative number, as previously mentioned), you may find the construction Mov ESP, EBP. (When the stack frame was
opened, ESP was copied to EBP, but EBP was not modified during the execution of
the function.) Finally, memory may be released by the Pop instruction, which pops
out local variables one by one into any unused register. (Such a method is justified
only when the number of local variables is small.)
Table 14. Allocating and Clearing Memory for Local Variables
Posloce ioEn
saweed

Allocating memory

Implementation variants

SUB’ ESP; *xxx

ADD ESP,- xxx

PUSH reg

ADD

ESP,

Xxx

SUB.

POP

MOV

ESP,

EBP

ESP, =. xxx

reg

Releasing memory

Identifying the mechanism that allocates memory. Using the sup and app instructions, memory allocation is consistent and interpreted unequivocally. If memory is allocated using the PUSH instruction and is cleared by Pop, this construction
becomes indistinguishable from simple allocation and deallocation of registers on
and from the stack. As a complication, the function also contains instructions for
allocating registers, mingled with memory-allocation instructions. Is it possible to
ascertain how many bytes are allocated for local variables, or whether any bytes
have been allocated? (The function may not contain local variables.)
The search for references to the memory locations "above" the EBP register
(i.e., with a negative relative offset) might be helpful. Let's consider two examples.

Part |: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

334

EE

Listing 124. Identifying the Memory-Allocation Mechanism
push

ebp

push

ebp

push

ecx

push

ecx

NOOK

XXX

XXX

mov

xed

HOS4

[ebp-4],

pop

ecx

pop

ecx

pop

ebp

pop

ebp

ret

0x666

ret

In the left-hand example, there is no reference to local variables; in the righthand code, the Mov

[EBP-4],

0x666 construction copies the 0x666 value to the

var4 local variable. If there's a local variable, memory must have been allocated
for it. As there are no instructions such as SUB ESP, xxx Or ADD ESP, xxx in the
body of the function, the memory must have been allocated by PUSH ECx.
(The contents of the Ecx register are stored on the stack 4 bytes "above" EB.) Only
one instruction, PUSH ECX, can be cited, because PUSH EBP is not fit for the role of
"allocator." What can be done if there are several "suspects?"
The amount of allocated memory can be determined by the offset of the "highest" local variable in the body of the function. In other words, of all the [zBP-xxx]
expressions, the greatest xxx offset generally is equal to the number of bytes of
memory allocated for local variables. However, local variables can be declared and
not used. Memory is allocated for them (although optimizing compilers remove
such variables as superfluous), but no reference occurs to them. In this case, the al-

gorithm for calculating the amount of allocated memory produces a result that is
too low. However, this error has no effect on the results of analyzing the program.
Initializing local variables. There are two ways to initialize local variables:
Assign the necessary value by the mov instruction (such as Mov [EBP-04], 0x666),
or directly push the values onto the stack using the PusH instruction (such as PUSH
0x777). This allows the allocation of memory for local variables to be favorably
combined with their initialization (if there are only a few of these variables).

In most cases, popular compilers perform initialization using Mov; perverse assemblers are more likely to use PUSH, sometimes in protection aimed at misleading
hackers (although any hacker led astray by such a trick must be a beginner).
Allocating structures and arrays. Structures and arrays (i. e., their elements) are
placed consecutively on the stack in adjacent memory locations. The smaller index of an
array is at the smaller address, but it is addressed by a larger offset relative to the pointer-

Step Seven: Identifying the Key Structures of High-Level Languages

335

we

register of the stack frame. This is no surprise; because local variables are addressed by
a negative offset, [EBP-0x4] > [EBP-0x10].
The mess grows because IDA omits the minus sign when it gives names to local
variables. For example, of the variables var_4 and var_10, the latter occupies the
smaller address, the index of which is larger. If var_4 and var_10 are two ends of an
array, instinct would place var4 at the head of an array, and var_10 at the end,
although they belong in the opposite locations.
Alignment in the stack. In some cases, elements of a structure, an array, or
even particular variables must be aligned by addresses that are multiples of a specific power of 2. However, the stack-top pointer value is not defined beforehand.
How can the compiler, which does not know the index value, fulfill this requirement? It simply discards the lower bits of ESP.
The lower bit of even numbers is zero. To ensure that the value of the stack-top
pointer is divisible by two without a remainder, simply force its lower bit to zero.
If two lower bits are set to zero, the resulting value will be a multiple of four;

if three lower bits are set to zero, the resulting value will be a multiple of eight;
and so on.
In most cases, bits are reset using the AND instruction. For example, AND

ESP,

FFFFFFO makes ESP a multiple of 16. How do we obtain this? Let's convert 0xFFFFFFFO
to a binary form, which will give the following: 111111111 11111111 11110000.
The four trailing zeroes mean that four lower bits of any number will be masked.
The number will be divisible by 2 to the power of 4, which equals 16.
How IDA identifies local variables. Although local variables have been used in
the previous listings, an example of how they are identified may be helpful.
Listing 125. Identifying Local Variables
#include

<stdio.h>

#include

<stdlib.h>

int

MyFunc(int

a,

int

b)

{
nghes (es

// B local

cha

sop5.0]

// Bn array, (shows the method of
// allocating arrays in memory)—

G sya

tub;

Leoal(cp

6x10},

;

0x10)

2

variable

of the

of-a

int type.

+ b is placed-into

// The

sum

// The

sum of a + b is converted

c.

into

336

Part I: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

>

Hiife Fkach
printf ("$x
IgE
bhay

==

3s

==

"ce,

eoaiatepe

&x[0])7..//

The

string

1s displayed.

(ey

main ()

int

a

=

0x666;

The

int

b =

Ox777;

demonstrating

a and

the

the

initializes

compiler

Tricks

LMeeCa tales

b local

like

this

to prevent

the

the

variable

local

"Register
Because

and

the

function,
passed,

are

mechanism

are

them.

compiler

into

the

Temporary
to

from placing

register.

Variables"

c is passed

a pointer

compiler

declared,

by which

necessary

optimizing

pointer

and
the

variables

to the

has

to

the

section.)
to the printf

register

leave

(See

the

can't

be

variable

in memory.
c[0]

=

MyFunc(a,

b);

prance ("sx\n, ~~<epOli<s
return

0;

}

The disassembled code of this example, compiled using Microsoft Visual C++
6.0 with default settings, should look as follows:
Listing 126. The Disassembled Code for Identifying Local Variables Compiled
Using Visual C++ 6.0

; CODE XREF: main+t1Clp

MyFunc

proc

var_38

= byte ptr -38h

<

8|

Il

nes

near

dword

ptr

-4

; Local

variables

; EBP;

function

arguments

are

allocated

; Note

that

the

"higher"

the

variable's

are

allocated

at

the

negative

offset,

at the positive
location,

relative

offset.

to

Step Seven: Identifying the Key Structures of High-Level Languages

; the

larger

the

absolute

value

arg0

=|

dword

ptr

8

arg 4

=

dword

ptr

OCh

push

of

ebp,

esp

; The

stack

frame

esp,

38h

sub

is

; The

ESP

value

by

7 are

allocated

for

mov

eax,

; The

value

of

the

clearly

is

; its

positive

add

eax,

; The

is

decreased

local

arg 0 argument

shown

offset

relative

to

the

of the

arg 0 argument

; Here

is the

first

local

just

a local

relative

how

the

10h

; The

0x10

the

EBP

register.

is added

to EAX.

EBP

as

shown

register.

by its
Why

is

it negative?

offsets

local

were

of

variables

marked

clearly.

fe aliohe
value

(the

the

radix

[ebptvar_
38]

ecx,

; The pointer

ltoa

to the

the

numeration

system)

function.

var_38

of a variable

disassembler

of

local

variableis loaded

is this?

Let's

scroll

find

the

screen

upward

to

variables

that

IDA has

recognized:

; var_38

= byte ptr

-38h

; var_4

= dword ptr -4

The

negative

be better

lea

; of local

EAX.

var4. It would

to

kind

into

by

determined

; is passed

; What

bytes

variable.

variable,

to

IDA has

negative

push

0x38

loaded

as

; It

; Look

is

argument,

eax

; offset

and

an

[ebp+var
4],

is

0x38,

variables.

[ebptarg4]

value

mov

opened.

[ebptarg
0]

; This

; the

offset.

ebp

mov

; if

its

337

nearest

lower

local

into ECx.

description

:

variable

has

an

offset

equal

to -4.

338

Part |: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

The

var

the

latter

38 variable

from the

It

is easy

to

Nevertheless,
to

char*.

Open

the

Select

the

function

ltoa

equal

to

0x34.

the

s[0x34]".

is done

as

follows:

Functions

submenu.

then

This
open

enter

the

or press

variables.

s[0x34]".

is

following

recognized

"char

size

the

A window

to

Subtracting

of var_38.

is expecting

Stack variables,

<;>

to -38.

size

to write

key combination.
local

the

equal

the

it is possible

menu,

press

gives

that

"char

Edit

an offset

former

calculate

Thus,

to var_38:

has

will

Bring

a recurring

Now,

hit

the

the

open

pointer
comment

<Ctrl>+<K>
that

lists

all

the

cursor

to

comment,

and

write

<Ctrl>+<Enter>

key

var

34,

combination

to finish input. Then, hit the <Esc> key to close
the local-variables window. Now, each reference to var_34
_e

will

push
,
.

,

me

Ta

eCcx

"char

s[0x34]"

to the local buffer-for

is passedto the
edx,

by the

ltoa

var_38

function.

[ebptvar_4]

-

The value of the var_4 local variable
a

»

comment.

Fe hatame

The pointer

mov
--

be accompanied

ee

i

Z

OL

>

:

=

is loaded into EDX.
-

s

a

Step Seven: Identifying the Key Structures of High-Level Languages

,

The

,

which

mov
lA

to

var

34 is passed

to the printf

displays

the

contents

the

ecx,

The value

push
,

pointer

on

function,

screen.

[ebptvar4]
of the

var 4 local

variable

is loaded

into ECX.

ecx

The value of the var_4 local variable is passed to printf.
—

push

offset

aXS

; "Sx

==

$s ==

"

call~..-printt
add

esp,

mov

eax,

,

The value

OCh
[ebptvar4]

of the

var 4 local

variable

is returned

into EAX.

,
=

mov
,

esp,

Memory

pop

occupied

ebp —

=.

ebp

“i
by local

variables

ee

The former value
of EBP is restored.
,
ae
aiken

is released.

——

339

340

~=—Part I: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

; The var_4 local variable

mov

is initialized and assigned the value 0x666.

s

[ebptvar_
8], 777h

; The var8 local variable
; Note

that

the

reverse

order

; is

the

7 HOt

declared. The

; allocated

of the

in this

order

variables
order;

; which

is why it should

mov

eax,

; The value

push

is initialized and assigned the value 0x777.

of local

variables

in the memory

in which

they

are

always

this

never

not

were

depends

on

be

on.

relied

the

referenced

—

compiler,

[ebptvar8]
of var 8 is copied to the EAX register.

— eax

:

; The value

of var_8 is passed to the MyFunc

function.

MOV

ecx, [ebptvar 4]
; The value of var 4 is copied to the ECX register.

push

ecx

; The value of var 4 is passed to the MyFunc function.
eall

ie

ray

Cc

2

x

‘

.

inc functionis called.

|

aks

fe

|

t

pen

ae

a

Step Seven: Identifying the Key Structures of High-Level Languages

;

Zero

is

MOv

returned.

esp,

; Memory

pop

341

ebp

occupied

by

local

is

closed.

variables

is

released.

ebp

; The

stack

frame

retn

main

endp

That was rather easy, wasn't it? The disassembled
compiled using Borland C++ 5.0 will be more difficult.

code of this example

Listing 127. The Disassembled Code for Identifying Local Variables Compiled
Using Borland C++ 5.0
MyFunc
var

proc

34

; Note

; were

=
that

declared!
placed

; to

speed

;

(See

; and

byte

there

; has

the

is

7; CODE

ptr

-34h

one

local

are

the

into

the

registers,

the

process

of

XREF:

variable,

Where

them

up

near

others?

_maint+14)p

although

as

This

compiler

rather

than

addressing

many

onto

as

the

three

stack,

them.

"Register

Temporary
push

Variables"

section

for more

details.)

ebp

mov

ebp,

esp

; The

stack

frame

add

esp,

OFFFFFFCC

; After

this

; into

the

; were

allocated

for

local

variables.

; was

allocated

using

ADD,

not

push

ebx

; Does

this

is

opened.

allocation,

signed

store

one,

press
which

EBX on

the

<->

in

gives

-34.

IDA

to

convert

Therefore,

the

0x34

Note

that memory

does

it allocate

number
bytes

SUB!

stack,

or

memory

342

‘Part I: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

; for

local

Because

variables?

; using

ADD,

PUSH must

lea

ebx,

[edxteax]

; This

tricky

save

memory

onto

allocated

was

previously

register

the

the

stack.

5

; Because
; the

;

(See

push

arguments

were

of the

sum

of EDX and

via

EAX.

explicitly,

initialized

Arguments"

eax,

choosen

to the

ltoa

them.

section.)

numeration

system

function.

[ebptvar_ 34]

7 The pointerto the
push

passed

the

not

10h

is passed

lea

gives

EAX were

"Function

the

; A radix
;

addition

EDX and

local

buffer

for var_34

is loaded

into EAX.

eax

; The pointer to the buffer for writing the result
; is passed to the ltoa function.
-s*

3

is

: ents saghsy the pointer)

oi
.

pant

+4

rg

arn?

See

5
me

Off

ek,"

on

b

.

is).

sro

beeqe oJ

Sat

202)

eons basis[>
.’
ae

ae

or
>

om

ao
ra.
as: ed

Step Seven: Identifying the Key Structures of High-Level Languages

call

yessprintt

add

esp,

OCh

eax,

ebx

mov

7 The

sum

of the

pop

ebx

; EBX is popped
mov

esp,

; Memory

arguments

off

the

is

returned

stack,

into

restoring

its

FAX.

former

state.

ebp

occupied

by local

variables

is released.

pop — ebp
7 The
“retn
MyFunc

stack

frame

is

ret
endp

closed.
,

te

|
ae

“ee

int —_cdecl

main

main(int argc,

const char **argv,

PEOC -Méar<

a7

e

_; DATA XREF:

const char *envp)
DATA:00407044vo

343

.

344

Part |: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

; The
mov

value

0x777

ebx,

666h

value

0x666

mov

edx,

esi

mov

eax,

ebx

; The

; The

arguments

call

MyFunc

; The

MyFunc

mov

; The

into

the

ESI

register.

is placed

into

the

EBX

register.

to MyFunc

via

the

.

are

passed

function

registers.

is called.

[ebpt+var_
4], eax

result

“ee variable.

been

is placed

returned

Wait!

allocated

by MyFunc

Which
for

it?

; could have done this.
; of the variable:

local

is

copied

variable?

Only one

of the

But which one?

It resides

4 bytes

to the

var_4 local

How has memory
PUSH

instructions

Look at the offset
higher

than

z

EBP,

:

; and its memory area is occupied by the contents of
; the register saved by the first PUSH instruction, which
+ came after the stack frame was opened. (The second PUSH places
+ the value

of the register

at an offset

of -8,

7
;

and so on.)

; The first instruction was PUSH ECX. Therefore, this

_

; does not lcs ue Ge grees oe Sree

<3 a

“<

Step Seven: Identifying the Key Structures of High-Level Languages

;

Zero

is

returned

pop

esi

pop

ebx

; The

pop

values

EAX,

ESI

and

the

EBX

registers

are

restored.

ecx

7; Memory

allocated

pop

ebp

;

stack

The

of

into

345

frame

for

is

the

var_4 local

variable

is

released.

closed.

retn

_Main

endp

Frame Pointer Omission (FPO). The £5? register traditionally is used to address local variables. As there are only seven general-purpose registers, it is
undesirable to designate one of them permanently for addressing local variables.
Is there another, more elegant solution?
Consideration of this problem leads to the conclusion that a dedicated register
for addressing local variables is not necessary; this goal can be reached (with some
tricks) by using one ESP — the stack-pointer register.
The only problem is the floating stack frame. After allocating memory for local
variables, ESP may point to the top of the allocated area. In this case, the buff variable (Fig. 17) will appear at the EsP+0xc address. As soon as something is placed
onto the stack (an argument of the calling function, or the register contents for
temporary storage), the frame will "move," and buff will appear at the ESP+0x10
address, not at ESP+0xc!

Contemporary compilers are capable of addressing local variables via Esp, and
dynamically tracing the zsp value (unless tricky assembler inserts in the function's
body unpredictably modify the Esp value).
This complicates an analysis of the code. After pointing to any part of the code,
it is impossible to determine which local variable is being addressed; the whole
function must be thoroughly worked out, and the Esp value must be watched
closely. (Often, massive errors will nullify all preceding work.) Fortunately, the IDA
disassembler knows how to treat such variables. Nevertheless, hackers never rely
entirely on automatics; rather, they try to understand how things work.

346

Part I: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

Pointer
to the stack top

ESP+0xC

ESP+0xC

variables
Local

te

variables
Local

Fig. 17. pocre- cing local variables via the ESP register
forms a floating stack frame

nee piedF239 turn to our good old file simple.c and compile it with the /02 key, which
oa optimizes performance byhavingthe souls use all pees: andaddress local

; 2b

1e2. e9iaecis?

\shds

1a

Step Seven: Identifying the Key Structures of High-Level Languages

347

ae

Q040L0052;

33.0

OO4001 = eDe7Caed.

14.

xOr

eax,

eax

lea

edi,

[esptilh]

EDT 1s set to point to the local variable [=sP+0x11] (an uninitialized tail of buf £).
0040101B:

68

60

60

40

00

push

406060h

; "Enter

password"

The offset of the "Enter password" string is placed onto the stack. Note that the ESP
register creeps 4 bytes upward.
00401020:

F3 AB

rep

00401022:

66

AB

stos

stos

dword

00401024:

33

ED

xor

ebp,

ebp

00401026:

AA

stos

byte

ptr

call

00401220

word

ptr
ptr

[edi]
[edi]

[edi]

The buffer is zeroed.
00401027:

E8

F4

01

00

00

The "Enter password" string is displayed on the screen. Note that the arguments
have not been popped off the stack!
0040102C:

68

70

60

40

00

push

406070h

The offset of the pointer to the stdin pointer is placed onto the stack. Note that
ESP creeps another 4 bytes upward.
00401031:

8D

4C 24

18

lea

ecx,

[espt+18h]

The pointer to the [EsP+0x18] variable is loaded into Ecx. Is this just another
buffer? No; this is the [ESP+0x10] variable, which has changed its appearance because
ESP has been modified. Subtracting 8 bytes (which ESP crept upward) from 0x18 gives
0x10, our old acquaintance [ESP+0x10]. (Should old acquaintance be forgot?)
Analyzing a procedure that contains a dozen lines is fairly straightforward, but
a program of a million lines would be enough to drive anyone mad. The alternative
is to use IDA. Consider the following example:
.text:00401000

main

proc

.text:00401000
.text:00401000

near

var_64

= byte ptr -—64h

.text:00401000

var_63

byte

ptr

7 CODE XREF:

start+AFYp

-63h

_ IDA revealed two local variables located at the offsets 63 and 64,relative to the

stack frame; that's why they were given the names var_63 and var_64.
64h

.text:00401000

sub

esp,

.text:00401003

mov

0 406900
al, byte

"

348

Part I: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

.text:00401008

push

ebx

.text:00401009

push

ebp

.text:0040100A

push

esi

.text:0040100B

push

edi

.text:0040100C

mov

[esp+74h+var
64],

al

IDA automatically combined the local variable name and its offset in the stack
frame.
.text:00401010

mov

ecx,

18h

.text:00401015

xOr

eax,

eax

.text:00401017

lea

edi,

[esp+74h+var_
63]

IDA failed to recognize the initialization of the first byte of the buffer and
mistook it for a separate variable. Only a human can figure out how many variables
are used here.
.text:0040101B

push

offset

.-text:00401020

repe

stosd

.text:00401022

stosw

.text:00401024

xor

-text:00401026

stosb

ebp,

aEnterPassword

; "Enter

password:"

ebp

. text: 00401027

call

sub
0
401220

.text:0040102C

push

offset

.text:00401031

lea

eCx,

off 0 406070
[esp+7Ch+var_64]

Note that IDA correctly recognized that the var_64 variable was accessed, even
though its offset, 0x7c, differs from 0x64.

Register and Temporary Variables
In an attempt to minimize the number of memory access operations, optimizing
compilers place the most intensively used local variables into general-purpose registers, saving them on the stack only in extreme cases (and, ideally, never).
What kind of difficulties does this create during analysis? First, it introduces
a context dependence into the code. In an instruction such as Mov EAx,
[EBP+var_10], the contents of the var_10 variable are being copied to the rax register. The variable type can be found by searching the function body for every occurrence of var_10, which may indicate the purpose of the variable.
This trick, however, will not work with register variables. Suppose that we

encountered the Mov BAX,

ESI instruction and want to trace all references to the

variable of the ESI register. Searching the function body for the substring "ESI"

gives nothing or, even worse, produces a set of false hits. What can be done?

Step Seven: Identifying the Key Structures of High-Level Languages

349

SS”

One register — in this case, ESI — may be used to store many different variables
temporarily. There are only seven general-purpose registers; EBP is assigned to the
stack frame, and BAX and EDx are used for the returned value of the function.

Therefore, only four registers are available to store local variables. There are even
fewer free registers when programs written in C are executed — one of these four
registers is used as the pointer to the virtual table, and another is the pointer to an
instance of this. Pressing ahead with just two registers is not really possible; there
are dozens of local variables in a typical function. This is why the compiler uses registers as a cache. Cases of each local variable residing in a register are exceptional; variables often are scattered chaotically around the registers, sometimes stored on the
stack, and frequently popped off into a different register (rather than the one in which
the contents were stored).

No contemporary disassembler (including IDA) is capable of tracing the "migration" of register variables; this operation has to be done manually. It is simple, although tiresome, to determine the contents of a particular register at any point in the
program: Just work through the program mentally from startup to the point in question, tracing all the passing operations. It is more difficult to find out how many local
variables are stored in a particular register. When a large number of variables are
mapped on a small number of registers, it becomes impossible to reconstruct the map
unambignously. For example, the programmer declares the a variable, and the compiler places it into the x register. Later, the programmer declares the b variable. If the
a variable is no longer used (as is often the case), the compiler may place the b variable into the x register without worrying about saving the value of a. As a result, one
variable is lost. At first glance, there are no problems; losing one variable is not a disaster. But if a was sufficient, why has the programmer introduced b? If the a and b
variables are of the same type, no problems arise; if they are different, the analysis of
the program becomes extremely complicated.
Let's look at techniques for identifying register variables. Many hacker manuals
assert that register variables differ from other variables in that they never deal with
memory. This is incorrect. Register variables can be stored on the stack temporarily
by the PUSH instruction and restored by the Pop instruction. In some ways, a variable of this sort ceases to be a register variable; nevertheless, it does not become
a stack variable. To avoid defining hundreds of variable classes, let's agree that the

register variable is a variable contained in the general-purpose register that may be
stored on the stack, but always at its top; it can never be stored in the stack frame.
In other words, register variables are never addressed via EBP. If
the variable is addressed
via EBP, it "lives" in the stack frame and is a stack variable. Is this correct? No; If the value

of the b stack variable is assigned to the a register variable, the compiler will generate
code similar to the following: Mov REG, [EBP-xxx]. Accordingly, the assignment of the
value of the register variable to the stack variable will look like this: MoV

[EBP-xxx],

Part |: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

350

REG. Despite reference to the stack frame, the REG variable remains a register variable.
Consider the following code:
Listing 128. Distinguishing Register Variables from Temporary Variables
ov

[ebp-0x4],

ov

esi,

0x666

[ebp-0x4]

ov

[ebp-0x8],

<q

SSal yn Osa a

Oo
.

ub
a
= ov

esi,

esi

[ebp-0x8]

[ebp-Oxc],

esi

This code can be interpreted in two ways: Either there is an ESI register variable
(the source code shown in the left part of Listing 129), or the Est register! is being
used as a temporary variable for passing data (the source code shown in the right
part of Listing 129).
Listing 129. The Source Code When Esz Is a Register Variable (Left)
and a Temporary Variable (Right)
int

var

4=0x66;

int var_4=0x666;

int

var

8=var

register

int

vac

€=0%777

4;

— var8

ESI

=

var

4;

int var_8=ESI;
ESI=0x777-var_8;
int

var_C

=

ESI

Although the algorithms of the listings are identical, the code on the left is substantially more illustrative than the code on the right. The main objective of disassembling is to reconstruct the algorithm of a program, not to reproduce the source
i In the C/C++ languages, the register keyword is intended for compulsory allocation of
variables in registers. However, most compilers ignore the recommendations of programmers and allocate variables where it seems convenient to the compiler. Compiler developers
argue that the compiler knows how to construct the most effective code, so programmers
don't need help it. This reminds me of a passenger who says: "I need to go to the airport,"
and the taxi driver who ignores this instructions and heads to another place.
Programmers should work on a compiler, but we should not to fight it! The compiler's
unwillingness to allocate a variable in the register is understandable, but the compiler should
at least stop the compilation process and send a warning.

Step Seven: Identifying the Key Structures of High-Level Languages

351

code ofaprogram. It does not matter whether zsI represents a register or a temporary variable. The main thing is that everything works smoothly. In general, you
should choose the most understandable interpretation if there are several versions.
Before examining temporary variables in detail, let's summarize our knowledge
of register variables by analyzing the following example:
Listing 130. Identifying Register Variables
main

()

{
int

a=0x666;

int

b=0x777;

Anica

jOvetinlene (MED

eR

cone

kelp OM enMEe

Bl

Seaton

The disassembled code of this example, compiled using Borland C++ 5.x, gives
the following result:
Listing 131. The Disassembled Code for Identifying Register Variables
7 int

-cdecl

main(int

_Mmain

proc

argc,

near

argc

= dword

ptr

8

=

dword

ptr

OCh

envp

=

dword

ptr

10h

that

no

stack

char

**argv;.const.char

; DATA

argv

; Note

const

variable

DATA:00407044vo0

been

recognized
by IDA,

; although

several

were

declared

in

program.

; that

the

compiler

has

allocated

them

push

ebp

mov

ebp,

esp

; The

stack

frame

has

XREF:

is opened.

the

*envp)

It

seems

in registers..

likely

352

Part |: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

push

ebx

push

esi

’

.
,

What

happened

,

.

on

stack,

.
,
.

,

here?

Were

or

was

memory

variables?

Since

no

stack

this

code

likely

saved

ebx,

666h

the

mov

The

register

(in the

"Local

mov

[ebpt+var_4],

value

the

the

0x666

been

can

this

stack

by IDA,

with

Listing

126

section),
line:

variable.

be proven:

directly

to the

Had

into

therefore,

the

the

function

0x666)— the compiler

PUSH 0x666 instruction

int

Compare

a register

passed

%x %@x\n",

the variable.

the

recognized

registers.

following

existence

This did not occur;
1.

the

been

saved
for

666h

EBX is likely

variable's

printf ("tx

has

Stack Variables"

contained

The

registers
allocated

is initialized.

which

Hence,

the

would

—

for example,

have

placed

code.

the value

0x666

is passed via

Thus, the reconstructed source code should contain:

a=0x666

i: eat ery
ie

J

.

an tioAe
ey

.

“ie
lls
Gee
tol
Baeayd

Step Seven: Identifying the Key Structures of High-Level Languages

? Sa DRnienk

Bon,Ap eat)

push

esi

; The

register

; in the
FeO

variable

preceding

eat

push

ebx

+ The

register

; in the
PSs

BO

Wovarlialaia

denoted

is passed

as b

to

the printf

EBX,

code,

denoted

is passed

as

to

a

the

offset

aXXX

pO"Sxce

; The

pointer

to

format-specification

; is passed

to

; that

three

; 3.

printf

function.

(Gawieya Weyer del)

push

all

function.

ALD)

variable

preceding

ESI,

code,

the

the

printf

function.

variables

printf ("$x + 3x =

%x",

Sxt= Sx"
This

are

of the

a,

b, atb)

string
string

indicates

int type.
25

=

call.

_printf

add

esp,

10h

=

mov

—

eax,

esi

:

; The register variable,
_¥

48, copied

-to EAX..

3 4. int -o=b

previously denoted as b,
.

eee

ee

es

ae

at

epee

ree

ci,

353

354 _— Part |: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

; The

value

; is passed
pe

of the
to

variable

the printf

joveubonera(
aa

; The

value

of the

variable

; is passed

to the

printf

(b)

.
in the

EBX

register

(a)

function.

printf (,, Alp lo, Jo=ey)

offset

aXXxX_0

; The pointer

to the

; the printf

function.

; variables

are

ge 4

register

’

ebx

push

ESI

doy Jey)

push

; 4.

in the

function.

DPRINEE (ox

; "8x + $x-=
This

of the int
et

$x"

format-specification

eX)

string

string

indicates

is passed

that

all

three

type.
aD,

a)

Call 25 {prance
add
esp, 10h

:
,

XOL
= @aX, ‘eax
; The zero value is returned into the EAX register.
; return 0

ee

to

3

x

;

5

=

a

%

Step Seven: Identifying the Key Structures of High-Level Languages

; to

understand.

To

stick

; the

c variable

can

be

; has

the

of

removing

benefit

; already
; to
_main

reconstructed

remove

a

superfluous

more

closely

reintroduced.
lines

to

the

Doing

the

rollback

need

not

be

assembler

355

code,

this

(i.e.,
rewritten

variable).

endp

Temporary variables. Here, temporary variables will be defined as variables
embedded into the code of a program by the compiler. Why are they necessary?
Consider the following example: int b=a. If a and b are stack variables, assigning a
value directly to them is impossible because the "memory-memory" addressing
mode is not available in 80x86 microprocessors. Therefore, the operation must be
carried out in two stages: memory to register, followed by register to memory. Actually, the compiler generates the following code:
register
int

Here,

b=tmp;

int

tmp=a;

mov

eax,

mov

[ebptvar
8],

[ebptvar
4]
eax

tmp is a temporary variable created to execute the operation

b=a, then

eliminated as superfluous.
Compilers (especially optimizing ones) tend to allocate temporary variables in registers; they only push temporary variables onto the stack in extreme cases. Mechanisms
for allocating memory and the techniques for reading and writing temporary variables
vary.
Typically, compilers react to an acute lack of registers by saving variables on the
stack. Most often, integer variables are showered on the top of the stack by the Pusu
instruction, then pulled from there by the Pop instruction. It is possible to assert
with confidence that an integer temporary variable is being dealt with if a program's code contains this sort of "push-pop" situation — not, however, saving the
contents of the initialized register in a function's stack argument. (See the "Function
Arguments" section.) In most cases, the allocation of memory for floating-point
variables and the initialization of these variables occur separately. This is because an
instruction that allows the compiler to transfer data from the top of the coprocessor stack to the top of the CPU stack doesn't exist; the operation must be carried
out manually. First, the stack-top pointer (in the EsP register) is "lifted" slightly
(usually by the suB ESP, xxx instruction). Then, the floating-point value is written in the allocated memory (usually, FstP [ESP]). Finally, when the temporary
variable becomes unnecessary, it is deleted from the stack by the ADD ESP, xxx instruction or something similar (such as SUB,

ESP,

-xxx).

356

Part |: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

Advanced compilers (such as Microsoft Visual C++) are capable of allocating variables in the arguments that remain on the top of the stack after the most recently called
function completes execution. This trick applies to cdec1 functions, but not to stdca1l
functions; the latter clear arguments from the stack independently. (See the "Function
Arguments" section for more details.) This type of trick appeared during the analysis of
the mechanism of returning values by functions (in the "Values Returned by Functions"
section).

Temporary variables larger than 8 bytes (strings, arrays, structures, objects)
almost always are allocated on the stack. They are distinguished from other types
by their initialization mechanism: Instead of the traditional mov, one of the cyclic
move instructions, such as MOvSx, is used. If necessary, it is preceded by the REP recurrence prefix (Microsoft Visual C++, Borland C++). Alternatively, several Movsx
instructions can be used consecutively (Watcom C).

The mechanism of allocating memory for temporary variables is almost identical to the mechanism of allocating memory for stack local variables. Nevertheless,
correct identification is not a problem. First, memory is allocated for stack variables
immediately after the stack frame is opened. For temporary variables, memory allocation takes place at any point of the function. Second, temporary variables are
addressed not via the stack-frame pointer, but via the pointer to the stack top.
Table 15. The Basic Mechanisms for Handling Temporary Variables

Eek
Sa ele anes
Reading a variable

eeOe det MOV,

[ESP+xxx]

'for cdecl only.

Different compilers create temporary variables in different instances. However,
it is possible to identify two instances in which the creation of temporary variables
is unavoidable: when performing assignment, addition, or multiplication operations,
and when an argument of a function or a part of an expression is another function.
Let's consider each case in more detail.
Creating temporary variables when moving data or computing expressions.
As previously mentioned, 80x86 microprocessors do not support the direct transfer

Step Seven: Identifying the Key Structures of High-Level Languages

357

of data from memory to memory. Therefore, assigning one variable's value to another variable requires a temporary register variable (if there are no other register
variables).

Computing expressions (especially complex ones) requires temporary variables
to store intermediate results. How many temporary variables are required to compute the following expression?
int

a=0x1l;

Into

int

b=0x2;

= t/ (aly Ob)

>

Let's begin from the parentheses, and rewrite the expression in the following
way:

inttmp

d=1;

tmp _d=tmp

d-a;

and

int

tnpae—

i>

enpre=cempe—b;

then

int tmp _f=tmp_d/tmp_e¢; and, finally, tmp j=1; c=tmp_j/tmp_f. It turns out that
there are four temporary variables. This seems a little excessive; is it possible to
write it in a shorter way?
ime

cM

i;

emo d=temod-a;

/7/)

Cla)

int tmp_e=1; tmp_e=tmp_e-b;
// (1-b);
tmp _d=tmp_d/tmp_e;
Vf (Ia)
/ (1-by
tmp_e=1; tmp_e=tmp_e/tmp
d;

We can manage with two temporary variables. What if the expression were more
complex, employing ten pairs of parentheses, rather than three: How many temporary variables would that require?
There is no need to count: No matter how complex the expression is, two temporary variables are sufficient. If the parentheses are removed, we can manage with
one variable, although excessive computation will be required. (This question will
be considered in more detail in the "Mathematical Operators" section.) Now, let's
see the results of compilation.
Listing 132. The Disassembled Code for Computing Complex Expressions
mov

[ebp+var
4],

1

mov

[ebp+var
8], 2

mov

[ebptvar
C],

; The

local

MOV

eax,

1

; Here,

the

first

; An

variables

; at the

are

initialized.
x

intermediate

; instruction

3

variable
value

always

location

is introduced.

is placed

places

the

of the minuend

into

result

it,

since

the

SUB

of computation

because

of architectural

_‘ Part |: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

358

; peculiarities

of the

80x86

; The minuend

cannot

; therefore,

a temporary

sub

eax,

[ebptvar_4]

7 tEAX

:= 1 — var4

; The

computed

mov

Gyebide

; Yet

another

; because
sub

; The

be a direct

value

variable

value;
must

be

introduced.

(1l-a).

wal

temporary

variable

EAX is already

ecx,

PcCK

microprocessors.

is introduced

occupied.

[ebptvar 8]

ttl

VAS

computed

value

ee
E
a

(1-b)

is stored

in the

ECX register.

cdq

; The double

word

+ a quad word

and placed

ni (The

wits

resides
into

in EAX is converted

idiv machine instruction always
in these registers.)
eas

Re

2 bight z at

E.

3

somp

oe.

into

EDX:EAX.

7; dividend

:
cx

that

a

ae

expects to see the
ded
,

it

:

ae

ited value (1-a) ‘ds’ aivides by
‘i? , and t
—

Son ae |; is placed into tEA

a

,

:

Z

ee +

Step Seven: Identifying the Key Structures of High-Level Languages

359

cdq
;

EDX

is

zeroed.

idiv

eCxX

; The

value

; The

quotient

1 is divided
is placed

mov

febptvar

pC

ele

; Thus,

only

10],

ae Cheer

; registers

by

((1l-a)/(1-b)).

into

EAX.

eax

ae (=D)5)

four

temporary

were

required

variables

and

two

compute

this

expression.

to

general-purpose

Creating temporary variables to store a value returned by a function and the
results of computing expressions. Most high-level languages (including C/C++)
allow functions and expressions to be used as immediate arguments, such as
MYLUNC

(esc

ey

-amytunci

2=—CeNs). Prior to calling myfunc,

the compiler

should

compute the value of the expression a + b. This is straightforward, but there is
a problem: Where should the result of addition be written? Let's see how the compiler solves this.
Listing 133. The Disassembled Code Illustrating How the Complier Stores the
Results of Computing Expressions and Values Returned by Functions
mov

eax,

[ebptvar
C]

; A temporary

; of the

variable,

var_C local

push

eax

; The

tEAX

temporary

; The

value

of

; to

the

the

myfunc

; variable

could

without

myfunc

add

esp,

; The value

be

is

created.

The

value

variable

is copied

into

variable

is

on the

var_C

local

function.

; function

call

tEAX,

stack.

variableis passed

(Theoretically,

passed

using

stored

it.

directly

temporary

to the

the

as

var_C

PUSH

an

argument

local

[ebptvar
4]

variables.)—

4

of the myfunc function

is returned

into the EAX register.

Part |: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

360

; This

be

can

push

eax

; The

results

; are

passed

mov

ecx,

as

a

returned

by

the

to

the

myfunc_2

value

of

; ECX

is

yet

another

why

the

; unclear

previous

the

var_4

function

function.

local

variable

is

variable.

However,

compiler

temporary

the

add

ecx,

[ebptvar
8]

; ECX

:=

HAX

did

not

variable

register

use
is

that

it

the

no

copied
EAX

longer

occupied

into
it

ECx.

is

register.
needed;

has

become

free.

var 4 + var8

eCxX

; The

sum

jis

Passed

call

myfunc

variable.

temporary

; therefore,

push

temporary

febptvar
4]

; The

; The

of

kind

regarded

of

the

to

two

the

local

variables

myfunc 2 function.

_myfunc2

The scope of temporary variables. Temporary variables are, to a certain extent,
local variables. In most cases, their scope is limited to several lines of code; outside
of this context, temporary variables are meaningless. In general, a temporary variable only obscures the code (myfunc (a+b) is much shorter and more intelligible
than int

tmp=a+b;

myfunc

(tmp) ). Therefore, to avoid cluttering the disassem-

bler listing, temporary variables should not be used in comments; it is better to
substitute actual values for them. It is a good idea to denote temporary variables
with a prefix, for example tmp_ (or t, for those who love brevity).

Listing 134. An Example of Good Comment Style
mov

eax,

[ebptvar4]

, Var<8 i= var
7.

add eax,

[ebptvar
8],

push eax
call

MyFunc

OUEAXSS:
=svarw4
; * CEAX += var8

; MyFunc(var_4+var8)

Step Seven: Identifying the Key Structures of High-Level Languages

361

Global Variables
Tackling a program stuffed with global variables is probably the worst task for
hackers. Instead of a tree with a strict hierarchy, the program components are interlaced. To solve one algorithm, the entire listing must be combed out and
searched for cross-references. No disassembler, not even IDA, is capable of recon-

structing cross-references perfectly.
Identifying global variables is much easier than identifying any other construction in high-level languages. Global variables give themselves away immediately
by addressing memory directly. In other words, references to them look like
MOV EAX, [401066], where 0x401066 is just the address of the global variable.
It is more difficult to understand the purpose of this variable and its content at
a certain moment. Unlike local variables, global variables are context dependent.
Each local variable is initialized by its parent function; it is not dependent on the

functions called before it. On the contrary, a global variable can be modified by
anyone — its value is not defined at any point of the program. To work it out, it is
necessary to analyze all the functions that handle it and to reconstruct the order in
which they were called. This question will be considered in more detail further on;
now, let's examine how to reconstruct cross-references.

Reconstructing cross-references. In most cases, IDA copes well with crossreference reconstruction, and manual reconstruction becomes unnecessary. However, even IDA makes mistakes occasionally, and not everyone has this disassembler at hand. Therefore, you should learn to deal with global variables manually.
Tracking references to global variables by searching for their offsets in the
code (data) segment. Addressing global variables directly facilitates the search for
the machine instructions that handle them. Consider the construction MOV EAX,
[0x41B904]. Assembling it gives A1 04 B9 41 00. The offset of a global variable is
written "as is" (while observing the reverse byte order: A higher byte is placed at
a greater address, and a lower one is set at a smaller address).
A simple context search will reveal all references to the global variable of interest. You can find its offset, rewrite it from right to left and... get a load of garbage
along with the useful information. Every number that coincides with the offset
of a global variable is not a pointer to it. In addition, 04-89 41 00 returns the following:

83EC04

sub

esp, 004

B941000000

mov

ecx, 000000041

The mistake is obvious: The value that we have found is not an operand of the
instruction. Moreover, it spans two instructions! Rejecting all occurrences that

Part I: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

362
>

ae

cross instruction boundaries immediately removes a significant part of the garbage.
The problem is how to determine the instruction boundaries; it is impossible to say
anything about the instruction if you only have a part of it.
Consider the following construction: 8D 81 04 B9 41 00 00. Ignoring the
trailing zero,

this sequence

can

be interpreted

as LEA

EAX,

[ECX+0x41B904].

If, however, 0x8D belongs to the "tail" of the previous instruction, the following
instruction will be ADD D, [ECX][EDI]*4, 000000041. There even may be several
instructions here.
The most reliable way to determine the boundaries of machine instructions is
to disassemble with tracing; unfortunately, this operation demands lots of resources, and not every disassembler is capable of tracing the code. Therefore, another method is required.
Machine code can be represented figuratively as typewritten text printed without spaces. An attempt to read from a random position likely will start in the middle of a word, and won't produce anything intelligible. The first several syllables
may form an intelligent word (or even two), but continuous nonsense will appear
further on.
The differences between constants and pointers, or salvaging the remaining
garbage. At last, we have removed all the false hits. The heap of garbage has
diminished appreciably, but artifacts such as PUSH 0x401010 keep turning up.
What is 0x401010 — a constant or an offset? It could be either; it is impossible to
tell until we reach the code that handles it. If 0x401010 is addressed by the handling
code as a value, it is a constant; if it is addressed by reference, it is a pointer. (Here,
it is an offset.)

This problem will be discussed in detail in the "Constants and Offsets" section.
For now, I would like to note — with great relief — that the minimal address for

loading a file in Windows 9x is 0x400000, and there are few constants expressed by
such a large number.

Pe

Note
The minimal address for loading a file in Windows NT is 0x10000. However, for a program
to work successfully under both Windows NT and Windows 9x, loading should start from
an address no lower than 0x400000.

ssf 9«)The trials and tribulations of 16-bit mode. It is not as simple to distinguish a constant from a pointer in 16-bit mode as it is in 32-bit mode. In 16-bit.
mode, one or more segments of 0x10000 bytes are allocated for data. Admissible

Step Seven: Identifying the Key Structures of High-Level Languages

363

values of offsets are confined to a narrow range — 0x0 to 0xFFFF — and most
variables have offsets that are very small and visually indistinguishable from constants.
Another problem is that one segment often cannot accommodate all the data;
therefore, several segments must be initialized. Two segments are tolerable: One is
addressed via the Ds register, the other is addressed via Es, and no difficulties arise
in determining which variable points to which segment. For example, if all
references to the x global variable, located in the base segment at the 0x666 offset,
are of interest, all instructions such as MOV

AX,

ES:

can be rejected at

[0x666]

once. In this case, the base segment is addressed via ps (by default), and this segment refers to ES. However, cee! a may occur in two stages, such as
MOV BX, 0x666/xxx---xxx/MOV AX,ES: [BX]. Having seen MOV BX, 0x666, it will
be impossible to determine a segment, a even to tell whether this is an offset.

Nevertheless, this does not overcomplicate the analysis.
The situation becomes worse if there are a dozen data segments in a program.
(It is conceivable that 640 KB of static memory could be required.) No number of
segment registers will be sufficient for this; they will have to be reassigned many
times. To figure out which segment is being addressed, the value of the segment
register must be determined. The simplest way to do this is to scroll the disassembler screen slightly upward and look for the initialization of the segment register
in question. Bear in mind that initialization often is done by Pop, rather than by
the Mov segREG,

REG

instruction.

Note

that

PUSH

ES/POP

DS

is equivalent

to

MOV DS, ES. Unfortunately, there is no equivalent of the Mov segREG, segREG
instruction in the language of the 80x86 microprocessors. There is no
MOV segREG, CONST instruction either, which is why it must be emulated manually,
or as follows: Mov AX, 0x666/MOV ES, Ax. Another possible method is the following: PUSH 0x666/POP ES.
Thankfully, 16-bit mode almost has become a thing of the past, and its problems have been buried by the sands of time. Programmers and hackers breathed
a sigh of relief after the transition to 32-bit mode.
Addressing global variables indirectly. Often, a claimi
is made that global variables are always addressed directly. However, the programmer may address a variable as desired in the inserts written in the assembler language. The situation is far
from simple. If a global variable is passed by reference to a function (there is no
reason by which a programmer cannot pass a global variable by reference), it will
be addressed indirectly, via a pointer. At this point, an objection may be raised:

Why should a global variable.be passed explicitly to a function? Surely, any function can address a global variable without passing it. This is true, but only if the
function knows about this beforehand. Suppose that the xchg function swaps

Part |: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

364

its arguments, and two global variables urgently need to be swapped. The xchg
function can access all global variables, but it does not know which of them to
change, or whether doing so is necessary. This is why global variables sometimes
must be explicitly passed as arguments to functions. This also means that it is impossible to find all the references to global variables by using a simple context
search. IDA Pro will not find them either; to do so, it would need a full-featured

processor emulator, or at least one capable of emulating its basic instructions —
as can be seen in the following example.
Listing 135. Passing Global Variables Explicitly
#include

int

a;

<stdio.h>

int

Chou dmterea,

// The

b;

// Global

variables

a and

b

ence)

function

that

swaps

the

values

of

the

arguments

{
int c; c=*a; *b=*a; *b=c;
// The arguments are addressed indirectly,
// using a pointer. If the arguments
// of the function are global variables,
// they will be addressed indirectly.

main

()

a=0x666;

b=0x777;

// The

global

variables

are

addressed

xchg(&a,

&b);

// The

global

variables

are

passed

directly.

by reference.

The disassembled code of this example, compiled using Microsoft Visual C++,
will look as follows:
SD

Listing 136. The Disassembled Code for Passing Global Variables Explicitly
EEE

main

proc
push

ebp

mov

ebp,

near
esp

; CODE

XREF:

startt+tAFYp

Step Seven: Identifying the Key Structures of High-Level Languages

7 The

stack

frame

is

mov

dword_ 405428,

7; The dword_405428
+ The

indirect

7 a global

666h
global

variable

is initialized.

addressing

indicates

that

dword_40542C,

; The

dword_40542C

push

offset

dword 40542C

# Note

that

passes

this
to

the

+ by reference).

is

777h

global variable

the

function

is initialized.

offset
as

an

of the

means

that

the

7; Variable indirectly

— via

the

pointer —

it addresses
offset

dword_40542C

argument

This

push

this

variable.

; variable

|

opened.

Mov

-;

(i.e.,

function

it is passed

will

in the

local variables.—

global

address

same

way

——

dword 405428

; The offset of the dword_405428 global variable
3

; is passed
to the function.

="

—-

‘call

Se

365

‘

xchg

ne

=

te re

eg

ee eR

gary leadion ACTS sialecaie'pene

:

oeee

ee

ee
ce

aS i¥HE sbi M7 gene ree 2

aie

the
as

366

Part |: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

; Memory

is allocated

mov

eax,

; The

contents

mov

ecx,

; A global

for the var_4 local

[ebptarg_ 0]
of the

.

arg 0 argument

in contrast

; Only

analysis

is addressed
to common

of the

code

; that a global variable

; The

are

loaded

into

EAX.

Now

you

can

can

happen.

[eax]
variable

; that,

mov

variable.

[ebp+var_4],

*arg 0 value

mov

edx,

; The

contents

indirectly.

opinion,

of the

this

calling

was addressed

function

(and which

see

.

can

reveal

]

one).

ecx

is copied into the var_4 local

variable.

[ebptarg
4]

mov

eax,

; The

contents

of the

arg 4 argument

are

loaded

into

EDX.

are loaded

into

EAX.

[ebptarg0]

of the

arg_0

argument

mov
_ ecx,_ [eax]
4,
; The *arg 0 argument is copied into ECX.

a
ee

~
oa

~

mov

[edx], ecx

=

; The arg 0[0] value is copied into

|

fot,

farg 4].

nha
|

6

2.

—.
:

Step Seven: Identifying the Key Structures of High-Level Languages

367
>

dword

40542C

;

has

IDA

7 “hesfarst!

; the

: The

for

second

(The

7 to

two;

all

; DATA
the

"write,"
two

o stands

a global

to

references

main+37w

initialization

; stands

;

dd0

found

and

main+D?w,

code.

(The

which

refers

are

maint+1C7o

for

"offset,"

XREF:

both

main+Dfw

global

a

main+17to

variables.

reference

w character
to

addressing

and

maint+177o.

which

refers

to

for

writing.)

obtaining

an

offset

variable.)

If there are references with the offset-designating suffix "o" — analogous to the
offset assembler instruction — among the cross-references to global variables,
these should be noted immediately. An offset means that the global variable has
been passed by reference. Passing by reference signifies indirect addressing, which
entails tiresome manual analysis, and no advances tools will be helpful.
Static variables. Static variables are similar to global variables, but they have a

limited scope: They are accessible only from the function in which they were declared. In all other respects, static and global variables are nearly identical: Both are
placed in the data segment, both are addressed directly (except when addressed by
reference), and so on.

There is only one essential difference: Any function may address a global variable, but only one function may address a static one. But what type of global variable is used by one function? This exposes a flaw in the program's source code:
If a variable is used by one function, it does not need to be declared as global.
A memory location addressed directly is a global variable (although there are
exceptions), but not all global variables are addressed directly.

Constants and Offsets
The 80x86 microprocessor family supports three types of operands: immediate,
register, and memory. An operand's type is specified in a special field of the computer instruction, called moa; therefore, it is not difficult to identify operand types.
You likely know what a register looks like: Conventionally, a pointer to the
memory location is enclosed in square brackets, and an immediate operand is written outside them. For example:
MOV

€CX,

eax

; Register

operand

mov

ecx,

0x666

; The

left

operand

; is immediate.

is

register.

The

right

operand

Part I: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

368
»

mov

[0x401020],

eax

; The

operand

left

; operand

is

is

The

pointer.

a

right

register.

In addition, 80x86 microprocessors support two memory-addressing modes:
direct and register indirect. If the operand is immediate, addressing is direct.
If the operand is a pointer stored in a register, the addressing is register indirect.
For example:
mov

ecx,

[0x401020]

; Direct

mov

ecx,

[EAX]

; Register

addressing

indirect

mode

addressing

mode

To initialize the register pointer, microprocessor developers introduced a spe-

cial command, LEA REG, [addr], that computes the value of the addr address expression and writes it into the REG register. For example:
lea

eax,

[0x401020]

; The

value

0x401020

is

written

into

the

EAX

; register.
mov

ecx,

[EAX]

;

Indirect

; at

the

addressing:

offset

The

0x401020

is

double

loaded

word

into

ECX.

The right operand of the LEA instruction always represents a near pointer
(except when LEA is used to sum the constants). Everything would be fine, except
an internal representation of the near pointer is equal to a constant of the same
value. Hence, LEA EAX, [0x401020] is the equivalent of Mov EAX, 0x401020.
For certain reasons, Mov has surpassed LEA in popularity, and has knocked it almost
completely out of use.
The expulsion of LEa has given rise to a fundamental problem of assembling —
the offset problem. It is impossible to distinguish the syntax of constants and offsets
(near pointers). A construction such as MOV EAX, 0x401020 may load zax either
with the constant 0x401020 (an example of the corresponding C code would be
a=0x401020), or with the pointer to the memory location at the offset 0x401020
(an example of the corresponding C code would be a=«x). Obviously, a=0x401020
is different from a=sx. What would happen if the x variable in the newly assembled
program appears at another offset, not at 0x401020? The program would fail,
because the a pointer still points to the memory location 0x401020, which contains
a different variable.
Why may a variable change its offset? There are two principal reasons. First, the
assembler language is ambiguous and allows interpretation. For example, the ADD
EAX, 0x66 construction may be represented by two machine instructions —

83 cO 66 and 05 66 00 00 00 — of3 and 5 bytes. The compiler may choose
either instruction, which may not be the one in the initial program (before it was
disassembled). If the compiler picks the wrong-size instruction, then all other in-

Step Seven: Identifying the Key Structures of High-Level Languages

369

structions, as well as data, will float away. Second, modifying the program — really
changing it, not just substituting gvz for 7z — will inevitably cause the pointers
to float away. The offset instruction may help return the program to a functioning state. If Mov EAX, 0x401020 loads a pointer into BAx, not a constant, then a label such as loc_401020 needs to be created at the offset 0x401020, and Mov EAX,
0x401020 needs to be replaced with Mov EAX, offset loc 401020. Now, the EaAx
pointer is not bound to the fixed offset; rather, it is bound to the label.
What happens if the offset instruction is put before a constant that has been
misidentified as a pointer? The program will fail, or it will work incorrectly. Imagine that the number 0x401020 represents the volume of water in a pool that has an
inlet pipe and an outlet pipe. Replacing the constant with the pointer makes the
volume of the pool equal the offset of the label in the newly assembled program,
and computation becomes impossible.

Types of operands

|

Immediate values

|

Immediate pointers

:

Pointers to data

Pointers to functions i

Fig. 18. Types of operands

MOV ECX, [0X401020]

Direct addressing

MOV EAX, [0X401020]
Register indirect addressing

MOV ECX, [EAX]

MOV ECX, [0X401020]
Fig. 19. Addressing modes

:

370

Part |: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

Thus, it is important to determine every immediate operand's type, and even
more important to determine it correctly. One mistake can kill a program's operability, and a typical program contains thousands or tens of thousands of operands.
Two questions arise: How are operand types determined? Is it possible to determine them automatically, or at least semiautomatically?
Determining the type of an immediate operand. An immediate operand
of the LEA instruction is a pointer. (However, to mislead hackers, some forms of

protection use LEA to load a constant.)
Immediate operands of the mov and PusH instructions may be either constants
or pointers. To determine the type of an immediate operand, it is necessary to analyze how its value is used in the program. If it is used for addressing memory operands, it is a pointer; otherwise, it is a constant.

Suppose that the Mov EAX, 0x401020 instruction turns up in the code of
a program (Fig. 19). What is it — a constant or a pointer? The answer to this question is given by the Mov Ecx, [EAx] line, which indicates that the value 0x401020
is used to address the memory indirectly. Hence, the immediate operand can only
be a pointer.
There are two types of pointers: pointers to data and pointers to a function.
Pointers to data are used to extract values from memory locations. They occur in
arithmetic and move instructions (such as MOV, ADD, SUB). Pointers to functions are

used in indirect call instructions (cALL) and, less often, in indirect jump instructions (JMP).

Consider the following example:
Listing 137. An Example of Constants and Pointers
main ()

{
static

int

int

*b =

int

c=b[0];

a=0x777;

&a;

Disassembling the compiled code of this example gives the Tievine
eee
Listing 138. The Disassembled Code That Illustrates Constants and Pointers
main

proc

near

var 8

= dword ptr -8

Step Seven: Identifying the Key Structures of High-Level Languages

var 4

= dword ptr -4
push

ebp

mov

ebp,

esp

sub

esp,

8

+ The

stack

frame

mov

i

Das

oe

oe
; =

opened.

[ebptvar
4], 410000h

; The value

0x410000

it

is not

7 whether

it

is a constant

mov

eax,

7 The

contents

+ are

loaded

into

mov

ecx,

[eax]

LO

is loaded
possible

into

to

or

the

var_4 local

variable.

say

a pointer.

[ebptvar4]

ECX is loaded

of the
the

var4 local

not

of the memory

This ‘means

a ‘Therefore, ache: var_4- local
; is a pointer,

va

ere eee

with the contents

a pointer,

variable

EAX register.

the EAX pointer.

; is also

phe
a))

is

7 As_yet,

i

~~

371

variable

and the immediate
a constant.

location

pointed

that EAX is a pointer.
from which

operand

To preserve

it was loaded

0x410000

the program's

; operability,

the loc_410000 label must be createdat the offset

=

a 0x410000.

label will convert

$425

——

The

the memory

into a double word. In es

a

—o

eee

at this

se
=

Part I: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

372

The following example calls a procedure indirectly:
Listing 139. An Indirect Call of a Procedure
Lune (ante a,

ane

b)

{
return

inc

ath;

(zzz),

// The

(nite,

function

is

eit.)

=

stun

called

indirectly

using

the

zzz

pointer.

zzz (Ox666, 0x777) ;

The disassembled code of the compiled example looks as follows:
Listing 140. The Disassembled Code That Illustrates Indirect Procedure Calls
.text:0040100B

main

proe

near

+ CODE

var 4

dword

ptr -4

XREF:

start+AFYp

.text:0040100B

.text:0040100B
.text:0040100B
. text:0040100B

push

ebp

.text:0040100C

Mov

ebp,

esp

. text:0040100C

; The

stack

frame

' push

eCx

is

opened.

.text:0040100C

.text:0040100E
. text: 0040100E

; Memory

is allocated

.text:0040100E
.text:0040100E

; the

.text:0040100F

mov

.text:0040100F

; The

value

0x401000

.text:0040100F

; the

local

variable.

.text:0040100F

; It

is not

yet possible

.text:0040100F
.text:0040100F

; whether

- text: 00401016

push

var_4

local

for

variable.

[ebpt+var_4],

401000h

is assigned
to say

it is a constant

77h

to

or

an offset.

Step Seven: Identifying the Key Structures of High-Level Languages

LGXES

, The

value

~Eextcis

pols

SLeeawconstant:,

exes

; This

pees

7 before

the

aCexes

push

666h

ECXE?

; The

immediate

~cLext:

7 onto

the

0x777

cannot

be

is

placed
or

onto

the

stack.

a pointer?

determined

called

function

is

analyzed.

oteXES

value

0x666

is placed

stack.

eect =
eexs

call

-Cext:

; The

SLXGs

; Hence,

- CexXt:

; Therefore,

SES MEE 00401020
ECs

[ebptvar
4]

function

; assigned

00401020

7 In

is

called

indirectly.

the var4 variable
the

immediate

it,

0x401000,

to

addi bi0ne

0x401000

value

is

also

a pointer.

is

the

address

function

is

located.

[ebpt+var
4],

401000h

TEC KE. 00401020

; where

the

HES AES 00401020

; Let's

name

~text: 00401020

; and

replace

see's 00401020

+ mov

[ebptvar_
4], offset

«text: 00401020

; Now,

the

mEexts 00401020

7 without

called

is a pointer.

it MyFunc,
mov

MyFunc.

program

can

be modified

any

of

collapse.

fear

with

~text: 00401020
EEE EE 00401023

add

“esp,

8

mieeer 00401026

Mov

esp,

ebp

Riser 00401028

pop

ebp

- text: 00401028

; The

SesheS 00401023

stack

frame

is

closed.

.-text: 00401028

retn

PEGIGE: 00401029
pier Ges 00401029

main

.text: 00401000

MyFunc

text: 00401000

; Here

is

text: 00401000

; Let's

examine

aCeXt:s 00401000

; immediate

endp

proc

the

near

indirectly

called

it to determine

values

passed

to

CERT? 00401000

seexer 00401000

arg0
arg4

seKts 00401000

; Here

texts 00401000

etext: 00401000

are

the

dword

ptr

8

dword

ptr

OCh

arguments.

it.

MyFunc

function.

type of the

373

374

Part I: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

. text: 00401000

push

.text:00401001

mov

.text:00401001

; The

ebp
ebp,

esp

stack

frame

is

opened.

.text:00401001
.text:00401003

mov

. text: 00401003

; The value

eax,

[ebptarg
0]

of the

arg_0 argument

is

loaded

into

is added

to

EAX.

.text:00401003
.text:00401006

add

. text: 00401006

; The value

eax,

.text:00401006

; EAX

.text:00401006

; at

.text:00401006

; a pointer;

[ebptarg
4]

of the

(arg 0).
least

one

arg 0 argument

This

operation

of

two

the

indicates

arguments

adding

two

pointers

stack

frame

is

closed.

the

two

is

is

that
not

senseless.

. text: 00401006
.text:00401009

pop

.text:00401009

; The

ebp

.text:00401009
.text:0040100A

retn

.text:0040100A

; The

sum

-text:0040100A

; is

returned

.text:0040100A

7 values

.-text:0040100A

# nor

-text:0040100A

; memory,

of

into

EAX.

The

and

0x777

were

used

neither

function

for

addressing

0x666

in the

arguments

calling

which

means

that

immediate

they

are

here

constants.

-text:0040100A
-text:0040100A

MyFunc

endp

.text:0040100A

Complex cases of addressing, or arithmetic operations over pointers. C/C++
and some other programming languages allow arithmetic operations over pointers
that complicate the identification of the direct operand type. If such operations on
pointers were forbidden, the occurrence of any arithmetic instruction that handles

an immediate operand would indicate a constant-type operand.
Fortunately, even in languages that allow arithmetic operations over pointers,
only a limited number of such operations are carried out. For example, it makes no
sense to add two pointers — and even less to multiply or divide them. Subtraction
is another matter. The compiler allocates functions in memory in the order
they were declared in the program; therefore, it is possible to calculate the size of
a function by subtracting the pointer to the function from the pointer to the next

Step Seven: Identifying the Key Structures of High-Level Languages

375
—

be

function (Fig. 20). Such a trick sometimes is used in packers (unpackers) of executable files and protection with self-modifying code, but it is rarely used in application programs.
Pointer to the function F1()

Length
of
function
the
Pointer to the function F2()

Fig. 20. Subtracting pointers to calculate the size of a function
(a data structure)

A pointer also may be combined with a constant. These combinations are so
popular that 80x86 microprocessors have a special addressing mode for the purpose.
Suppose that we have a pointer to an array and the index of a certain element of the
array. To obtain the value of the element, the index, multiplied by the size of the element, must be added to the pointer. Subtraction of a constant from the pointer is

used rarely; it is required by a smaller scope of calculations, it often results in serious
problems. The following technique is popular among beginners: To get an array
whose index begins with one, they declare a standard array, obtain a pointer to it, and

decrease the pointer by one. This appears to be an elegant solution. Nevertheless,
consider what happens if the pointer to the array is equal to zero. In this situation,
"the snake will bite itself by the tail," and the index will become a large positive number. Generally, under Windows NT/9x, an array cannot be allocated at an offset of
zero. However, it is unwise to get used to the tricks that work on one platform and
not on others.

Part I: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

376

"Normal" programming languages forbid the mixing of different types. Such
mixing can result in a mishmash and a fundamental problem of disassembling —
determining types in combined expressions. Consider the following example:
mov

eax,

Ox...

mov

ebx,

Ox..

add

eax,

ebx

mov

ecx,

[eax]

It seems to be a two-headed camel! The sum of two immediate values is used
for indirect addressing. It is logical to assume that both values cannot be pointers.
One of the immediate values must be a pointer to an array (a data structure or an
object); the other one must be an index to this array. To preserve the program's
operability, the pointer must be replaced with the offset to the label, and the index
must be left unchanged because it is of a constant type.
How can the pointer be distinguished from the index? Unfortunately, there is
no universal answer; it is impossible in the context of the above example.
Instead, consider the following example:
Listing 141. Determining Types in Combined Expressions
MyHunen(Ghiaticusar,

mite)

{

afij="\n";
a lit? ]=0;

main()

Static

char

butiil="Hell
le, sSaulor ks

MyFunc (&buff£[0],

}
aE

AES

ILE

5);

SAS SEERA SOE STIS Sah AES Oe SA

Be PE

tsREE

The disassembled code of this example, compiled using Microsoft Visual C++,

gives the following:

Listing 142. The Disassembled Code for Determining Types in Combined
Expressions Compiled Using Visual C++
enn

nnn

nnnnn

nn

main

rr

proc

push

ebp

mov

ebp,

near

esp

SSS

7; CODE

XREP:

start+AFVp

Step Seven: Identifying the Key Structures of High-Level Languages

; The

stack

push

5

; The

immediate

push

405030h

; The

immediate

call

MyFunc

add

esp,

; The

main

frame

is opened.

value

0x5

value

0x405030is passed

ebp

7 The

stack

_retn

is passed

frame

|

is

0x5)

function

a7

arg_0
arg 4

S8

=

pe

cu

proc near
_

<<,
push

is

called.

closed.

beth
gs

;

to MyFunc.

.

endp

MyFunc

to MyFunc.

8

MyFunc(0x405030,

pop

377

~—s/

aes
eee

=

Fs

pe

?:«CODE -XREF: maintaAtp

=dword ptr
8 ©
= adword ptr, .0Ch

ebp

-

ai

Ika

s a

Crowes

Salhebe Das ; eee.
Pe stk ees
=te cer
ye ~The-stack-fremevis-opened>.

é

Se

PRESS

Saas

m

3

pate aeyao

Ea

ete

ASr

;

eae

pei

378

Part I: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

to understand

the

the

want

programmer

Assume

™

~

=e

that

sense
to

the value

of the

program

achieve

by adding

0x5

Not

quite;

if this

The

first

64 KB of the

are

code:

is a pointer.

is a pointer,

then

address

What

Is this
where

space

did

pointers?

logical?

does

of Windows

it point?
NT

reserved

for

"catching"

uninitialized

and

null

pointers.

It is clear

that

a pointer

cannot

equal

to

five

in any

unless

programmer

cunning

trick.

the

And

if 0x401000

and

legal

has

used

is a pointer?

offset.

But

what

is

be

some

It looks
coming

00401000 db 'Hello,Sailor!',0
— a pointer

(value

0x401000)

and

the

(value

0x5)

are

passed

the

pointer,

index

the memory

mov

ecx,

.
,

The value

°
,

(a pointer,

to

location

thus

to the

index

to the
and

a fair

up now?

.

Now everything matches

the

like

case,

"Hello,

of a character

function;
has

the

Sailor!" string
of this

function

—

string

has

added

written

the

\n character

into

is placed

into

ECX

=

as was established previously.)

|

obtained.

[ebptarg
0]
of the

arg 0 argument

as was

established

previously).
=

add
.
if

The

ecx,

[ebptarg
4]

arg_0

and arg 4 arguments

(The arg 4 argument

mov

are

is an index,

byte ptr [ecxtl], 0.

=

added.

<i

.

=

Step Seven: Identifying the Key Structures of High-Level Languages

379
>

all

Now let's compile the same example in Borland C++ 5.0, and see the difference
compared to the code obtained from Microsoft Visual C++. To save space, the

code of only one function, MyFunc, is presented; the main function is almost identical to the one in the previous listing.
Listing 143. The Disassembled Code for Determining Types in Combined
Expressions Compiled Using Borland C++ 5.0

MyFunc

proc

push

ebp

; The

empty

mov

byte

near

stack
ptr

; Borland

C++

; right

the

in

; CODE

frame

address

constant,

and

; the

previous

listing,

ptr

mov

ebp,

esp

pop

ebp

; The

stack

frame

no

local

variables.

the

pointer

and

the

Which

register

stores

summed

stores

this

[eaxtedx+1],

is

there

expression!

which

_main+Dtp

are

OAh

immediately

; the

byte

opened;

[eaxtedx],

has

mov

is

XREF:

the

needs

an

pointer?

analysis

As

of

constant

in

their

values.

0

closed.

Fee

MyFunc

endp

The order of indexes and pointers. A little secret: When summing an index
with a constant, most compilers put a pointer in the first position and a constant in
the second, regardless of their order in the program. In other words, the expressions a[i], (ati) [0], * (ati), and * (ita) are compiled into the same code. Even if
(0) [ita] is used, the compiler will put a in the first place. Why? The answer is ridiculously simple: The addition of a pointer to a constant gives a pointer. Therefore, the result of computation is always written into a pointer-type variable.
Let's return to the previous listing and apply this new rule in the analysis.
Listing 144. The Result of Adding the Constant to the Pointer Is Written into
the Pointer-Type Variable
mov
eax,
; The value

[ebptarg0]
of the arg0 argument

:
is loaded

i
into EAx.

380

Part I: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

;
add

eax,

the

contains

arg 0 argument

(The

[ebptarg
4]

; The

value

of

arg 4 argument

(containing

; the

value

0x5)

is

added

This

; indicates

that

one

argument

; while

the

other

is

either

byte

ptr

[eax],

OAh

mov

0x405030.)

value

immediate

; The

sum

; the

memory

of

the

immediate
But

; a pointer

because

; and

is likely

var_4

which
it

EAX.
is

a constant,

address

used

to

is

either

EAX

index

a pointer.

it

is most

is positioned

an

or

is

hence
one?

operation

a constant

values

indirectly,

; a pointer.

to

because

a constant

likely

in the

to

first

it comes

or

be
place,

second.

Using LEA to sum constants. The LEA instruction is widely used by compilers
not only to initialize indexes, but also to sum constants. Because the internal representation of constants and indexes is identical, the result of adding two indexes
is the same

as the sum

of the constants

that match

them

(i.e., LEA

EBX,

[EBX+0x666] == ADD EBX, 0x666). However, the functionality of LEA considerably outperforms app. Consider LEA ESI, [EAX*4+EBP-0x20]. Try to feed the same
to the ADD instruction.
After you encounter the LEA instruction in the code of a program, do not hurry to
stick the tag "pointer" on it; the instruction may be a constant. If the "suspect" is never
used to address expressions indirectly, it is not a pointer; rather, it is a true constant.

Identifying the constants and pointers "visually." Here are some hints that
may help you distinguish pointers from constants:
OF In 32-bit Windows programs, pointers can accept a limited range of values.
The region of address space accessible to processors begins with the offset
0x1.00.00 and stretches to the offset 0x80.00.00.00; in Windows 9x/ME, the
accessible space is even smaller — from 0x40.00.00 to 0x80.00.00.00. Therefore, all immediate values smaller than 0x1.00.00 and larger than 0x80.00.00
represent constants, rather than pointers. There is one exception: the number 0, which designates the null pointer’.
i Protective mechanisms directly address the code of the operating system located above the
0x80.00.00 address.

Step Seven: Identifying Key Structures of High-Level Languages

©

©

381

If an immediate value looks like an index, check where it points. If a function
prolog or a meaningful text string is located at this offset, it is likely that this is
a pointer, although this may be coincidence only.
Look at the table of relocatable elements. (See "Step Four: Getting Acquainted
with the Debugger.") If the address of the "suspected" immediate value is present
in the table, it is a pointer. However, most executable files are not relocatable.
Such an approach can be used only to examine DLLs, since these are relocatable
by definition.

Incidentally, the IDA Pro disassembler uses all three methods just described to
identify the pointers automatically.

Literals and Strings
At first glance, identifying strings would seem to present few difficulties: If the
object referred to by a pointer (see "Constants and Offsets") looks like a string,
it certainly is a string. Moreover, in most cases, strings are revealed and identified
simply by looking through the dump of a program (if it is not encrypted; encryption is a theme for a separate discussion). This is all true, but there are some

complications.
The first task is automatic detection of strings in the program — megabyte-size
dumps cannot be examined manually. There is a set of algorithms for identifying
strings. The simplest, although not the most reliable, is based on the following two
ideas:

O

The string consists of a limited set of characters. As a rough approximation, the
characters are digits and letters of the alphabet (including blanks), punctuation
marks, and control characters, such as tabulation or carriage-return characters.

O

The string should consist of at least several characters.

Let's agree that if the minimal length of the string is N bytes, it is enough to find
all sequences of N or more valid string characters. If N is small (about 3 or 4 bytes,
for example), the search will generate plenty of false hits. If N is large (about 6 or
8 bytes, for example), the number of false hits will be close to zero and can be
ignored, but all short strings (such as "OK", "YES", or "NO") will not be recognized.

In addition to digits and letters, strings may contain pseudo-graphic elements (an
especially frequent feature in console applications), faces, arrows, marks — almost
everything that the ASCII table contains. Is there, therefore, any difference between

382

Part |: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

a string and a random sequence of bytes? Frequency analysis is useless here;
for normal work, it needs at least 100 bytes of text, not strings of just two
or three characters. The problem can be approached from the other side as well:
If a string is present in a program, there must be a reference to it. It is possible to
search among immediate values for the pointer to the recognized string. If it is
found, then the chances that it is a string, and not just a random sequence of bytes,
increase sharply.
However, it is not quite that easy. Consider the following example:
Listing 145. A Text String within

a Program

BEGIN

WriteLn('Hello,

Sailor!"');

END

Compile this example using any suitable Pascal compiler (Delphi or Free Pascal, for example). After loading the compiled file into the disassembler, walk
through the data segment. Soon, the following will appear:
Listing 146. The Contents of the Data Segment of the Compiled Example
.data:00404040

db OEh

;

.data:00404041

unk 404040

db

48h

; H

.data:00404042

db

65h;

e

.data: 00404043

oloy (alata) fe al

.data:00404044

elo) (lay

fe eh

.data:00404045

db

6Fh

; 0

.data:00404046

GD=2Chn

pay
;

.data:00404047

db

.data:00404048

db osha

-data:00404049

do

-data:0040404A

oleh tShclia\, ofa

.data:0040404B

ab: 6Ch

yo 1

-data:0040404C

db

6Fh

; o

.data:0040404D

Sl

MAGNA

ha}

.data:0040404E

db. Zing

3

.data:0040404F

Oign

-data:00404050

word 404050

20h
6lh

s
; a

Usa

dw 1332h

a

Step Seven: Identifying Key Structures of High-Level Languages

383
a

ll

This is the sought string, and there is no doubt that it is a string. Now, let's try
to work out how it was referred to. In IDA Pro, this is done by using the
<ALT>+<I> key combination and entering the offset of the beginning of the string —
0x404041 — into the search field.
"Search Failed?" How can that be? What is passed to the writen function in

that case? Has IDA become faulty? Looking through the disassembled code also
fails to return a result.
It fails because in Pascal, there is a byte at the beginning of strings that contains
the length of the string. The value oxk (14 in the decimal system) is contained in the
dump at the offset 0x404040. And how many characters are there in the string
"Hello, Sailor!"? Fourteen. Pressing the <ALT>+<I> combination again and
searching for the immediate operand equal to 0x404040 returns the following:
Listing 147. The Result of Searching for the Immediate Operand
. text: 00401033

push

404040h

- text: 00401038

push

[ebptvar
4]

.text:0040103B

push

0

.text:0040103D

call

FPC_ WRITE

.text:00401042

push

[ebpt+var
4]

TEXT SHORTSTR

.text:00401045

call

FPC_WRITELN
END

.text:0040104A

push

offset

.text:0040104F

call

FPC_IOCHECK

FPe (Op Exar

.text:00401054

Cali

.text:00401059

leave

.text:0040105A

retn

loc

40102A

Identifying a string appears to be insufficient; in ee at least its boundaries
must be determined.
The following types of strings are most ee C strings, ending in zero;
DOS strings, ending in $; and Pascal strings, beginning with a one-, two-, or four-byte
field that contains the string length. Let's consider each of these types in more detail.
at the end), C strings are
C strings. Also called ASCIIZ strings (Z means Zero
widely used in operating systems of the Windows and Unix families. The character
"\o" (not to be confused with."0") has a special task, and is interpreted in a special
way — as a string terminator. The length of ASCIIZ strings is limited only by the
size of the address space allocated for the process, or by the size of the segment.

384

Part |: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

Accordingly, the maximum size of an ASCIIZ string is only a little less than 2 GB in
Windows

NT/9x, and it is about 64K in Windows

3.1 and MS-DOS.

The ASCIIZ

string is only 1 byte longer than the initial ASCII string. Despite these advantages,
ASCIIZ strings have certain drawbacks. First, an ASCIIZ string cannot contain zero
bytes; therefore, it is not suitable for processing binary data. Second, performing
copying, comparison, and concatenation over C strings incurs significant overhead.
Working with single bytes is not the best variant for modern processors; it is better
for them to deal with double words. Unfortunately, the length of ASCIIZ strings is
unknown beforehand; it must be computed "on the fly," checking each byte to see
whether or not it is a string terminator. However, certain compilers use a trick:
They terminate the string with seven zeros, making it possible to work with double
words, thus increasing the speed noticeably. Initially, it seems strange to add seven
trailing zeros rather than four, as a double word contains 4 bytes. However, if the

last significant character of the string falls on the first byte of the double word, its
end will be taken up with three 0 bytes, but the double word will not equal zero any
more because of the intervention of the first character. Therefore, the following

double word should be given four more 0 bytes, in which case it certainly will equal
zero. However, seven auxiliary bytes for each string is too much.

DOS strings. In MS-DOS, the function that outputs lines reads the "$" character as the end-of-line character, which is why programmers call them DOS strings.
The term is not absolutely correct — all other MS-DOS functions work exclusively
with ASCIIZ strings. This strange terminator character was chosen when there was
no graphic interface in sight, and console terminal was considered a rather

advanced system for interaction with the user. <Enter> could not be used to end
the line, since it was sometimes necessary to enter several lines into the program at
once. Combinations like <Ctrl>+<Z> or <Alt>+<000> were also unsuitable since

many keyboards at that time did not contain the <Ctrl> and <Alt> keys.
Computers were mainly used to solve engineering tasks, not accounting ones, and
the dollar sign was the least-used character. Therefore, it was used to signal that the

user had finished entering the line — in other words, as a string terminator.
(Yes, the string terminator was entered by the user; it was not added by the program, as is the case with ASCIIZ strings). Now, DOS strings are encountered very
rarely.
Pascal strings. Pascal strings have no terminator character; instead, they are
preceded by a special field containing the string length. The advantages of this approach are the possibility of storing any characters in the string (including 0 bytes),

Step Seven: Identifying Key Structures of High-Level Languages

385
i

ll

and the high speed of processing the string variables. Instead of constantly checking
each byte to find a terminator, memory is addressed only once — when the string
length is read. If the string length is known, then it is possible to work with double
words that are the native data type for 32-bit processors, not with single bytes. The
only question is how many bytes to allocate for the size field. Allocating only 1 byte
is economical, but the maximum length of the string will be limited to 255 characters, an insufficient amount in many cases. This type of string is used by practically
all Pascal compilers (Borland Turbo Pascal and Free Pascal, for example); there-

fore, such strings are called Pascal strings, or, more exactly, short Pascal strings.
Delphi strings. Realizing the absurdity of restricting the length of Pascal strings
to 255 characters, the Delphi developers expanded the size field to 2 bytes, thus increasing the greatest possible length to 65,535 characters. Although such strings are
supported by other compilers (Free Pascal, for example), they are traditionally
called Delphi strings or two-byte Pascal strings.
The restriction to more than 60K can hardly be called a restriction. Most strings
are much shorter, and the heap (dynamic memory), as well as a number of specialized functions, can be used to process large data files (text files, for example). The

overhead (two auxiliary bytes for each string variable) is not substantial enough to
be taken into account. Therefore, Delphi strings, which combine the best features
of C and Pascal strings (practically unlimited length and high processing speed, respectively), seem to be the most convenient and practical type.

Wide Pascal strings. Wide Pascal strings have as many as 4 bytes for the size
field, thus "limiting" the length to 4,294,967,295 characters, or 4 GB, even more

than the amount of memory that Windows NT/9x allocates for "personal use" by
an application process. However, this luxury comes at a high price, as each string
has four extra bytes, three of which will remain empty in most cases. The overhead
incurred by using Wide Pascal strings becomes rather substantial; therefore, this
type is rarely used.
Combined types. Certain compilers use a eprabined C-Pascal type. On one
hand, the combined C-Pascal type allows you to process strings at a high speed and
store any characters in such strings. On the other hand, it provides compatibility
with a huge quantity of C libraries that work with ASCIIZ strings. Each combined
string is forcefully terminated with zero, but this zero does not appear in the string.
Regular libraries (operators) of the language work with it, as with a Pascal string.
When calling functions of C libraries, the compiler passes a pointer to the first
- character of the string, not to its true beginning.

386

Part I: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

End-of-line character

Heft [efo].] [sfa} i [efolR] ! jo)
1) C string
End-of-line character

HyeTe{ejoy.
[
[sfali fefojR|']s.
2) DOS string
1 byte

String length

3) Pascal string
2 bytes
String
length

[14|09)
4) Delphi string
4 bytes
String length

*4JoojoofoofH
PELL IL
JO}. | [S{A} tft folR]t |
5) Wide Pascal string

Fig. 21. The main types of strings

Determining string types. It is rather difficult to determine the type of a string
by its appearance. The presence of zero terminators at the end of a string is not
a sufficient reason to label it an ASCIIZ string: Pascal compilers often add one or
several zeroes to the end of a string to align data on boundaries that are multiples
of power-of-2 values.
The string type can be determined roughly by the type of compiler (C or Pascal), and precisely by the processing algorithm (i.e., by an analysis ofthe pile that
handles it). Consider the following example. ~

Step Seven: Identifying Key Structures of High-Level Languages

387

Listing 148. Identifying Strings
VAR

SOS

ee oeernG:

BEGIN

sO)

s="HelWoyeSarlork

sl

:="Hello,

IF

sO=sl

World!';

THEN

WriteLN('OK')

ELSE

Writeln('Woozl');

END.

After compiling this using Free Pascal, look in the data segment, where the following line can be found:
.-data:00404050

aHelloWorld

db

ODh, 'Hello,

World!',0O

; DATA

XREF:

main+2Bto

Isn't it reminiscent of an ASCIIZ string? Even if the compiler has yet to be identified, no one would think that oxp is the length field rather than the carriagereturn character. To test the hypothesis concerning type, proceed according to the
cross-reference found by IDA Pro, or find the immediate operand 0x404050 (the
offset of the string) in the disassembled code manually.
push

offset

Sl

push

offset

aHelloWorld

; A pointer
; to

; to
push

OFFh

the

7"\rHello,
the

; This
FeO

is

is passed

string

destination.

World!"
string
the

A pointer

is passed

source.

maximum

length

Pe nGes mists

call FPC_SHORTSTR_COPY

The pointer to the string was passed to the FPC_SHORTSTR_COPY function. From
the documentation supplied with Free Pascal, it is clear that this function works
with short Pascal strings. Therefore, the 0xp byte is not a carriage-return character,
but the string length. How would it be possible to discover this without the Free
Pascal documentation? It is hardly possible to get documentation for every compiler. Incidentally, the regular delivery of IDA Pro, including version 4.17, does not

contain the signatures of FPP libraries, which have to be created manually.
When the string function, is unidentified or does not have a description, the
only way out is to investigate the code to find its operation algorithm. This is
shown in the following example.

Part I: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

388

ae

Listing 149. The Code of the rpc_sHORTSTR_copy Function
errr
re
ee

proc near

; CODE XREF:

arg_0

= dword

ptr

; Maximum

length

arg 4

= dword ptr OCh

: A source

string

arg 8

= dword

; A destination

push

ptr

8
10h

ebp,

esp

; The

stack

frame

push

eax

push

ecx

are

string

saved.
/

LODS,

flag

is reset

(i.e.,

STOS,
and MOVS instructions

; the register
edi,

are

forced

eS

ive81

3 The value of the arg.8 argument
i

increment

£ ~

is loaded into the EDIihog oo

; (the offset of the destination buffer).
veins

to

pointer).
~ A

2.

string

Bi

; The direction

_ mov

of the

is opened.

lel
; the

———

sub401018+21Tp

ebp

mov

; Registers

;
Sores,

eee

FPC_SHORTSTR_COPY

tees

Lets:

wHici ies

Step Seven: Identifying Key Structures of High-Level Languages

cmp

eax,

e€CxX

7 The

first

byte

of the

string

is compared

7 length.

It

is

already

clear

that

; string

is the

length.

; of

arg 0 argument

the

However,

jbe

short

loc 401168

; if

(ESI[0]

<= arg_0)

Mov

eax,

; The

ECX value

the

let's

was

unclear,

goto

loc 401168

with

first

pretend

and

the

maximum

character
the

continue

purpose
the

analysis.

to EAX.
+

loc_401168:

; CODE XREF: sub401150+1473

stosb
; The

first

byte

of the

; destination buffer,
q

.

;

:

cmp

|

eax,

7

source

string

is writtén

and EDI is incremented

into

by one.

eet

———

; The string length is compared with the 0x7 constant.

41
:

short loc 401183

; Is the string

length

less

than 7 bytes?

:

; Then it is being copied byte
by byte!
A

ae

7

i>

ARS

aA

BSS

3

pee

string

of the

eCxX
is copied

389

ee

the

390

Part |: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

repe

movsb
are

; ECX bytes

destination

the

; into

mov

eCcx,

; Now,

ECX

source

string

buffer.

In this

case,

value

of the

the

from

copied

the

is decremented

and

eax,

3

; The

three

least-significant

; The

others

are

shr

6ex;

22

the

cyclic

first

byte

of

the

string,

by one.
==

; ECX

is divided

repe

movsd

bits

are

left

in EAX.

reset.

shift

instruction,

by four

(2 to the

copied

power

is

4).

bytes

+; It becomes

clear that ECX contains the string length.

the value

are

second

; ECX double

; Since

of the

first

from ESI to EDI.

E

byte of the string

yy

is loaded

_; into ECX, it is possible to state confidently
7 thatthe: first byte nt utherstning just.)

a) sar

4

7

; the byte, not the word) contains the length of this string.
; Therefore,
%

i

¢

Axe Ae
5

a

*

.

eax
contains

; which

; Using

.

is copied.

1 byte

it is a short Pascal string.
=

EC ae SAS

és

clan

Se

‘.

Fea

=

eel

OPO.

+o

—

5

ISIN

&.

YE

4

Step Seven: Identifying Key Structures of High-Level Languages

pop

eax

; The

registers

are

391

restored.

leave

;

The

retn

stack

frame

is

closed.

OCh

FPC_SHORTSTR_COPY

endp

The next example will be helpful in the identification of C strings.
Listing 150. Identifying C Strings
#include

<stdio.h>

#include

<string.h>

main()

{
char

sO[J="Hello,

World!";

char

sl[]="Hello,

Sailor!";

if

(strcomp(&s0[0],

&s1[0]))

printf ("Woozl\n");

else

printf ("OK\n") ;

Compile this example using any suitable C compiler, such as Borland C++ 5.0. Microsoft C++ does not fit in the case. Then, look for the strings in the data segment.
It should not take long to find them.
DATA: 00407074

aHelloWorld

db:

'Helllo,.

World!.",0.

.;. DATA

XREF:

main+16to

DATA:00407082

aHelloSailor

db

‘Hello,

Sailor!',O

; DATA

XREF:

main+22To

DATA:00407091 aWoozl

§ db 'Woozl',OAh,O

; DATA XREF: maint4Ffo

DATA:00407098 aOk

db 'OK', 0Ah, 0

; DATA XREF: _maint+5Cto

Note that the strings follow one another, each ends in a "0" character,
and the value of the first byte of the string does not match its length. These are
indubitably ASCIIZ strings. However, analyzing the code that handles them
will not hurt.

392

— Part I: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

LL

Listing 151. An Analysis of the Code That Handles ASCIIZ Strings
_main

proc

near

; DATA XREF:

var_ 20

byte

ptr

-20h

var_10

byte

ptr

-10h

push

ebp

mov

ebp,

DATA:00407044vo

e

esp

; The stack frame is opened.
add

esp,

OFFFFFFEOh

; Space

is allocated

for

local

variables.

mov

ecx,

is placed

into

the ECX register.

3

; The value

0x3

lea

[ebptvar_
10]

eax,

; EAX is loaded with the pointer to the var_10 local buffer.
lea

edx,

[ebptvar 20]

;

ay

.

+, EDX is loaded with the pointer ze the var Lge local buffer.

ane

tar

ie

ee

Bie

ae

pe
unspent

; TheESI a

Ph

naa desiree

is saved --

iienns Le

ma a someon

nese

te —
a

i

Step Seven: Identifying Key Structures of High-Level Languages

+ and

that

; to

address

+ Hence,

repe

the

next

instruction

memory

indirectly.

a pointer

loaded

into

ESI.

are

copied

from ESI to EDI.

movsd

words

7 What

ECX equal?

does

; To convert
;

ESI

is

; ECX double

; This

uses

double

obtains

"Hello,

equals

0x3.

words

into

which

is one

byte

string,

pointed

to by ESI.

0xC,

World!"

It

bytes,

multiply

0x3

shorter

than

by 0x4.
the

copied

movsw
7 The

|

last

byte

of

the

"Hello,

the

terminating

; is copied,

with

lea

[ebptvar_
20]

edi,

World!"

string

zero.
te

a

; EDI is loaded with the
pointer
to
the var_20 local buffer.
mov *

esi,

offset

aHelloSailor

; "Hello,

Sailor!"

=

; The | ESI register
:

eee

Genk

"Hello,

is loaded

with

Sailor!" String.

ae pee 3 co PY Liste Oi oe. ett: SOs

the eines

to the

7

res ise ee

ae

393

394

‘Part |: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

; THe
;

contents

"Hello,

of the

World!"

next

string

byte

are

of the

loaded.
a

cmp

cl,

; Is

CL equal

;

"Hello,

jnz

[edx]

to the

contents

short

of both

n ABS the loc_4010C9

label.

test

Ck,

iz

short

of the

strings

do not

match,

jump

.

loc_4010D8

CL register

; the

character

If so,

byte

CL

; Is the

_

next

loc_4010C9

Focalize the characters

"0"

of the

asaidlor!"Sstrings

equal

been

to

zero?

(In other

seen

in the

string?).

words,

jump to loc 4010D8.

7 Now the string

type can be determined.

; The

of the

first

byte

string

contains

; of the string, not the string length.

the

first

character

In addition,

; the string is checked for being a "0" character. ee

? eae

has

chesicr gee tS

S0 Seba.

&

i

fig

?

;

each byte of

"3

these are

4

i

next charac’ er of the. "Hello, World!" string is loaded into CL. Ks
pe: i Oat
See ai be!
“3

Step Seven: Identifying Key Structures of High-Level Languages

395
>

test

elma

arew2

short

; Repeat
is

,

loc

loc _4010AD

matching

until

the

terminating

See

the

"Conditional

; Outputting

the

string

offset

Colle

petitei

pop

ecx

jmp

short

loc

401053

; Outputting

the

string

push

offset

aOk

Calla
pop

es Or niet

IF-~THEN-ELSE

;

The

format

; CODE XREF: _main+5atj
eax,

eax

function

edi
esi

; The

registers

mov

esp,

pop

ebp

The

format

ecx

pop

.

section.

; CODE XREF: _main+39fj main+4D\j

pop

i

Statements"

"OK"

loc _4010E3:
.

string

"Woozl"

aWoozl

loc _4010D8:

,

the

loc _4010D8

push

xor

of

; CODE XREF: main+35tj main+41Vj
short

a

character

reached.

4010C9:

jz

ae

stack

returns

are

zero.

restored.

ebp
frame

is

closed.

retn

_main

endp

Turbo-initialization of string variables. Distinguishing strings is not always
simple. To illustrate this, it is enough to compile the previous example in the
Microsoft Visual C++ and, using any suitable disassembler (IDA Pro, for example),
open the file obtained.

Part I: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

396
tl

It will take you an eternity to scroll through the data section. There is no trace
of strings like "Hello, Sailor!" and "Hello,
ever, is a strange bulk of double words:
.data:00406030

dword_ 406030

dd

6C6C6548h

.data:00406034

dword_ 406034

dd

57202C6Fh

.data:00406038

dword_ 406038

dd

646C726Fh

.data:0040603C

word _40603C

dw

21h

.data:0040603E

align

World!". The striking feature, how-

4

.data:00406040

dword_ 406040

dd

6C6C6548h

.data:00406044

dword

406044

dd

53202CoFh

.data:00406048

dword

406048

dd

6F6Cc6961h

.data:0040604C

word

40604C

dw

2172h

.data:0040604E

byte

40604E

db

0

What can they be? They are not pointers, since they do not point anywhere.
Nor are they int-type variables, since none were declared in the program. Pressing
the <F4> key to move into hex mode reveals the strings:

.data:00406030 48 65 6C 6C 6F 2C 20 57-6F 72 6C 64 21 00 00 00 "Hello, World!..."
.data:00406040 48 65 6C 6C 6F 2C 20 53-61 69 6C 6F-72 21 00 00 "Hello, Sailor!.."
.data:00406050 57 6F 6F 7A 6C 0A 00 00-4F 4B 0A 00 00 00 00 00 "Woozlml. .CKM..... :
So why has IDA Pro treated them like double words? Analyzing the code that
handles the string will help to answer this. Before doing so, let's convert these double words into normal ASCIIZ strings. (The <U> key converts double words into a
chain of typeless bytes, and the <A> key converts them into strings.) Bring the cursor to the first cross-reference and press the <Enter> key.
Listing 152. An Analysis of the Code That Manipulates Strings
main

proc

near

; CODE

Wait 20's

= byte

var_1C
var_18
var_14

= dword ptr -1Ch
= dword ptr -18h
= word ptr -14h

ptr

-20h

var

12

= byte

ptr

-12h

var_10

= byte

ptr

-10h

XREF:

start+ARp

Step Seven: Identifying Key Structures of High-Level Languages

varC

Il adword

ptr

var8
var4

adword

ptr

-8

= word

ptr

-4

have

so many

variables

push

ebp

mov

ebp,

esp

stack

frame

; Where

,

The

397

-0Ch

come

from?

is opened.
e

sub
.
,

esp,

Memory

mov

20h

is allocated

eax,

Gword

EAX is loaded

for

ptr

— not

local

aHelloWorld

with

"Hello,

World!",

but with

Now

it

is obvious

why

the

original

looked

like

code

eax,

This

is illustrative:

; "Hello,

a pointer
the

IDA Pro

(before

this:

mov

variables.
World!"

to the

first

string

4 bytes

has made

of this

a mistake

it was. converted

into

string.

—
the Sie)

Xia

dword_ 406030

examination,

If it were

this disassembler

someone

else's

program

under

trick
would
be
confusing.

mov

dword ptr

The

first 4 bytes of the string aS copied

[ebptvar__ 10), eax

5 es

: into

the var 10 local Saale

egoa

eee
Saree Sak
See ca

act

398

‘Part I: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

; These

bytes

; to be more

are

accurate,

mov

ax,

; The

remaining

mov

copied

word

ptr

into

into

the

the

var_8

string

local

variable

or,

loaded

into

buffer.

aHelloWorld+0Ch

two-byte

tail

of the

string

is

Ax.

[ebptvar_
4], ax

; The tail

is written

; fragments

of the

; variables:

int var_10;

int var_0C;

; Hence,

is

one

this

into the

string

actually

are

var_4 local
copied

local

variable.

Thus,

into the following

int var-8;

short

local

int var_4.

variable:

Bp Clason eve
190 |)

mov

ecx,

dword ptr aHelloSailor

; The

same

copy

7 “Hello,

operation

Sailor!"

Sailor!"

on the

string.

mov

dword

ptr

[ebptvar

mov

edx,

dword

ptr aHelloSailor+4

mov

[ebp+var_1C], edx

‘mov

eax, dword ptr aHelloSailor+8

‘mov

lebptvar_18], eax — Hack
= Choe

; "Hello,

is performed

20],

ecx

)

7%

3

©

:

=

,

Ea
: Cae

<E

3
.Ceaes

ae sist g Si iM Fi eda esas

:

Step Seven: Identifying Key Structures of High-Level Languages

|

not

lea

[ebptvar 10]

ecx,

a value

type.

local

PP SeOresstne

Hello;

World!

"estring;

ecx

sst romp

add

esp,

to the

strcmp

World!",

eax, eax

short loc_40107B

ex,

strings

Displaying

SSE

esp,

function.

"Hello,

Sailor!")

Soar
ae

ea

"Wooz1\n"

Wainer

etieceetintecadoas

short loc 41088
Sneptd~-~ShgdiyesFO) 1G (53 - +i mharast S

eer

eeecE

the "Wooz1" “string

rie

te

2s

6 [FW

push _ offset. aWooz1

ae

1s) Voadediiintoe

8

test

eer escall

which

3

5z

pel:

variable,

B is@igeis selene

ucali,

+ Are, the

m=

int

var_10

7 stremp("Hello,

.

the

to the

7 It is passed

=

of

; The pointer

push

|

=

7 a string,

399

—

Seas

cas

Bo

er

a

ee

ees.

ae

h

as =;

=f Difax: a:

alas

ation:

=

400

Part I: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

Conditional \F—THEN—ELSE Statements
There are two kinds of algorithms, unconditional and conditional. The order of performing operations in unconditional algorithms is always invariable and does not
depend on the input data — for example: a = b + c. The order of operations in
conditional algorithms, on the contrary, depends on the input data. For example:
IF c is not zero THEN a = b/c, ELSE send an error message.

Take note of the keywords IF, THEN, and ELSE marked in bold. These are called

branches. No program can manage without them. (Simple examples like "Hello,
World!" do not count.) Branches are the heart of any programming language.
Therefore, it is extremely important to identify them correctly.
Without going into syntactic details of particular programming languages,
branch statements can be schematically represented in this general form:
IF

(condition)

THEN

{statement,;;

statementy;}

ELSE

{statementl;;

statementily; }

The task of the compiler is to translate this statement into a sequence of machine instructions that execute statement: and statementy if condition is true
and, respectively, statement1l, and statement1» if it is false. Microprocessors of
the 80x86 family, however, support rather modest set of conditional statements
limited to conditional jumps. Programmers who are familiar only with PCs based
on the 80x86 family will not consider such a limitation unnatural. However, there

are plenty of processors supporting a prefix of conditional instruction execution:
Instead of writing TEST ECX, ECX/JNZ xxx/MOV EAX, 0x666, it is possible to write
TEST ECX, ECX/IFZ MOV EAX, 0x666. The IFz is just the prefix of conditional
execution; it allows the execution of the following instruction only if the zero
flag is set.
In this sense, 80x86 microprocessors can be compared with the early dialects of

BASIC, which did not admit any statement except coro into branches. Compare the
following listings.
SS

Listing 153. The New (Left) and Old (Right) BASIC Dialects
IF A=B

THEN

PRINT

"A=B"

10

IF A=B

THEN

20 GOTO

40

30

PRINT

"A=B"

40

...

// The

GOTO

30

rest

of code

Step Seven: Identifying Key Structures of High-Level Languages

401

Anyone familiar with old dialects of BASIC will probably remember that it is
better to execute corto if the condition is false, and to continue the normal execu-

tion of the program otherwise. (Contrary to popular opinion, knowledge of BASIC
programming is not entirely useless, especially in disassembling.)
Most compilers (even nonoptimizing ones) invert the value of the condition,
converting the statement

IF

(condition)

THEN

{statement;;

statementy;}

into

the following pseudo-code:
Listing 154. The Pseudo-Code Produced from the 1F-THEN Branch
IF

(NOT

condition)

THEN

continue

statement;

statementy;

continue:

Hence, to reconstruct the source code of the program, the condition must be

inverted, and the block of statements {statement:;

statementy;} must be stuck to

the THEN keyword. Suppose the compiled code looked like this:
Listing 155. A Reconstruction of the Source Code of a Program
10

IF

20

PRINT

A<>B

"A=B"

THEN

30

...//

The

30

rest

of

the

code

In this case, the source code must have contained the following lines: IF A=B
THEN PRINT "A=B". However, could the programmer check the variables a and B
for an inequality (i.e., IF A<>B THEN PRINT "A<>B")? The compiler would invert
the value of the condition and generate the following code:
Listing 156. The Complier Inverts the Condition
10

IF A=B

THEN

20

PRINT

"A<>B"

30

...//

The

30

rest

of the. code

ee

402

Part I: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

Certainly, you might encounter compilers that suffer from verbosity. They are
easy to recognize by the unconditional jump that immediately follows the branch.
Listing 157.

A Verbose Complier Is Recognized by the Unconditional Jump

IF

(condition)

GOTO

continue

THEN

do

doer
statement);

statementy;

continue:

In cases like this, the conditional value does not need to be inverted. However,

nothing terrible will happen if it is inverted; the code of the program merely may
become less understandable.

Now

let's consider

{statement;;

how

the complete

statementy;}
ELSE

{statementl;;

statement

IF

statemently;}

(condition)
may

THEN

be converted.

Some compilers act like this:
Listing 158. The Result of Converting the Complete 1r-THEN-ELSE Statement
IF

(condition)

// The

ELSE

THEN

branch

do it

is executed.

statementli;

statemently;

GOTO

continue

do_it:
// The

IF branch

is

executed.

statement);
statementy;

continue:

Others convert it like this:

Listing 159. An Alternate Result of Converting the 1r-THEN-ELSE Statement
IF

(NOT

// The

condition)
IF branch

THEN
is

else

executed.

“

Step Seven: Identifying Key Structures of High-Level Languages

403

Statement);

Statements;

GOTO

continue

else:

//

The

ELSE

branch

is

executed.

statementl;;

statementiy;

continue:

The latter inverts the condition value; the former does not. Therefore, without

knowing the compiler's preferences, it will be impossible to figure out what the
original code of the program looked like. However, this does not create any problems, since it is always possible to write the condition in a convenient form. For example, if you don't like the statement IF (c<>0) THEN a=b/c ELSE PRINT
"Error!", you can write IF

(c==0)

THEN

PRINT

"Error!"

ELSE a=b/c.

Types of conditions. Conditions can be simple (elementary) or complex (compound). An example of the former is if (a==b)...; an example of the latter is
if ((a==b) && (a!=0)).... Thus, any complex conditional expression can be decomposed into several simple conditional expressions. Let's start with simple conditions.
There are two types of elementary conditions: relational conditions (with the
operators

"less," "equal," "less than or equal," "not equal," "greater than," and

"greater than or equal," designated as <, ==, >, <=, !=, and >=, respectively) and logical conditions (with the operators AND, OR, NOT, and exclusive or, designated
in C notation as s, |, !, and *, respectively). Well-known hacking authority Matt
Pietrek adds testing the bits in here as well. In this book, we will cover this topic

separately.
A true expression returns the Boolean value TRUE; a false one returns FALSE.
The internal (physical) representation of the Boolean variables can vary, depending
on a particular implementation. Generally, FALSE is represented by zero, and TRUE 1s
represented by a nonzero value. TRUE is often represented by 1 or —1, but
this is not always the case.

For example,

IF

((a>b)!=0)...

is correct,

and

IF ((a>b)==1)... is bound to a particular implementation,
which is undesirable.
Note that IF ((a>b)!=0)... does not check the a and b variables for an
inequality to zero; rather, it checks

the result of their comparison.

Consider

the following example: IF ((666==777)==0) printf("Wooz1l!"). What will
be displayed on the screen by launching this example? "Wooz1!", of course.

Part |: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

404

Neither 666 nor 777 is equal to zero, but 666!=777. Therefore, the condition
(666==777) is false-and equal to zero. Incidentally, writing IF ((a=b)==0).
would give a different result: The value of the variable b would be-assigned to the
variable a, and then checked for equality to zero.
Logical conditions mostly are used to bind two or more elementary relational conditions into a compound condition (for example, IF ((a==b)

&&

(a!=0))

...).

When compiling the program, the compiler always resolves compound conditions
into simple ones (in this example, as IF a==b THEN IF a=0 THEN... ).
At the second stage, the conditional statements are replaced by coro.
Listing 160. The Complier Resolves Compound Conditions into Simple Ones
IF

a!=b

THEN

continue

IF

a==0

THEN

continue

...//

The

code

of the

condition

rest

of code

:continue

...//

The

The order of computing the elementary conditions in a complex expression is
at the compiler's discretion. The only guarantee is that the conditions bound by the
logical AND will be tested from left to right in the order they appear in the program.
If the first condition is false, the next one will not be computed, which allows us
to write

code

like

if

((filename)

and

(f=fopen(&filename[0],"rw")))...

If the filename pointer points to nonallocated memory area (i.e., contains zero,
a logical FALSE), the fopen function is not called and the crash does not occur.
These types of computations have been called fast Boolean operations.
Now, let's proceed to the problem of identifying logical conditions

and analyzing complex expressions. Let's take the following
if ((a==b) && (a!=0))... and see what happens when it is compiled.
Listing 161. The Result of Compiling the if
IF a!=b

THEN

continue

IF a==0

THEN

continue

.»-//

This,

code

((a==b)

is executed

// if at

least

one

// above

conditions

of the
is

false.

: continue

// The

rest

of the

code

follows.

ey

s&

expression:

(a!=0)) Expression

Step Seven: Identifying Key Structures of High-Level Languages

405

Obviously, this code gives itself away with a series of conditional jumps to the
same label. Note that each elementary condition is tested for being true or false,

and the label is located after the code that immediately follows the branch statements.
Identifying the logical or operation is more difficult because of the ambiguity
of its translation. Let's consider this on the example of the if ((a==b)
||
(a!=0))... statement. It can be broken into elementary statements in this way:
Listing 162. Breaking
higa——o

LEN

if

((a==b)

||

(a!=0))

into Elementary Statements

doer

IF a!=0 THEN do it
goto

continue

RelOeauie
...//

The

code

is executed

// if at

least

// above

conditions

one

of the

is true.

:continue

...-//

The

rest

of

the

code

follows.

It can also be broken down as follows:

Listing 163. An Alternate Breakdown of if

((a==b)

||

(a!=0))

IF a==b THEN do it
IF

a==0

THEN

continue

|

:Go0.it
...//

The

//

if

code
at

// above

is executed

least

one

conditions

of

the

is true.

:continue

...//

The

rest

of

the

code

follows.

The first variant is rather distinctive, comprising a series of tests (without
inverting the condition), which pass control to the label preceding the code that is
executed if the condition is true, with an unconditional jump at the end of the series, which passes control to the label that follows this code.

However, optimizing compilers eliminate the unconditional-jump instruction
by inverting the test of the last condition in the chain and changing the jump
address. Beginners often take this construction for a mix of or and AND. Consider

Part I: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

406

address. Beginners often take this construction for a mix of or and AND. Consider
the result of compiling the if ((a==b) || (a==c) && a(!=0))... Statement.
ct

a

i

a

Ea

en

IF a==b

THEN

check

a!=c

THEN

continue

IF

a

||

(a==c)

i

&& a(!=0))

a

EE

Statement

Eee

ites 5) GS

Seat

LS

((a==b)

Listing 164. A Compilation of the if
null

check null:

IF a==0

...//

THEN

The

continue

code

// conditions

is executed

if at

in the

last

two

least

of the

code

follows.

one

IF statements

of the
is true.

continue:

...//

The

rest

How can a single, readable compound condition be obtained from the
impenetrable jungle of elementary conditions? Let's start from the beginning
(i.e., from the first comparison operation). If the a==b condition happens to be
true, it makes the a!=c condition "quit the game." Such a construction is typical for
the or operation (i.e., if one of two conditions is true, it is enough for the code to

work). Keeping if

((a==b)

|| ...) in mind, let's move on. Ifthe (a!=c) condi-

tion is true, all further tests cease and control is passed to the label, located after the

code, pertaining to conditions. It is reasonable to assume that this is the last or operation in a chain of comparisons, which is typical behavior. Therefore, let's invert
the expression of the condition and continue to write: if ((a==b) || (a==c)..).
The last stage tests the a==0 condition. It will be impossible to execute code
pertaining to conditions if the a==0 condition is bypassed. Hence, it is not oR;
it is AND. But AND always inverts the condition. Consequently, the original code
should look like this: if ((a==b) || (a==c) && (a!=0)).
Do not be deluded: This example is elementary. In reality, optimizing compilers can have you troubled.
Representing complex conditions as a tree. A statement consisting of three or
four elementary conditions can be analyzed mentally. However, patterns of five
or more conditions form a labyrinth that is difficult to comprehend immediately.
The ambiguity of translating complex conditions brings about an ambiguity
of interpretation. This results in varying analyses, and progressively more information must be remembered with each step. It would be easy to go mad in such a case,
or to get confused and obtain incorrect results.

Step Seven: Identifying Key Structures of High-Level Languages

407

The way out is to use a two-level system of translation. At the first stage, the
elementary conditions are converted into an intermediate form that clearly and
consistently represents the interrelation of the elementary operations. Then, the final translation is put into any suitable notation (for example, C, BASIC, or Pascal).
The only problem is how to choose the successful intermediate form. There are
many options, but to save paper, let's consider just one: trees.’
Let's represent each elementary condition as a node with two branches going
to the appropriate states: the condition is true and the condition is false. For clarity,
let's designate "false" as a triangle and "true" as a square. Let's agree always
to place "false" on the left and "true" on the right. We will call the obtained design
a nest.
Condition

False

True

Fig. 22. A schematic representation of the nest

Nests may be joined into trees. Each node can join only one nest, but each nest
can join several nodes. Let's consider this in more detail.
Let's join two elementary conditions by a logical AND operation, taking the example ((a==b)

&&

(a!=0)). Let's take the first condition from the left, (a==b),

and place it in a nest with two branches, the left one corresponding to a!=b
(i.e., the condition a==b is false), and the right one corresponding to the opposite
case. Then, let's do the same with the second condition, (a!=0). This gives two
nests; the only thing that remains is to join them with the logical anp operation.
As you know, AND tests the second condition only when the first condition is true.
Hence, the (a!=0) nest should be hitched to the right branch of (a==b). The right

branch (a!=0) will correspond to the ((a==b) && (a!=0)) expression being true,
and both left branches will correspond to this expression being false. Let's designate
the first case with the do_it label, and the second case with the continue label.
As a result, the tree should look like the one shown in Fig. 23.

408

Part |: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

For better presentation, let's mark the route from top of the tree to the label

do it with a thick arrow. It is only possible to get to do_it by one route. Graphically, the AND operation looks like this:

((a==b)&&(a!=0))

Continue:

do_it:

Fig. 23. A graphical representation of the AND operation as a binary tree
(which shows only one way to get into the do_it point)

Let's proceed to the logical or operation and consider the following expression:
((a==b)

||

(a!=0)). Ifthe (a==b) condition is true, the entire expression is also

true. Hence, the right branch of the (a==b) nest is connected to the do it label.
If the (a==b) condition is false, the next condition is tested. This means that the left
branch of (a ==
b) is connected to the (a!=b) nest. If the (a!=b) condition is
true, the entire ((a==b) || (a!=0)) expression is also true; if the (a!=b) condition is false, the entire expression is also false, since the (a!=b) condition is tested

only when the (a==b) condition is false. It can be concluded that the left branch of
the (a!=b) nest is eee: to the continue label, and the right one to do it.
Note that it is possible to get to do_it by two different routes. The or operation
graphically looks like it is shown in Fig. 24.

O

Step Seven: Identifying Key Structures of High-Level Languages

409

((a==b)&&(a!=0))

Continue:

do_it:
Fig. 24. A graphical representation of the OR operation as a binary tree
(which shows two ways to get to the do_it point)

So far, logical operations have been represented by trees. However, trees
were meant for just the opposite purpose — to convert the sequence of elementary conditions into intuitively clear representation. Let's try this with the
following code:
Listing 165. Converting a Sequence of Elementary Conditions
IF a==b

THEN

check null

IF a!=c

THEN

continue

check_null:
IF

a==0

...//

THEN

This

is

continue:
..// The rest

continue
code

pertaining

of the

code

to

the

condition.

:
follows.

a
SS
SS

TD

Part |: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

410

Let's take the (a==b)

condition and put it into the nest. Ifit is false, the (a!=c)

condition is tested, meaning the (a!=c) nest is connected to the left branch of
(a==b). If the (a==b) condition is true, control is transferred to the check_null

label, which tests the (a==0)

condition for being true; hence, the (a==0) nest is

connected to the right branch of (a==b). In turn, if the (a!=c)

condition is true,

control is passed to the continue label; otherwise, it is passed to check_nu11. This
means that the (a!=0) nest is connected both to the right branch of (a==b) and to
the left branch of the (a!=c) nest.
Certainly, this is easier to draw than to describe. A correct sketch should produce.a tree similar to the one in Fig. 25.
The (a==0) nest can be reached in two ways: through (a==b), or
through the (a==b) > (a!=c) chain. Hence, these nests are joined by the or operation. Logically, this produces if ((a==b) || !(a!=c)...). Where has this nor
come from? The (a==0) nest is connected to the left branch of the (a!=c) nest
(i.e., it is checked for being true). Now, Not can be removed by inverting
the if ((a==b) || (a==c)...)... condition It is possible to move further —
from the (a==0) nest to do_it — only in one way, meaning this is a junction
through the AND operation. Therefore, let's write if (((a==b)
|| (a==c))
&& !(a==0))... and get rid of superfluous brackets and the Not operation.
The result obtained is ((a==b)
to

the

||

(a==c)

&&

(a!=0))

{// The code pertaining

condition}.

This is a simple method. It is not even necessary to build trees manually,
as a program can be written to do the work.
Analyzing specific implementations. Before translating the IF (a complex
condition)

THEN

{statement::statementy}

ELSE

statement

into a machine

language, remember that the I1r—THEN-ELSE statement can be represented through
IF—THEN,

the THEN

{statement;:statemen ty} aggregate expression

can be repre-

sented by THEN GOTO do it, and any complex condition can be reduced to
a sequence of elementary relational conditions. Therefore, at a basic level,
the operation can be reduced to statements of the type IF (a simple relational
condition)

THEN

GOTO

do_it, which then can be used like building blocks to

produce the necessary combination.
Let's consider relational conditions, or the results of comparing two numbers.
In Intel 80x86 microprocessors, integer values are compared using the cmp
instruction, and floating-point values are compared using the coprocessor
instructions such as FCOM, FCOMP, FCOMPP, FCOMI, FCOMIP, FUCOMI, and FUCOMIP.
You should be familiar with assembler, so these instructions will be considered
only briefly.

Step Seven: Identifying Key Structures of High-Level Languages

do_it:

411

Continue:

Fig. 25. A graphical representation of a complex expression

The a instruction. This is equivalent to the sus integer subtraction operation

with one exception — unlike sup, cmp does not modify the operands. It only affects
the flags of the main processor: the zero flag, the carry flag, the sign flag, and the
overflow flag.
.
The zero flag is set to 1 if the result of subtraction is zero (i.e., if the operands
are equal).

412

Part |: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

The carry flag is set to 1 if, during subtraction, there was a borrow from the
most significant bit of the minuend (i.e., the minuend is less than the subtrahend).
The sign flag is set equal to the most significant bit (the sign bit) of the computation
result (ie., if the result of computation is a negative number, the sign flag is set to 1).
The overflow flag is set to 1 if the result of computation "climbs into" the most
significant bit, leading to the loss of the number's sign.
To test the state of flags, a group of instructions of conditional jumps are performed if a certain flag (or group of flags) is set (or cleared). The instructions used
to analyze the result of comparing the integers are listed in Table 16 (? means that
the state is not defined.)
Generally,

the

IF

(an

elementary

relational

condition)

THEN

do

it

statement is translated into the following processor instructions:
empaca,

jxx

5

do.it

continue:

Other instructions that do not affect the processor flags (Mov or LEA, for example) may be inserted between cmp and Jxx.
Table 16. The Relational Operations and Their Processor Instructions
The state of the flags

Unsigned
ie)

A

Unsigned

a >=b

a <=b

Unsigned

Unsigned

Comparing floating-point numbers. The Fcomxx instructions that compare
floating-point numbers (see Table 18), in contrast to instructions that compare

Step Seven: Identifying Key Structures of High-Level Languages

413

integers, affect the coprocessor registers, rather than the main-processor registers.
At first glance, this seems reasonable. However, there are no conditional-jump

instructions controlled by the coprocessor flags. Additionally, the coprocessor
flags are not accessible directly — to read their status, the sw coprocessor status register must be loaded into memory or into a general-purpose register of the main
processor.
Analyzing the flags manually is worse. When comparing integers, the flags controlling the conditional jump are not taken into account — producing, for example, cMP A,B; JGE do it (jump IF A is greater on equal to 8). Here,
the trick will not work. However, it is possible to cheat and copy the coprocessor
flags to the flag register of the main processor, then use native conditional-jump instructions of Jxx type.
The coprocessor flags cannot be copied to the main processor directly. This operation should be carried out in two stages: The FPU flags have to be loaded into
memory or into any general-purpose register available, then pushed into the CPU
flags register. Only one instruction, PoPrF, is capable of directly modifying the CPU
flags register. All that remains is to figure out which coprocessor flags correspond
to which processor flags. Surprisingly, flags 8, 10, and 14 of the coprocessor coincide with flags 0, 2, and 6 of the main processor — with cr, PF, and ZF, respectively

(see Table 17). Therefore, the most significant byte of the coprocessor flags register
can be pushed into the least significant byte of the main-processor flags register
without any conversion. However, bits 1, 3, and 5 of the CPU flags register, which

are not used in current versions of the processor, but are reserved for the future
use, will be distorted. The values of the reserved bits must never be changed. Who
can guarantee that, tomorrow, one of them will not be responsible for the self-

destruction of the processor? This is a joke, of course, but many a true word is spoken in jest.
Fortunately, no complex manipulations are necessary. The processor developers have provided a special instruction, saAHF, that copies bits 8, 10, 12, 14, and 15 of

the ax. From Table 17, it is possible to work out that bit 7 of the CPU flags register
contains the sign flag, and the corresponding bit of the coprocessor flags register
contains the FPU busy flag!
Therefore, it is not possible to use signed conditional jumps (31, 2G; soLb, tt

JNLE, JGE, and JNGE) to analyze the result of comparing the floating-point numbers. These jumps work with the sign and overflow flags. If, instead of the sign flag,
these instructions receive the FPU busy flag, and the overflow flag is left in a suspended state, the conditional jump will not work as desired. Unsigned jump instructions (JE, JB, JA, etc. — see Table 16) should be used instead.

Part I: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

414

This does not mean that it is impossible to compare the signed floating-point
numbers — it is possible. But, for the analysis of the comparison results, only unsigned conditional jumps should be used.
Table 17. The Correspondence of the CPU and FPU Flags

Thus, the floating-point

statement IF

THEN do it can be translated
processor instructions:

(an

elementary

relational

condition)

into one of the two following sequences of the

Listing 166. Two Variants of the Processor Instructions
edlie!

palo!

fcomp
fnstsw

fcomp

[b]
ax

fnstsw

sahf

apo

dome

[b]
ax

test

ah,

jnz

do it

bit_mask

The first variant is more illustrative, but the second one works faster. However,

only Microsoft Visual C++ may be capable of generating this code. Borland C++
and Watcom C have an inclination for the instruction saxF, which slightly slows but drastically simplifies the code analysis. An instruction like ana would tell even a
half-asleep hacker that the jump is being carried out when a<=b. Checking the bit
mask such as TEST

AH,

0x41/JNZ

do_it would make us take a pause for thought,

or mechanically consult a reference manual. (See Table 16.)

In this sense, the instructions of the FUCOMIxx family are more convenient:
They return the result of comparison directly into registers of the main processor.
Unfortunately, only Pentium Pro understands them; they are lacking in earlier
microprocessors. Therefore, you will rarely encounter them in real programs.

Pages 3-112 of Intel's "Instruction Set Reference" describe these instructions
in detail.

Step Seven: Identifying Key Structures of High-Level Languages

415
>

Table 18. The Instructions for Comparing Floating-Point Values
|Instruction | Purpose

FCOM

FCOMP

Result

Compares the floating-point value located on top of the
coprocessor stack with the operand located in memory
or on the FPU stack

Same as FCOM, but pops the floating-point value off

The FPU flags

the top of the stack
FCOMPP

Compares two floating-point values located on top of
the coprocessor stack, then pops them off the stack

FCOMI

Compares the floating-point value located on top of the
coprocessor stack with another floating-point value located on the FPU stack

FCOMIP

Compares the floating-point value located on top of the
coprocessor stack with the floating-point value located
on the FPU stack, then pops it off the stack

FUCOMI

Makes an unordered comparison of the floating-point
value located on top of the coprocessor stack with the
floating-point value located on the FPU stack

FUCOMIP

Makes an unordered comparison of the floating-point
value located on top of the coprocessor stack with the
floating-point value located on the FPU stack, then pops

the value off top of the stack

Table 19. The Coprocessor Flags

ER ee ee

The CPU fl
:
ae

ae

416

Part I: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

Table 20. The State-Of-Flag Registers for Relational Operations

p= free
#0x4000

==

#0x0100

==

0

* The left operand of the instruction that compares floating-point values is a; the right operand is b.

Table 21. The Behavior of Compilers
|Compiler

|

Borland C++

Microsoft Visual C++

The algorithm that analyzes the FPU flags...
..copies the coprocessor flags to the flags register of the main
processor.
| ...tests the bit mask.

Watcom C

..copies the coprocessor flags to the flags register of the main
processor.

Free Pascal

..copies the coprocessor flags to the flags register of the main
processor.

Boolean set-on-condition instructions. Starting with 80386 chips, the language
of Intel microprocessors was enriched with the instruction for setting a byte on
condition, SETxx. This instruction sets its single operand to 1 (Boolean TRUE) if the
condition xx is true, and clears it to 0 (Boolean FALSE) if the condition xx is false.

The sztxx instruction is widely used by optimizing compilers to eliminate the
branches (i.e., to remove conditional jumps), since branches clear the processor

pipeline, seriously reducing the program performance.

Step Seven: Identifying Key Structures of High-Level Languages

417

Table 22. The Boolean Set-On-Condition Instructions

SETC
SETL

SETNGE

SETBE

SETNA

SETNG

Other conditional instructions. 80x86 family of microprocessors supports
a set of the conditional instructions that generally do not involve the relational
operation. Therefore, these instructions are rarely used by compilers. However,
they are used frequently in assembler inserts. They deserve to be mentioned at least
briefly.
Conditional-jump instructions. In addition to those described in Table 16, there
are eight conditional-jump instructions: JCxz, JECXZ, JO, JNO, JP (also known as
JPE), JNP (also known as Jpo), Js, and uns. Of these, only gcxz and gEcxz have

a direct relationship to the comparison operations. Optimizing compilers
occasionally replace the cmp [E]CX, 0\JZ do_it construction with the shorter
equivalent J[E]CXZ do it.
The go and uns conditional jumps are mainly used in mathematical libraries to
process the long numbers (1024-bit integers, for example).
Besides basic applicability, the gs and sNs conditional jumps are frequently
used to quickly test the value of the most significant bit.
:
The gp and unp conditional jumps are used only in exotic assembler inserts.

418

Part |: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

Table 23. The Auxiliary Conditional Jumps

...the CX register equals zero.
..the ECX register equals zero.
.. there is an overflow.
...there is no overflow.

.. parity of the least significant byte of the result is
even.

PRas~

...parity of the least significant byte of the result is
odd.

P

1

...the sign bit is set.
..the sign bit is cleared.

Conditional-move instructions. The processors of the Pentium family starting
from Pentium Pro, Pentium II, Celeron support the conditional-move instruction
CMOVxx, which sends a value from the source to the destination if the condition xx

is satisfied. This leads to more effective code that does not contain branches and fits
into a smaller number of instructions.
Let's consider the IF a<b THEN a=b statement. Compare how it is translated
using conditional-jump (left) and conditional-move (right) instructions.
Listing 167. Comparing a Conditional Jump and a Conditional Move
cmp

a,

b

emp.

a,b

jae

continue:

cmovb

Mov

ai,

a,

b

continue:

Unfortunately, at the time of writing, no compiler seemed to use cmovxx when
generating code. However, the benefits are so obvious that advanced optimizing
compilers should emerge in the near future. Table 24 presents a brief description
sufficient for disassembling the programs. See pages 3-59 of the "Instruction Set
Reference" guide from Intel for more detailed explanations.

Step Seven: Identifying Key Structures of High-Level Languages

419
—”

Table 24. The Main Conditional-Move Instructions

SE

==

OF

CF

==

1

Boolean comparisons. The logical FALSE corresponds to the zero value, and
the logical TRUE to any nonzero value. Thus, Boolean relationships are reduced to
comparing the value of a variable with zero. The IF (a) THEN do it statement is
translated into IF (a!=0) THEN do it.
Practically all compilers replace the cmp a, 0 instruction with the shorter
instructions such as TEST

A, Aor oR A, A. In all cases, if A==0, the zero flag is set;

if A!=0, the zero flag is cleared.
Therefore, code like TEST EAX,
indicates a Boolean comparison.
Identifying

the

EAX\JZ

do_it in the disassembler listing

" (condition) ?do_it:continue”

construction.

statement such as a=(condition)?do it:continue
IF

(condition)

THEN

a=do_it

ELSE

In

C,

the

generally is converted into

a=continue. However, the results of com-

piling these statements are not always the same.

ee

For a variety of reasons, the ? operator is more amenable to optimization than
the IF-THEN-ELSE branch, as the following example demonstrates.
Listing 168. Identifying the Conditional Operator

aaa

main ()

a

int

a;

// The

variable

is not

initialized

on purpose.

Part I: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

420

ae

//

it with

not

replace

a constant.

a=(a>0)?1:-1;

// A conditional

if

// B branch

(b>0)

does

compiler

the

// Therefore,

lol

operator

b=-1;

return

ath;

}

If we disassemble this example compiled using Microsoft Visual C++, we will
get the following result:
Listing 169. The Disassembled Code of the Test Example Compiled Using
Visual C++
push

ebp

mov

ebp,

esp

; The

stack

frame

sub

esp,

8

; The

space

is

; This

is

xor

eax,

; EAX

is

cmp

; The

_setle

the

is

opened.

allocated

beginning

local

variables.

of

the

? conditional

is compared

with

zero.

is placed

into

al if var_a-<=

operator.

eax

zeroed.

[ebp+var_a],

variable

0

al

; The value

Oxl

7 The value

0 is placed

dec

for

into

eax

; EAX is decremented

by 1.

al if vara > 0.

0.

Step Seven: Identifying Key Structures of High-Level Languages

; Now,

if

var_a

>

; and

if

var_a

<=0,

0,

then EAX

:=

-1,

for

the

then EAX

and

eax,

2

+ All

bits

are

cleared

; Now,

if

var_a

> 0,

then

EAX

<=0,

then

EAX := 0.

; and if var_a

add

eax,

; Oxl

is

; Now,

if

except

second

var_a

from

EAX.

> 0,

then

EAX

<=0,

then EAX

:=

result

; Note

:= -1.

is assigned

to the

var_a

variable.

a single

__

conditional

the

has managed to do without

Saad

; This isthe: ees
immammmntsd oe MS lex
THIS

87 gsiter

operator

$22

icra aneee

the it Are penne ea tice

AEN compared gis aas

ZIT! HIGS oviea =# £5TAL
aes

jle

eos

SR
needed

{ebp+var_b],

if

z

conditional

a

jump was

; to translate

“Seeger

=a

not

+ the SES

cmp

&

that

figs
+=;
CU
—

left.

:

prostiisrcu

i

the

1,

7 This is the end of the ? operator.

A

from

[ebpt+var_
a], eax

; The

3

bit

:= 2,

OFFFFFFFFh

subtracted

; and if var_a

mov

421

ES ee

short

ee

else

ee

pieesas
ea

=

1 dup, Spat bite, se

HEE 7

tana

:

ct

aay

NS

ate

= Fi) rent 2

tere

mn

ao

Se

NE een

<b

Seat PEN

eres

Beft pilite
hs J
ACES SMR
Nia“Ti ere

bette ane

ae aFy ae

ae
2
as ee
o
hecaiee a. tet OeaROSiS Sie agian gee
oy

2

Se

:

f

Fee

ietat

ace

422

Part I: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

This

is

>; Note

that.

the

; is more

that

mov

eax,
value

add

eax,

; The value
; of the

of

the

than

that

considerably

esp,

pop

ebp

; The

stack

branch.

of

the

?.

However,

of

IF-THEN-ELSE
it

degrade

the

program

variable

is

loaded

variable

is added

statement

contains

conditional

performance.

[ebptvar
a]
of

the

var_a

into

EAX.

[ebptvar_b]

of the

var_a

var b variable.

mov

IF-THEN-ELSE

implementation

compact

; jumps

; The

end

the

The

result

to the value

is placed

into

FAX.

ebp

frame

is

closed.

retn

Thus, it is impossible to assert that the result of translating the ? conditional
operator is always the same as the result of translating the IF-THEN-ELSE statement. However, in aggressive optimization mode, Microsoft Visual C++ generates
identical code in both cases.
Listing 170. Compiling the Program Using Aggressive Optimization
_main

proc
push

near

eCcx

; Memory

is allocated

for

; Since

they

never

used

together,

places

them

into

; the

compiler

mov

; The

are

edx,

[espt+0]

value

of the

xOr

eax,

; EAX

is

a and

b local
one

variables.

but
memory

; Instruction

a variable

eax

is

loaded

only

#1

into

; Instruction

individually,

cell.

#2

of

the

? operator

EDX.
of

the

? operator

the

content

rest

of the

zeroed.

; Since

the

setle

; of the

AL

register

(and does

not

; register),

it must

be cleared

manually.

test

edx

edx,

al instruction

only modifies
affect

; Instruction

the

#3 of the

? operator

Step Seven: Identifying Key Structures of High-Level Languages

; The
mov

; The

a variable
edx,

value

is tested

for

[esp+0]

equality

7 Instruction

of the b variable

setle

al

; The

value

Oxl

; The

value

0 is placed

dec

eax

into

into

2£

7 and

if a <=0,

xOr

a > 0, then

ex

ea

then

eax,

2

IF branch

EDX.

#4 of the

al if a <=

? operator

0.

al if a > 0.

#5 of the

? operator

by 1.
FAX

3= —1;

EAX

:= 0.

:

=

; Instruction

; Zeroing ECX

; All bits

into

; Instruction

7; Now,

zero.

#1 of the

is loaded

+ Instruction
is placed

; EAX is decremented

and

to

423

a
PNR

#2 of the

alee

i Instruction

are cleared except

IF branch

oe
#6 of the

? operator

the second bit from

rn: the left, counting from em
=

aay

<a

Now, if a > 0, then EAX := ss

“a and

ifa <=0, then RAK se

Oc

ee

Te

itek

es

cag oo

prernemerginesesitese Beeb np pstmt nme T assieieiel ciesicon sconsdapsieima lieth aigjeTaeia anc ce

+

_Instruction

pa

aerial

epeuePa

be .

asiceeiar

fees Sigs
alate

#7 of the?

watniscns:

~

;

Part I: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

424
—

*) Now,

Wied:

>)0,

-Nand

Wieb

<0;

and

ecx,

2

bits

are

; All

theneicx

Ehem

Lex

=,

sl

;
cleared

Instruction

except

the

second

bit

; Instruction

#7

AMCOUN tang

serom

si

» Now

25

>

0,

then,

HCX

t=" 27

~ and

ii

-b <=0,

then

ECX

:=

dec

eCcx

; ECX

is

so Now,.

; and

add

decremented

at

if

2b >

eax,

; The

0,

b <=0,

then

ecx

; The

stack

of

the

from

IF branch

the

left,

0.

of

the

IF branch

1.

2CSes=.

iy

then

ECX

:=

0.

is

added

to

the

CCX

b variable

pop

by

#6

frame

is

a variable.

closed.

retn

_main

endp

The compiler has mixed the instructions relevant to the ? conditional operator
with the IF-THEN-ELSE branch statements. However, comparing them shows that
the implementations of both constructions are identical.
From a language point of view, however, the ? conditional operator
favorably differs from a branch. For example, it can be used directly in expressions.
Listing 171. Using the 2 Conditional Operator Directly in an Expression
main ()

{
IMt

ay

printt ("Hello,.ts\n",

(a >-0)°?

“Sailor™

: "World!")>

Step Seven: Identifying Key Structures of High-Level Languages

425
>

ae

This could be implemented so compactly using branches! However, this convenlence is superficial; the compiler translates this example as follows:
Listing 172. The Compilation of the Example with the 2 Conditional Operator
main()

{
kta

char

=p;

static

char

sO[]="Sailor";

static

char

sl[]="World";

if

(a>0O)

p=s0;

else

prince (EHellepyss\n",

p=s1;

p)?

Compile both listings, then disassemble the files obtained — they should be
identical. Thus, when decompiling C/C++ programs, it generally is impossible to
say whether a branch or a conditional operator was used in them. In certain cases,
a few hooks can help determine the appearance of the source code.
For example, it seems improbable that the programmer could build the listing
shown in the last example. Why should the programmer introduce static variables
and manipulate a pointer in a complex way, when it's easier to use a conditional
operator, rather than a branch?

Thus, if the conditional operator smoothly fits into the program being decompiled, and branching does not, then a conditional operator, not a branch, was used
in the source code.
Identifying the types. Conditional instructions are a key for identifying
the types. Since the result of comparing signed and unsigned variables is analyzed
by different groups of instructions, signed int can be distinguished from|
unsigned

int.

However, the identification of types is a theme for a separate discussion.

@
si mode. One unpleasant feature of 16-bit mode is the limited scope
of conditional-jump instructions. In an attempt to make the code highly compact,
the microprocessor developers allotted only 1 byte for the destination address,
limiting the jump length to an interval of 255 bytes. This short jump is defined
by the relative signed offsets, counted from the beginning of the instruction next

426

Part |: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

~

to the jump instruction (see Fig. 26). Such addressing restricts the length of the
"forward" jump (i.e., the "downward" jump) to just 128 bytes. The "backward"
jump is even shorter: 127 bytes! (The backward jump is shorter because it needs to
"jump over" the jump instruction itself.) These restrictions are not relevant to the
near unconditional jump, which uses 2 bytes for addressing and works within the
limits of the entire segment.
0000:

3BC3

cmp

ax, bx

je

07

0007: B80100

mov

ax, 01

000A: C3

retn

0002: 7403

0004: 3300

py

Fig. 26. An internal representation of a short jump

CMP A,B

CMP A,B

Ix do_it

INx continue

Inverts the condition

continue:

s

IMP do_it

Short
conditional

ore

®

continue:

jump

// a lot
iat rede

je)

® =

rs
©
=)

La lot

hie

// of code

do_it:

fleas

a
Near unconditional
jump works
in the whole segment

do_it:
Fig. 27. Translating short jumps

Short jumps complicate the translation of branches: Not all the destination addresses are within the 128-byte limit. There are many ways to bypass this restriction. The following is most popular: If the compiler sees that the destination address falls outside the limits reached by the conditional jump, it inverts the
condition of the Ir statement and performs a short jump to the continue label.
Alternatively, it uses a near jump, which works within the limits of one segment, to
pass control to the do_it label (see Fig. 27).

Step Seven: Identifying Key Structures of High-Level Languages

427

A similar approach can be used when the destination address is located in
a different segment. It is enough to replace the near unconditional jump with the
far one. To the great pleasure of compiler developers — and of hackers who disassemble programs — in 32-bit mode, the conditional jump "strikes" within the limits of the entire 4 GB address space, and all these problems disappear.

Listings of examples. To better understand the points made in this section, let's
consider several examples using various compilers. Let's begin with analysis of elementary integer relationships.
Listing 173. Elementary Integer Relationships
#include

main

<stdio.h>

()

t
int..ay

int-bs

if

((a<b)

printf ("a<b")+

isa

|ab)

aprintT(va>b
sy

if

(a==b)

printf ("a==b");

if

(at=b)

printf ("a!l=b");

if

(a>=b)

printf ("a>=b");

if

(a<=b)

printf

("a<=b");

Disassembled code of this example compiled using Microsoft Visual C++
looks as follows:
Listing 174. Compiling Elementary Integer Relationships Using Visual C++
main

proc

near

; CODE

var_b

= dword

ptr -8

var

= dword

ptr

a
push

-4

ebp

mov

ebp,

esp

; The

stack

frame

sub

esp,

8

is opened.

XREF:

start+AFTp

428

_— Part I: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

; Memory
mov
; The

is allocated

eax,
value

cmp

eax,

; The

value

short

the

var_a

that

Pale

“Gl <A)

and var_b local

variables.
3

local

variable

is reacted into

EAX.

—

[ebptvar_b]

of the

var_a

the

local

variable

is compared

var 6 variable.

loc_40101B

; If var_a >= var_b,
the strings.
_e print
; Note

var_a

[ebptvar_ a]
of

; to the value-of
jge

for the

the

jump to continue; otherwise,
.

original

code

looked PAies thase

felastayes2 (a) seals) 0

; In other words,

the relational

condition

has been inverted

7 by the compiler.
; The

JGE

instruction

7; the var_a

is

signed;

therefore,

and var_b variables

# are also signed.

; The DO_IT branch

push

offset aAB 4; "a < b"

.

este

|

sate es :ob

>

Step Seven: Identifying Key Structures of High-Level Languages

ion

(Je

push
calle

‘offset-aAB
~ Sprintt

add

eO) prin
tia (a

429

iM)

3; “a>b"

esp,

4

edx,

[ebptvar
a]

.

,

loc 401030:

; CODE XREF: maint+21%j

mov

; The value
cmp

of the

edx,

var_a

variable

of the

+ with the

var_b variable.

var_a variable

short loc 401045

,

; Jump if var_a!=var_b;
; Hence,

into EDX.

[ebptvarb]

; The value

jnz

is loaded

the

original

is compared

=

-

—

i.

otherwise, print theistrings:
code

of the program

looked

like

ee

ee

this:

3 if (a==b) printf ("ab");
=

——:.
=

push offset
Cabs
—_——

ae

=.

add

oc. 400045;

iy th
eprintiog
esp a 24

fe

=

=

; “"a==b"

bese +

<2cee

=
ete

er
er

Bee

Pa

ee)

CODE XREF maint36hj

eee

ee

430

‘Part I: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

i

esp,

add

4

; CODE XREF:

loc_40105A:
mov
ecx,
; The value

[ebptvar_a]
of the var_a

ecx,

cmp

variable

of the var_a variable

; with the

var_b variable.

short

; if
push

calls
madd:

< var_b;

the original

(a>=b)

otherwise,

code

ECx.

is compared

print the strings.

of the program

looked

like

this:

printf ("a>=b");

offsetsaAB 1 7 "*a>=b"
_printft
-esp,4

loc_40106F:
mov

into

loc_40106F

; Jump if var_a
; Hence,

is loaded

;

[ebptvar_b]

; The value

ape

main+4Btj

+ CODE XREF: BE
edx,

[ebpt+var_ a]

;

_; The value of the var_‘a variable

~

;

ne loaded >ie ox.

Boe

Step Seven: Identifying Key Structures of High-Level Languages

; The

stack

frame

is

431

closed.

retn

main

endp

Now let's compare this 32-bit code with the 16-bit code generated by Microsoft
C++ 7.0. (To save space, only a fragment is given. )
Listing 175. The Disassembled Code of Elementary Integer Relationships
Compiled by Microsoft C++ 7.0
Mov

ax,

; The

[bptvar
a]

value

cmp

of

the

var a variable

[bptvar

b],

ax

is

loaded

into

AX.

; The value of the var_a variable is compared
; with the value of the var_b variable.
al
--Jump

tO

jmp

loc

; An

loc_10046
the code

; of

that

the

prints

jump

ehe

string

continue.

short

is made

to

being

unsure

that

the

jump

be

sufficient

to

reach

will

to

; The

taken

unconditional

jump has

the

; Thus, the conversion
; comparison condition

of the
has occurred

; relational

was

was

condition

parsed,

Therefore,
NOT falls

original

pote

Moran
et
Va<Di) sy

loc 10046:
push

code

the

twice: once when
and once when the

Hence,

the

scope

control.

generated.

mov

< varb-

do it label,

+ canceled.

ma=Dp

varia

compiler,

the

; continue label, has jumped
; located within the scope.

; code

1f

10050

unconditional

; Note

that

on

NOT

to the program

the

and

a

; CODE XREF: _main+111j
ax

pOLESeL

dAbE;

Lasor

a

ax

Ca lie oeprintt
add

Spee

loc_10050:

; CODE XREF: _main+131j

; // The
deena

rest

of

the

code

follows.

ee

can

looked

be

like

this:

432

Part |: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

tee

Now let's change type of variables being compared from int to float, and see
how this affects the resulting code. The disassembled code of the example compiled
using Microsoft Visual C++ should be the following. (Only a fragment is given.)
Listing 176. The Disassembled Code of Elementary Floating-Point
Relationships Compiled by Visual C++
a@alte!

[ebpt+var
a]

; The

value

of

; on

top

the

fcomp

of

var_a

floating-point

coprocessor

variable

is

; The

value

of the

, with

the

var b variable.

; The

result

; The

of

var_a

variable

comparison

is

is compared

saved

in

the

coprocessor

flags.

into

register.

ax

coprocessor

test

aly,

flags

register

is

copied

the

AX

ou

; Is bit

0 of the

AH register

set?

; Is

bit

8 of

the

coprocessor

flags

; And

what

in

the

; The

eighth

bit

12

short

loc 20

; Jump

if the

is

eighth

contains

register

set?

bit?

the

carry

flag.

carry

flag

is

cleared

(i.e.,

this

; equivalent

of the

JNC

construction

when

integer

7 compared).

Let's

look

in Table

the

JNB

; is a synonym
eer

loaded

stack.

[ebpt+var
b]

fnstsw

loc_20:

the

(aaa)

JNC.

Hence,

printf ("a

<5 enaae

push

ocffset,

call

_printf

add

esp,

for

$SG339

16 —

the

original

is the
values

are

instruction

code

; "a<b"

4

; CODE XREF: maint1l11j

IEE

looked

like

this:

Step Seven: Identifying Key Structures of High-Level Languages

433
>

The code generated by Borland C++ or Watcom C is much clearer.
Listing 177. The Disassembled Code of Elementary Floating-Point
Relationships Compiled by Borland C++ or Watcom C
fld

[ebptvar

a]

; The

value

of

the

; on

top

the

coprocessor

fcomp

of

var_a

floating-point

variable

is

loaded

stack.

[ebptvar
b]

; The value
7 and

the

fnstsw

; The

of the var_a variable
result

is

saved

is compared with the var_b variable,

in the

coprocessor

flags.

is

copied

to

the

AH

register

are

ax

coprocessor

flags

register

AX

register.

sahf

; The
; to

corresponding
the

flags

of

bits

the

of

main

the

jnb

short

; Jump

if

; Now,

without

digging

in any

; the

original

code

be

Halim

(Gh 5S Ue) Vopasliay
erm Adee Leave

push
cait)
pop

copied

processor.

loc _1003C

!(a<b);

otherwise,
can

offset unk_100BO
priber
ecx

print

the

strings

reference

tables,

printf ("a<b").

reconstructed:

; format

loc_1003c:

; CODE XREF:

_maintFt3

Now, with some experience identifying elementary conditions, let's proceed to
more complex operations. Consider the following example:
Listing 178. Identifying Complex Operations
#include

<stdio.h>

main()

{

unsigned

int

a;

unsigned

int b;

int

c;

int

d;

434

_— Part I: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

ie O(8)

prance
e TRUE ee

else

if (((a>b)
ie

&& (al=0)).

le=—ol)i

|| ((a==c)

&& (c!=0)))-print£(4OK\n");

|

jelesbonee
Ue val ylA

:

}

|

.

Disassembling the compiled code of this example should give roughly the following:
Listing 179. The Disassembled Code with Complex Operations
_main

proc

var d
var _C
var_b
vara

=
=
=
=
push

near

dword
dword
dword
dword

ptr
ptr
ptr
ptr

-10h
-O0Ch
-8
-4

ebp

ebp,
mov
; The stack

esp

sub

10h

esp,

frame

.
is opened.

;

+ Memory is allocated for local variables.

ae

cmp

[ebptvar_d], 0 —

;

-

ys

ers

Deon

=

q

a.

# The value of the var_d variable

ohees

ens

—~—

Ry

is compared

fe

"dei

with zero.

ee gah.

a

°*

~~»

.

oieaac

Step Seven: Identifying Key Structures of High-Level Languages

; into

the

existing

tree.

™~

;

3:

te

vard ==

0

lGG ie

A

printl ("TRUE")

:

loc_44

Loc: 1B:

:
mov

eax,

; The value of the

var_a variable

cmp

eax,

; The

var_a variable

jbe

short loc 22

™e

graft

main+atj

is loaded

into EAX.

[ebptvar
b]

Lee valn a is less

; Let's

; CODE XREF:

[ebptvar
a]

a new

is compared with the

or equal

nest,

to

var b,

jump

var_b variable.

to

keeping
in mind

that var_a and var_b are unsigned variables!

loc_29,.—

435

436

_— Part I: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

loc 29:

; CODE XREF: _main+21Tj
; The

loc_29

label

is already present.

Let's

correct»

7, ene Eee

;

jE

;

.

loc_1B

i

Ver cars

;

==

vara

printf ("TRUE")

var_b

t=(

> a bec.44

loc_29

“ee

mov

;

oe — >

foe “i

i The value

of the vara

variable

is Saad

cmp

lebptvar. _C)

ane

i

Oe

eCx,

The ete as the vata variable

a jnz >

:

ates

—- eCx,

;a

ae

eae

at vara I=var_c.

Pek

oe.

Phat

a. >

is “compared with the var- C variable.

cei

ieee loc.44

into CX.

;

:a,

a
>

a

;

ag

4

. *,q

at
—

5

Step Seven: Identifying Key Structures of High-Level Languages

cmp

[ebpt+var

; The value

C],

of the

0

var_C variable

jz
short loc 44
; Jump to the loc_44

label

is compared

vane

ee

i—=—

loots

y

mS
jouewsavicie (WANENO AY)

WelsGl SP yee)10)

;

os

;

;

ete

;

gee
yar.

Vatee
C.==

ene

loc 44

ea

‘ekeeel HE

z

zero.

if var_C ==

:
if

with

IGE29

denver

C

=

eS

ise:44

* continue
;

7

_

toc. 37:
;

a

sed

-

CODE XREF: _maint27%5

;- ‘Theince 37 label is already present in the tree. :
.
i Let's graft Pete
;
25
;
f

at

te eh

=

437

438

|

_ Part I: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

push
cali.)

offset $SG346
printt

; "OK\n"

5

add

esp,

; The

loc _44 and loc_37 branches

4

loc_44:

; CODE XREF: main+19tj

;

;

‘
i

ee
var_a

oe

close

_main+2Ffj

up.

var _d a.

—

LB

<= var_b

loc 29

printf ("TRUE")
loc_44

...

Step Seven: Identifying Key Structures of High-Level Languages

push

offset

$SG348

call

—iovanb ghee

add

esp,

439

5; "+++\n"

4

;

Se

;

Var

d

OCeEES

;

Vara

'

<=

==

0

<

DEINE
DY TRUE )

vars)

ee

loc

44

=a

var a !=0

loGe29

Var a != varC
4

jae

C ==

:

loc 44

;

OCHSH

Pranks

B

("OK")

var CG d=ave ra)

5

Pee

loc 59:

Be (eee)

finish

; CODE XREF: main+4atj
mov

esp,

pop

ebp

ebp

retn

_main

endp

As a result, a huge tree with many branches has grown. At first glance, it seems
impossible to figure out. However, a little pruning will yield results. Let's optimize
the tree, remove the "twisted" branches by inverting the condition in the nest, and

440

Part I: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

eliminate all labels — now that the. skeleton of the tree is ready, they are
unnecessary. If everything is done correctly, the tree should look like this:

var_d !=0
Se

var_a <= var_b

printf("TRUE")

var_a != var_c

printf(""OK")

var_c != var_d

Te

printf("+++")

x
finish

Fig. 28. The logical tree

It is striking that all routes pass through the point Z (see Fig. 28), which joins all
branches. This means that there are two separate trees, each represented by its own IF
statement. Wonderful! This considerably simplifies the analysis — if the trees are
independent, they can be analyzed independently! Let's begin from the upper one.
Two branches grow from the var_d!=0: nest: the right one leading to
printf ("TRUE")

and, further, to the end of the IF—-THEN[-ELSE]

statement; and

the left one passing through a crowd of nests before it reaches Z. The situation
looks like this: If the var_d variable is not equal to zero, print "OK" and finish the job;
otherwise,

carry out additional

tests. In other-words,

IF

(vard !=0)

THEN

printf ("OK") ELSE..., and the left branch of the nest (var_d != 0) is the ELSE
branch. Let's analyze it.
From the (var_a <= var_b) nest to the printf("oK") nest, there are two
routes:

!(var_a

!(var_c

==

<=

var_b)

>

!(var_a

==

0)

and! Warla

1=evwaric)

>

0). If there is an alternative, there must always be an or operation:

Step Seven: Identifying Key Structures of High-Level Languages

441

either the first way, or the second. At the same time, the nests of both ways are
connected serially; they are joined by an anpD operation. Therefore, this branch
should

look like this: IF

var_c)
&& (var_c
Statement gives: IF
ver

(var.

6&

by)

((var_a

>

var

b)

&&

GvieliqnsOpe

!= 0)) printf("OK").
Putting
(var_d !=0) THEN printf("0K")
0)

Osi

ahha

lvarsa

a=

vara):

—Sai0))e)

||

(vara ==

ELSE into the first IF
ELSE IF ((var_a >
66

xlvrat

PRIN te (Ow)«

ics

l=

0)-)

a

The analysis of the second tree is trivial: IF (var_c==var_d) printf "+++").
The source code of the program being disassembled looked like the following:
Listing 180. The Source Code of the Program Being Disassembled
Wnt

ayoueint

Boe a(GL

stowed
(aE RUBIES) s

bp oP. intoc;

2?
int

-d;

else

Tw

if

Cecasb

(c==d)

res

s(at—O\

els

la=—c es Gea led=Onin) prints

(“OK\n)-;

printf ("+++\n");

Therefore, the a and b variables are unsigned int, since the result of comparison was analyzed using the gnB unsigned relational instruction. Unfortunately,
the c and d variables are impossible to determine. Nevertheless, we were able to re-

construct a complex condition using trees, in which it would be easy to get lost.

Optimizing the branches. Let's examine a tangled code. (The sETGE instruction
sets the destination operand to 1 if the sF and oF status flags are equal (i.e., SF == OF);
otherwise, the destination operand is set to zero.)
Listing 181.
mov

A Tangled Code Produced by an Optimizing Compiler
eax,

[var A]

xOr

eCX,

ECX

cmp

eax,

0x666

setge

cl

cee

eCcx

and

ecx,

add.

ecx, 0x300

OXFFFFFC0O

~

mov

[var zzz],

ecx

Part I: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

442

At first glance, this fragment seems to have been borrowed from a crafty protection mechanism. In fact, it is the result of compiling the following trivial state(a<0x666)°

ment: if

zzz=0x200

else

zzz=0x300,

whose nonoptimized form

looks as follows:
Listing 182. The Nonoptimized Form of the Tangled Code
mov

eax,

cmp

eax, 0x666

[var A]

jge

Label1

mov

ecx,

jmp

Label2

Ox100

Label1:
mov

ecx,

0x300

[var

2zz],ecx

habelyZ):
mov

Why did the compiler reject this variant? The variant is shorter, but it contains
branches (i.e., unplanned changes of the normal flow of the program's execution).
Branches negatively affect performance — they clear the pipeline, which in contemporary processors is very long and cannot be refilled quickly. Therefore, removing branches by using mathematical calculations is entirely justified and warmly
greeted. In addition, it complicates the analysis of the program, protecting it from
hackers.
Let's execute the program step by step.
Listing 183. A Step-by-Step Execution of the Tangled Code
mov

eax,

[var

A]

paCak.==—VaTA

xOr

eCX,

eCx
#~eCx=0;

cmp

eax,

0x666
; if eax<0x666

{ SF=1;

OF=0}

else

{SF=0;

OF=0}

Step Seven: Identifying Key Structures of High-Level Languages

443
a

dec

and

7 if

eax<0x666

(i.e.

SF==1,

OF

;

eax<0x666

ecx=-1

else

ecx=0

(i.e.,

ecx==-1)

(i.e.,

ecx=-0x400)

ecx,

if

else

cl=l1

OxFFFFFC00O

ecx,

eax<0x666

ecx=OxFFFFFCOO

(-0x400)

else

ecx=0;

0x300
7 if

mov

cl=0

ecx

; if
add

==0)

eax<0x666

ecx=0x100

else

ecx=0x300;

[esp+0x66],ecx

The algorithm has been cleared up and reversed. It is a rather simple example —
in real life, the code will be much more complicated — but the basic idea is apparent: Encountering the sETxx instruction makes it likely that a conditional jump is
near. In elementary cases, SETxx may be replaced with spp (subtraction with a borrow). Knowing this, let us solve the second problem.
Listing 184. Another Example of Code That Looks Like a Puzzle
sub

ebx,

eax

sbb

ecx,

eECxX

and

ecx,

ebx

add

eax,

eCx

What does this code do? Does it perform some complex arithmetic operation?
Listing 185.
sub

ebx,

eax
; if

sbb

ecx,

ecx,

eax,

SF=1

else

SF=0

(EBX<EAX)

ECX=-1

else

ECX=0

(EBX<EAX)

ECX=EBX

else

ECX=0

(EBX<EAX)

EAX=EAX+(EBX-EAX)

ebx

if
add

(EBX<EAX)

eECX

; if
and

A Step-by-Step Execution of the Puzzle-Like Code

eCx

if

else

HAX=EAX

Part I: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

444

Removing the brackets from the last expression (while remembering that Zax
has been subtracted from EBX) gives if (EBX<EAX) EAX=EBX. Therefore, it is
a classical algorithm for finding a smallest of two signed numbers. One more
example:
Listing 186. Another Example That Looks Complicated but Is Rather Simple
cmp

eax,

1

sbb

eax,

eax

and

ecx,

eax

soja

eeree

pall

and
Or

eax,
eax,

ebx
CCX

Try to solve the example manually, then look at the answer.
Listing 187. The Step-by-Step Execution of the Seemingly Complex Code
cmp

eax,

1
, af

sbb

eax,
ecx,

eax,

eax,

eax,

(BAX!=0)

HAX=-1

(EAX!=0)

ECX=ECX

(EAX!=0)

EAX=0

else

EAX=-1

(EAX!=0)

EAX=0

else

EAX=RBX

(EAX!=0)

EAX=ECX

else

EAX=0

else

ECX=Q

ebx

, if

or

SF=1

—-1

7, if
and

else

eax

7 af
xor

SF=0

eax
; if

and

(EAX!=0).

eCx
; if

else

EAX=EBX

After all these exercises, readers could be excused for dreaming in Boolean

terms. However, such is the cost of civilization. Incidentally, most compilers deal
with conditional jumps well enough, and do not tend to expel them completely.
Therefore, analyzing optimized code is not a great strain. Although, manual optimization is not included, as professional developers eliminate conditional jumps
first of all.

Step Seven: Identifying the Key Structures of High-Level Languages

445

The switch—case—break Statements
To improve the readability of programs, the switch statement was introduced
in the C language. In Pascal, the case statement is more flexible than its C ana-

logue and is used for solving the same task. These distinctions will be considered further on.

It is easy to show that switch is equivalent to the following statement: IF (a == x:)
THEN

statement;

ELSE

IF

(a*==

x2)

THEN

statement2

ELSE

THEN

statement3

ELSE

IF

(

x4)

THEN

statement,

ELSE...

==

IF

(a
a

==

x3)

default

statement. Representing this branch as a logical tree gives a structure that resembles a braid (Fig. 29).

Switch{a)
caseOQ_

case 1:

: printf("a == 0");
break;

printf("a == 1");
break;

case 2

: printf("a =x

2

break;

a ==

666

oa
printf("Default");

case 666 : printf("a == 666h");
break;

default

: printf("Default”);

Fig. 29. A general translation of the switch statement

It might seem that identifying switch is an easy task: Even without constructing a tree, we cannot overlook a long chain of nests that test an expression against
a set of immediate values for equality (since switch cannot compare a variable
3
against another variable).
In reality, however, matters stand differently. Compilers translate switch

into

a real mess stuffed from top to bottom with various relational operations. Let's
compile the above example in Microsoft Visual C++ and see the result.

Part I: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

446

LT

Listing 188. The Disassembled Code of the switch Statement Compiled by
Visual C++
rr

main

proc

var_ tmp

= dword

ptr

var_a

= dword

ptr -4

push

near

e

—————

; CODE

XREF:

start+AFYp

-8

ebp

mov

ebp,

esp

; The

stack

frame

sub

esp,

8

; Space

is allocated

mov

eax,

is opened.

for

local

variables.

:

; The value
mov

[ebptvar_
a]

of the var_a variable

[ebptvar

; Notice

; Even

that

tmp],

switch

if the value

oe

;
eee

ease °

into EAX.

;

eax

creates its own

of the variable

7 in some branch of case,
a 3 affected! Hereinafter,

ioe

is loaded

temporary variable.
being compared is changed

the result of executing switch will not be
to avoid confusion, we will refer to

;

ua; ‘the var_tmp variable as the vara variable.

ren Saas eo

oe :

——

gm

:

we:

e

J

ere

ee

:

ce

cmp
[ebptvar ant
Ss
_j ‘The value o
var_a variable is comparedto 2.

-

ce code, case began with 0, and ended with01666,

So
ee

Step Seven: Identifying the Key Structures of High-Level Languages

; this

operation

; flags

since

then.

jz

short

loc_40104F

(PEE

eas Madestor

a moment

the

is obtained

code

Re CESS

29 jonbaeic((ley eee

cmp

[ebp+var tmp],

of var_a

jz

loc_401031

; This

code

7 casero:

cmp

is made

4z
ya,
; This

is obtained

[ebpt+var

y Ine waive

have

printer

by translating

is compared

to the

printf ("a

and

the

not

changed

(lag=—12"))

aie var a ==

2.

it Var a ==

0.

branch

==

tmp],

to 0.

call of ree

es =—

by translating

the

0").

1

0")

branch
S

Fe

et

ee

ef vara is" compared to 1.

short loc_401040
is made
code

any

0

; The value

short

ago

icallwot

; This

; A jump

pee

just

447

to the

is obtained

Pp wecase as pee

|
call

of printf("a

==

1")

by translating the branch

ee== ee

Dae

ame

ae

if var_a

==

1.
a

448

_— Part I: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

jmp

short

; A jump

; This

loc_40106D

is made

code

; default:

to the

call

is obtained
printf("a

==

; CODE XREF:

; printf("A

==

push

offset

etl

isbeslighess

add

esp,

jmp

short

loc_40107A

; Here

is

the

first

; outside

the

switch

the

rest

aAOQ

; "A ==

eran

Sieg;

aoe

break

eS

Sa

:

statement,

of the branches

of the

passes

were

would

value

to which

control

no break

|

they correspond!

hes

:

i<

~

.

e

|

ae

eae agin
Bore OOS ie
Wa
ms EE
Sset

AA
Tm AeTeer eh SPO 88. + SER
ist ee eur cing
ean TEES
a oy Aa
;
en

statement,

be executed

; CODE XREF: main+22t3
-

offset Al | "A =i"
ot

which

If there

of case

var_a

ete
GE eT

C

0"

statement.

seat ©SPEAR.
2

main+1ctj

4

loc_401040:
; printf ("A == 1")
push

>

branch

0")

; irrespective

-

the

0").

loc_401031:

~

of printf("Default").

by translating

=

ea

-

.

-

=

;

.

Al a

it

a

4
~

Step Seven: Identifying the Key Structures of High-Level Languages

449

——”

jeprInen ("Default")
push

offset

call

~
jehaatigh
ene

aDefault

add

esp,

MOV

pop
; The

“Default”

4

loc_40107A:
; The

7

; CODE XREF: main+3Efj maint+4pDtj
end

of

esp,

switch

ebp

ebp
stack

frame

is

closed.

retnm
main

endp

By constructing a logical tree (see the "Conditional 1F-THEN-ELSE

Statements"

section), the following picture will be obtained (Fig. 30). First, notice the a > 2 condition, which was not present in the source code. Then, notice the changes to the

order of processing the cases. The calls of the printf function still follow one after
another, according to the order in which they were declared. Why does the compiler behave in such a way?
The purpose of the (a > 2) nest can be easily explained: Consecutive processing of all cases of the switch statement is extremely unproductive. Such processing
is fine if there are only four or five cases, but what if the programmer stuffs the
switch statement with a hundred or so of them? The processor will become ex-

hausted from testing each of them. (Especially since the sought case "likes" to appear at the end). Therefore, the compiler "compresses" the tree to reduce its height.
Instead of one branch (in Fig. 30) in the given case, the compiler has constructed
two of them. It placed the numbers that are less than two into the left branch, and

the rest of the numbers into the right branch. As a result, the branch 666h appeared
to be relocated from the end of the tree to its beginning. This method of optimizing
the search for values is called a fork algorithm.
The compiler has the right to change the order in which it processes the cases:
The standard does not say anything about it, and each implementation is free to act
as it considers appropriate. The case routines (i.e., the codetowhich case passes
control if the condition is true) are another matter. They must be ordered just as
they were declared in the program because, in the absence of the terminating break
statement, they should be executed strictly in the order suggested by the programmer. However, this opportunity of the C language is rarely used.

450

Part I: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

a

a==2
a ==0

a==1_

a == 666h
aS

printf("a =

oy

LW

printf(

"

a ==

666h

u

7

printf("a == 0");

printf("Default"); printf("a == 1");

Fig. 30. Translating the switch statement
using Microsoft Visual C++

Thus, we can identify the switch statement by applying this statement: After
removing the central nest and grafting the right branch to the left one (or vice versa), if
we obtain an equivalent tree that forms a structure like a braid, we are dealing with a
switch statement or its analogue.
Do we have the right to delete nests, and would this operation impair the tree's
structure? Note that the left branch of the node's nest contains the (a ==

2),

(a==0), and (a==1) nests; the right one contains (a == 0x666). Obviously,
if a == 0x666, then a != 0 anda !=1. Hence, it is safe to graft the ia branch to
the left one. After such a transformation, the tree becomes typical for the switch
construction (Fig. 31).

This nest can be removed;
if'a != 0 &é&anda != 2,thena

a== ne

a == 0. printf('a == 2"
a==1

sent, =n
printf("Default"); printf("

Fig. 31. Pruning the logical tree

© printf("

Soak ("a ==

= 666h");

1");

Step Seven: Identifying the Key Structures of High-Level Languages

451

However, such simple identification tricks do not always work. Particular compilers may create such a mess that your hair will stand on end. eon DES this example in Borland C++ 5.0 results in the following:
Listing 189. The Disassembled Code of the switch Statement Compiled by
Borland C++
ine

_Cdecl

main(int

argc,

const

char

proc near

_main

push

**argv,

; DATA XREF:

char

*envp)

DATA:00407044\o

ebp

mov

ebp,

esp

; The

stack

frame

; The

compiler

; Since

it
eax,

1

; Now,

EAX

is

; There

was

no

jb

short

7 Le Ax

already

; it

does

opened.

not

the

variable

initialized,

decremented

1.

What

in the

a uD

lS made!

change

CMP

not

easy!

prineg
("a ——

0!").

it mean?

the

instruction,

except

as

a result

translating

operands.

0: Print£ ("a ==

values

is generated

can

this

EAX take

to

satisfy

At

first

condition

of

Be A

een

EEDA

LEE OU

; You

know

that

JB is an unsigned

; and

-0xl

appears

Ate,

as

; OXFFFFFFFFis much

0

paella

glance,

eee) eS DOL

instruction

of comparison,

OxXFFFFFFFF
in an unsigned

greater

; therefore,

the

only

; Thus,

construction

than

suitable
is

of

0").

relation?

; the

short

is

calilot

case

this

might

it

SUB

7; the

; for equality

of

program.

the

code

What

EAX register.

tomthe

this

; Think!

the
note

is

; Therefore,
branch

into

making

401092

mentioned,

not

by

subtraction

loc

<i

; As

is

places

was

sub

32

const

1;

value

simply

form.

Ss
is.
a veiled

to zero.

test

of

ae

loc_40109F

; A jump is made if the zero
; It will

be

set

if: EAX =

; Indeed,

the

jump

flag is set.

1.

is performed

to printf("a

==

1").

EAX

452

~_—«—~Part I: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

dec

eax

; EAX

is decremented

jz

short loc_4010AC

; A jump

is made

; after

1 is

if the

subtracted

; In other

words,

; Control

is passed

sub
; The

eax,

664h

value

0x664

jz

short

by 1.

the

is

)

|
zero

flag

by the

original

to the

The

flag

instruction,

value

branch

subtracted

is set.

SUB

of EAX should

that

from

calls

is set

1 is

left

have

printf("a

if,

been

==

|

in EAX.

2.

2").

EAX.

loc_4010B9

; A jump

is made

; After

decrementing

if the

EAX twice,

zero

flag

; hence

the original

value

is set.

it becomes

equal

to 0x664,

pier

is

is 0x666.

jmp — short loc_4010C6
; A jump is made to the call eS

bi

arenes: this iseesste: of the. sewarch statement.

£

eae
Fo.
Be.wae =

~
;

Step Seven: Identifying the Key Structures of High-Level Languages

453
a”

push

ORESet

Call

pra niet

one

pop

ecx

jmp

short

ra

am ——

2!

loc_4010D1

loc_4010B9:
7; printf

; CODE XREF: maint+12Tj

("a==666")

;

push

offset

call

Pieresigicns

aA666h

pop

ecx

jmp

short

loc

; "a ==

666h"

4010D1

loc_4010C6:

; CODE XREF: main+141j

, DPEIMMEL(DerauLe”)push

offset

call

ggiakchee

pop

ecx

aDefault

7

loc_4010D1:

Default

; CODE XREF: main+21tj

xOF

eax,

pop

ebp

_main+2ETj

eax

retn
~main

endp

The code generated by the compiler modifies the variable being compared.
The optimizer decided that DEc EAx is shorter and works faster than the instruction for comparison with a constant. However, hackers are none the better for it!

The direct retranslation of the code (see "Conditional IF-THEN-ELSE

Statements")

gives a code like this: IF

IF

(a==0)

2 aren

BEG:

primer ("a
IF

==

LF

((a-=0x664)==0)

(a--

==

Bishkek
printf("a

0)

= (=a)
==

666h);

printf("a
==
ELSE

<0)

==

0");

ELSE

printf ("a

coe

printf ("Default").

The switch

statement does not seem to be visible in it. However, it is still visible: The switch
must be near the long chain IF-THEN-ELSE-IF-THEN-ELSE. It will be easier to recognize the switch statement if we represent it as a tree; note the typical braid

(Fig. 32).

:

There is another distinctive feature — case routines or, to be more precise,
the break statements that traditionally terminate them. They form the right half

454

~_—Part I: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

eS

of the "braid" and converge to the point Z. However, many programmers prefer
case routines that have a size of two or three screens and that include loops,
branches, and even nested switch statements! As a result, the right part of the "braid"

turns into an impassable jungle. The left part of the "braid" remains recognizable.

ee

© Ee

EAX--==

fEAXS&0.

S\N
~\

Eee

+5 \
printss
t('a == 0");
~

~

fo
REA SQ. printhtas= 1");
hese == 666h / ~
ene
\ (BAX -= 0x666) >=0, Pina == 20;
A

x

=

™~

=

i]

u

\

printf("Default");

printf("a nies y

Fig. 32. Constructing a logical tree with nests that modify
the variable being compared

The last compiler to be considered regarding this topic is Watcom C. As one
would expect, we should watch for specific subtleties and "delicacies" here. The
compiled code of the previous example looks like the following:
Listing 190. The Disassembled Code of the switch Statement Compiled by

Watcom C
main_

proc
push

near

; CODE

XREF:

__CMain+40Vvp

8

Call

CHK

; The

stack

is

cmp

eax,

1

; The

value

7 containing

tested

for

1 is compared

the

overflow.

with

a variable.

the register

variable

Step Seven: Identifying the Key Structures of High-Level Languages

jb

short

; If EAX ==

loc _41002F
0, a jump

; that

contains

jbe

short

; If EAX ==

* a jump
cmp

(i.e.,

to

7 a jump

the

condition

the

branch

2

short

; If EAX ==

to the

branch

tests.

loc_41003A
1

EAX < 1 has

that

calls

been

tested

printf("a

==

already),

1").

2

; EAX is compared

ibe

is made

additional

is made

eax,

455

to 2.

loc_410041
2

(the

is made

cmp

eax, 666h
; EAX is compared

condition

to the

EAX < 2 has

branch

ine
to the value

that

calls

been

tested

printf("a

already),

== 2").

y

0x666.

S22

ies
jz

short

loc_410048—

j; If EAX == 0x666,
A
:

PlriIneh

a jump is made to the branch

that calls

as—=s6 66h").

—

jmp

short

loc 41004F

; None of the conditions

is ‘satisfied and a jump

; to the branch "Default" must be performed.

ees

|

456

Part |: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

push

offset

aAl

;

"A

jmp

short

loc 410054

==

1"

loc_410041:
; printé ("a

; CODE XREF:

push

offset

aA2

jmp

short

loc

; "A ==

2"

410054

loc_410048:
; printf("a

; CODE XREF: main +1Bf3
==

666h");

push

offset

aAe66h

jmp

short

loc

; "A ==

666h"

410054

loc_41004F:
}) PLINEL

main +1473

==92")

; CODE XREF:

main +1Dtj

main +2173

main +28fj

main +2Ftj

('DefaaLe!);

push

offset

aDefault

loc_410054:

7

"Detaulen

; CODE XREF:

call

Sprermtte

; Here,

printfis receiving

add

esp,

4

; The

stack

frame

is

arguments

from

the

case

routines.

closed.

retn

main_

endp

Strangely enough, Watcom generates an illustrative and readable code.
Distinguishing switch from the case statement of the Pascal language.
The case statement of Pascal is practically identical to its C rival —
the switch statement. However, they are not twins: The Pascal case statement favorably differs in that it supports sets and ranges of values. Sets can be processed using switch, although not as elegantly as in Pascal. (See Listing 189.) However, testing to discover if a value falls into a range in C exclusively uses the

IF-THEN-ELSE

statement.

In Pascal, each case body is terminated by the

implicit break, and the C programmer is free to use it or not at his or her own
discretion.

Step Seven: Identifying the Key Structures of High-Level Languages

457
>

<e

SEE
EEE
ee
a
eee
Listing 191. Distinguishing the switch Statement from the case Statement
CASE

a OF

switch (a)

begin

{
al

S) Apankierswmal
(ich e———

SUSie

case

4d Se printi("ay—=

1)

break;
2a eel

9

ee

ealsise Intake

: WriteLn('a

==

Casey

9');

cme:

case

4

Case

7s

;

ieee)

break;
LP Reiciassmers

Pietneeay ——e

24

(Vey

7).

Sie

break;

Both languages impose a restriction on the variable being tested: It must belong
to one of the integer types. In addition, all sets (ranges) of values must be constants
or constant expressions computed at compile time. Variables or function calls
should not be used.
It is interesting to see how Pascal translates the tests of ranges and how this differs in the C compilers. Let's consider the following example:
Listing 192. Translating Tests of Ranges in Pascal
VAR

a:

Longint;

BEGIN

CASE

a

OF

2
Ave

6

OM

LOO

:

WriteLn ("a

==

2")-;

:

WriteLn('a

==

4/6

WriteLn("a

==

[10,100]
");

');

END;

END.

Compiling this example in Free Pascal should give the following result.
(To save space, only the left part of the "braid" is shown.)
Listing 193. The Disassembled Code of the Range-Test Translation Using
Z
Free Pascal
mov
.
,

The

eax,

value

ds:

A

of the

variable

being

compared

is loaded

into

EAXx.

458

on
e

‘Part |: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

cmp

eax,

2

; EAX is compared-to

the value

0x2.
>

34

loc_CA

; This

; If EAX < 2,
sub
; The

az

a jump

eax,

2

value

0x2

is

is made

to the

end

subtracted

from

EAX.

Aeyose NT

; A jump
sub

to the

0x2

Zz

loc_72

short

-——.

we

8

lb ig

of WriteLn('a

is subtracted

== Ze

== 2')

if EAX =

4, eg

ns rains

call Of WriteLn (' a==

==

4/6");

hE 8

ea

ero sora

Cnet

—

ne

ei if EAX ==

eee

=

#2
Sua

ye ae «A

:

short loc 72
jump is

made

2

mae

Farina a

; The value 0x2 is aigheeaeted from EAX.

os:

;

Ta pe

CR!

POO Oe
en

2.

from EAX.
; WriteLn('a

7 A jump is made to the
(or a =

call

yy)

; The value

;

case.

g WriteLn('a

is made

eax,

is the end of CASE.
of

=

Writeln('a == 416");

= S

is

4

a

to thexh ofBETS = 4)6") if Ri* 2"

ie e.

Step Seven: Identifying the Key Structures of High-Level Languages

seal

Eee

; Since
;

this

jmp

ae

OO

the

case

branch

loc

; A jump
7 none

a

of

works

hl

O0)u.

a >

10 has

if

a>=10

the

end

&&

been

; This

made

the

processed

to

conditions

had

of

above,

a<=100.

CA

is

of

orm

459

is

the

end

of

CASE.

case;

been

satisfied.

Apparently, Free Pascal generates practically the same code as Borland C++ 5.x
does; therefore, no complexities should arise during analysis.
Balancing tall trees. In rare cases, the switch statements contain hundreds or
even thousands of sets of values. A straightforward solution to such a comparison
task will produce a logical tree of enormous height. Passing through such a logical
tree will take a long time, negatively affecting the program's performance.
However, we should think about what the switch statement is engaged in. Let's
digress from the commonly accepted maxim: "The switch statement provides a special means for choosing one of many variants, and consists of testing the coincidence of
the value of a given expression with one of the given constants and in the corresponding
branch." Instead, we can say that switch is a statement for finding an appropriate
value. In such a case, the initial switch tree is a trivial algorithm of sequential
search — the most inefficient searching algorithm.
Suppose that the source code of a program is the following:
Listing 194. An Example of the Source Code of a Program
switch

(a)

{
case

98

1

case

4

;

CASSEL

}

ee ce usrevar

Casewo=

hls

Case

Zins claus

a4

Casey:

Meo yanuy

easeuddl)

cr 3:20.57

Case

6660

case

096:....;

CaSeeal

Lh] iim ee

ioScone GES EN

NES

47

ah nds AEN PIES Spa

e

ep i

et

ee ene 2 oe

a

a

460

Part |: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

An appropriate nonoptimized logic tree will appear to be 11 nests high (Fig. 33,

at the left). The left branch of the root nest will appear to contain as many as 10
other nests, but the right branch will appear to contain none (only a corresponding
case routine).

The "skew" can be corrected by splitting one branch into two parts, and grafting
the resultant halves into a new nest, containing a condition that determines which

branch should be sought for the variable being compared. The left branch, for example, may contain nests with even values, while the right branch may hold the
odd ones. However, this is a bad criterion: The number of even and odd values is

rarely split fifty-fifty, and the skew arises again. The following method is much
more reliable: Take the smallest value and throw it into the heap a, then take the

greatest value and throw it into the heap B. Repeat this procedure until all available
values have been sorted.
A unique value is required for the switch statement (i.e., each number only
may occur once in the set, or range, of values). Therefore, it is easy to show that the
heaps will contain equal quantities of numbers (in the worst case, one heap may
contain one more number). In addition, each number on the A heap will be less
than the smallest number on the B heap. Hence, we can make one comparison to

determine in which heap we should look for the values being compared.
The height of the new tree will be equal to (N + 1) /2 + 1, where N is the number
of nests of the old tree. Really, the branch of the tree is split into two parts, and
a new nest added, creating N/2 and +1. Then, (N+1) is needed to round off the division result to the upper value. For example, if the height of the nonoptimized tree
reached 100 nests, it now decreases to 51. You think 51 is a large number, too?
What prevents us from again splitting each branch into two parts? This will reduce
the height of the tree to 27 nests. Subsequent compaction will give 16 > 12 >
11 + 9 + 8 — this is all. Further compaction of the tree is impossible (think —
or construct the tree — to figure out why). Still, 8 nests are not as unmanageable as
100 nests. Passing through the entire optimized tree will require less than nine
comparisons.
Practically all compilers, even nonoptimizing ones, are capable of compacting
logical trees of the switch statement! Compaction boosts performance, but it complicates analysis of compiled programs. Look at Fig. 33 again: The left, unbalanced
tree is illustrative and intuitively clear; the right, balanced tree is difficult to understand.

Fortunately, the tree's balance admits an effective rollback. But before we begin
climbing trees, let's introduce the concept of a balancing node. A balancing node
does not change the operation logic of a binary tree; it is an optional node, whose
only function is to truncate the branches. The balancing node of a tree may be

Step Seven: Identifying the Key Structures of High-Level Languages

461
~~

ae

replaced by any of the branches without losing the functionality. Each branch of
a balancing node should contain more than one nest.

Fig. 33. A logical tree before (left) and after (right) compaction

If all nodes of a logic tree, the right branch of which contains one or more
nests, can be replaced by this right branch without losing of the tree's functionality,
then the given construction represents a switch statement. Why just the right
branch? The switch statement, in its unwrapped condition, represents a chain of
nests. These are interconnected by left branches and contain case routines on the
right branches. Therefore, we try to hook all the right nests on the left branch. If we
succeed, we are dealing with the switch statement; if not, we have encountered

something different.
Consider the reconstruction of the balance in the following example (Fig. 34, at
the left). Starting from the lower-left branch, we shall climb the tree until we encounter a node that has one or more nests on its right branch. In this case, this is

the (a > 5) node. If we replace this node with its nests — (a ==

7) and (a == 9), the

tree's functionality will not be disturbed (as shown in the middle of Fig. 34). Similarly, the (a > 10) node can be replaced by the (a > 96), (a == 96), (a == 22), and
(a == 11) nests without any serious consequences. Then, the (a > 96) node can be

replaced by the (a == 98), (a == 666), and (a == 777) nests. A switch tree, in
which the multiple-selection statement can easily be recognized, is formed.

462

Part I: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

Keep moving from the
lower-left branch of the
tree until the node is
reached whose right
branch contains one or
more nests.

If the node can be
replaced by its right
branch without losing

If a tree comprised of
one branch is obtained

after all the balancing
nodes have been

the tree's functionality,
this node is a balancing

unwrapped, this is
the switch statement. Je

Fig. 34. Reversing the balance of the logical tree

A complex example of balancing (or optimizing the balance). To reduce the
height of the tree being compacted, some compilers replace existing nests with balancing nodes. Consider the following example: To reduce height of the tree, the
compiler splits it into two halves (Fig. 35). The left half is filled with nests that have
values <= 1; the right half holds all other nests. It would seem that the (a == 2) nest
should hang on the right branch of the node (a > 1). However, this is not the case.
The (a > 2) node and the case routine :2 are hooked to the left branch. This is
quite logical: if (a >1) and ! (a> 2), then a == 2.

1 :

se
nfoefelit nc

Ne

a==1

Y

ES

aoe

Oi

Nae es oe NS
i

is

Fig. 35. An intricate example of balancing

The (a > 2) node is rigidly connected to and works with the (a > 1) node.
It is impossible to throw out one of them without impairing the functionality of the
other. It also is impossible to use the algorithm described above to reconstruct the
balance of a tree without impairing the tree's functionality! It might seem that we
are not dealing with the switch statement, but with something different.
To dispel this delusion, several additional steps need to be taken. First, case

routines are always on the right branch of the switch tree. Is it possible to transform the tree so that the case routines appear on the left branch of the balancing

Step Seven: Identifying the Key Structures of High-Level Languages

463

node? Yes, this can be done by replacing (a > 2) with (a < 3) and swapping the locations of the branches (in other words, by performing an inversion). Second, all

nests of the switch tree comprise equality conditions. Can the (a < 3) inequality be
replaced by a corresponding equality? It certainly can: (a == 2).
After these transformations, the tree's balance can be easily reversed.

Branches in case routines. In reality, case routines teem with a variety of
branches, loops, and conditional jumps. As a consequence, the logical tree resembles a thistle thicket, not the switch statement. It should be clear that, after identifying the case routines, this problem can be solved. But how can we identify the
case routines?
Except for rare, unusual instances, case routines do not contain branches rela-

tive to the variable being compared. Statements such as switch(a)...

case 666 :

if (a == 666)... OF switch(a)... case 666 : if (a > 666)... are pointless.
Thus, we may safely remove from the logical tree all the nests containing conditions
that involve the variable being compared (the variable of the root nest).

What if the programmer puts into case routines a branch relative to the variable being compared? This does not complicate the analysis: The inserted branches
are easily recognized as superfluous or as nonexecuting, and they simply can be
pruned off. For example, if (a > 0) is hooked to the right branch of the (a == 3)
nest, it can be removed; it does not carry any information. If (a == 2) is hooked to
the right branch of the same nest, it can be removed; it never executes, since if a == 3,

thena != 2.

Loops
Loops are the only constructions (except the offensive GoTo) in the high-level languages that have a backward reference (i.e., to the area of lower addresses). All

other kinds of branches — be it the IF—-THEN-ELSE or switch statement — are directed "downward" (i.e., to the area of higher addresses). Consequently, the logical
tree representing a loop is so typical that it can be identified at first glance.
There are three basic types of loops: loops with a condition at the beginning
(Fig. 36, a), loops with a condition at the end (Fig. 36, b), and loops with a condition
in the middle (Fig. 36, c). Combined loops can have several conditions in different
places, such as at the beginning and at the end simultaneously.
In turn, conditions can be of two types: conditions of the loop termination and
conditions of the loop continuation. In the first case — if the loop termination is true—
a jump is made to the end of the loop; otherwise, the execution of the loop is continued. In the second case — if the loop continuation condition is false — again,

464

Part |: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

a jump is made to the end of the loop; otherwise, the execution of the loop is
continued. Conditions of the loop continuation represent the inverted conditions
of the loop termination. Thus, it is enough for the compiler to support the
conditions of only one type. The while, do, and for statements of the C language
work only with conditions of the loop continuation. The Pascal while
statement also works with the condition of the loop continuation; the only
exception is repeat-until, which expects the loop termination condition.
Loop beginning

Loop beginning

Loop beginning

Condition

Statement 1

Statement 1

aN
’

Statement 1

Statement 2

Statement 2

y

M
:

Statement 2

Statement N

Statement N

Statement N

y

Y

Unconditional

jump

Loop end

a

Condition

>

’

z

y

’

2

Condition

Loop end

Unconditional

jump

b

Loop end

c

Fig. 36. The logical tree of a loop with the condition at the beginning (a),
at the end (b), and in the middle (c)

Loops with conditions at the beginning (or loops with the precondition). In
the C and Pascal languages, support for loops with the precondition is provided by
the statement while

(expression), where expression is a loop continuation con-

dition. For example, the while (a <10) a ++; loop will execute as long as the condition (a < 10) remains true. However, the compiler may invert the loop continuation condition into the loop termination condition. If the Intel 80x86 platform is
used, such a trick saves one or two machine instructions. In Listing 195,
a loop with the termination condition is at the left, and one with the continuation
condition is at the right. The loop with the termination condition is shorter by one

Step Seven: Identifying the Key Structures of High-Level Languages

465
as

instruction! Therefore, practically all compilers generate the left variant. However,
some of them are capable of transforming loops with the precondition into more
efficient loops with the postcondition.
Listing 195. The Same Loop with a Termination and a Continuation Condition
cmp

a,

jae

end

10

jb continue

inc

A

jmp

jmp

while

end:

cmp

a,

10

end

continue:
inc

a

jmp

while

The loop with the termination condition cannot be directly represented by the
while statement. This is frequently overlooked by beginners: They make this mistake by writing what they see: while (a >= 10) a++. The loop with such a condition
will never be executed. How can we invert the condition and avoid mistakes?
If this seems to be an easy task, ask a novice hacker to name the inverse operation
of "more than." The most probable answer will be "less than." However, this answer

would be incorrect — "less than or equal" is correct. The complete list of inverse relational operations is given in Table 25.
Table 25. The Relational Operators
Logical operators

Inverse logical operators

ESS
Peery eee ee eee es ae

Loops with the condition at the end (also known as loops with the postcondition). In the C language, support for loops with the postcondition is provided by
the statement pair do-while. In Pascal, support comes from the pair
repeat\until. Loops with the postcondition are directly translated from a high-

Part I: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

466

level language into computer code without any problems (as opposed to loops with
a precondition, with which inverting the condition does not occur).

For example, do a ++; while (a < 10) is generally compiled into the following code. (Note that the relational operation in the original loop is also used in the
jump. This looks beautiful, and no errors occur when it is decompiled.)
Listing 196.

A Compilation of a Loop with a Postcondition

repeae.

Ince
emp

a, +ako

jl repeat
end:

Compare the code of the loop with a postcondition with the previous code of
the loop with a precondition (shown in Listing 195). The loop with the condition at
the end is more compact and faster, isn't it? Certain compilers (Microsoft Visual
C++, for example) are capable of translating loops with a precondition into loops
with a postcondition. At first glance, it is an inadmissible initiative on the part of
the compiler — if the programmer wishes to test the condition at the beginning,
should the compiler be able to put it at the end? Actually, the difference between "at
the beginning" and "at the end" is not important. If the compiler is sure that the
loop is executed at least once, it can test the condition whenever it sees fit. Certainly, the condition being tested should be slightly corrected: while (a<b) is not
equivalent to do ... while (a<b), since, in the first case, the loop is already terminated if (a == b), and, in the second case, one more iteration is performed before exiting the loop. However, this is easy to resolve: Increase a by one (making it
do

...

while

((a+1)<b)), or subtract one from b (making it do

...

while

(a<(b-1) ) ). Everything will work.
Why do we the need all these tricks, which considerably inflate the code?
The static branch-prediction unit of Pentium processors is optimized for jumps
directed

backward

(i., into the area

of lower

addresses).

Therefore,

loops

with a postcondition should execute a little faster than similar loops witha precondition.

Loops with a counter. Loops with a counter (for) are not independent types;
they only represent a syntactic version of loops with a precondition. As a first
approximation, for (a = 0; a < 10; a ++) is the same as a = 0; while
(a<10) {...;a++;}. However, the results of compiling these statements may not
be identical.

O

Step Seven: Identifying the Key Structures of High-Level Languages

467

Optimizing compilers (as well as a significant part of nonoptimizing ones) pass
control to the statement that tests the condition of the loop termination after initializing the variable counter. The resulting statement is evident at once when the
program is analyzed. In addition, it cannot be translated directly into a while loop
of a high-level language. Consider this listing:
Listing 197. An Example of a Loop with a Counter
MOV

a,

XXX

; The

jmp

variable

of

the

"counter"

is

initialized.

the

conditional

; A jump

is made

to

the

testing

of

of

the

loop

reached.

loop

continuation

condition.

repeat:

; The

beginning

is

; The
+ body

add

“ay

; The

“xxx “| subwa7,
counter

is

loop's
follows.

“xxx

modified.

conditional:

CN Od Bins oO
; The
xx

loop

continuation

condition

is

tested.

repeat

; A jump

is made

to

the

loop's

beginning

if the

condition

is true.

The immediate jump downward may result from compiling the for loop or the
Goto

statement. The latter is out of fashion and is seldom used; however, without

it, the IF-THEN conditional jump statement cannot jump directly into the middle of
the while loop. Of all "candidates," only the for loop remains.
Certain advanced compilers (such as Microsoft Visual C++ and Borland C++,
but not Watcom C) try to determine at compile time whether the given loop is executed at least once. If such an action occurs, they convert for into a typical loop
.
with the postcondition.

Part I: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

468

nn nS

Pt
as nce
a
a
a
Listing 198. An Example of the Conversion of a Counter
MOV

aA,

> The

XXX

variable

of

the

"counter"

is

initialized.

wepeat s

; This

is

the

beginning

of

the

loop.
; The

loop's

+ body
adda

ex

; The

counter

SUl

cmp a, XXX
; The loop
jxx

a,

follows.

Sox

is modified.

continuation

condition

is

tested.

repeat

; A jump

is made

to

the

loop's

beginning

if the

condition

is

true.

The most advanced compilers (only Microsoft Visual C++ 6.0 comes to mind)

are capable of translating loops with an increment into loops with a decrement —
provided that the loop parameter is not used by the loop statements and only allows the loop to execute a certain number of times. Why does the compiler need
this? Loops with a decrement appear to be much shorter: The DEc 1-byte instruction not only decrements the operand, but also sets the zero flag when zero is
achieved. As a result, the cMp A, xxx instruction becomes unnecessary.
Listing 199. Changing a Loop with an Increment for a Loop with a Decrement
MOV

a,

XXX

; The

variable

repeat:

; This

is the

fans

; The

loop's

ase

+ body

follows.

deca

; The

jnz repeat

; This

counter

of

the

"counter"

beginning

is

of the

is

loop.

decremented.

is repeated

while

initialized.

A != 0.

EEE

Step Seven: Identifying the Key Structures of High-Level Languages

469

Thus, depending on the configuration and nature of the compiler, the for
loops can be translated either into the loops with the precondition, or into the
loops with the postcondition that start to execute from the testing of the loop continuation condition. The continuation condition may be converted into the termination condition, and the loop with an increment may turn into the loop with
a decrement.
Such ambiguity complicates the identification of for loops. Only the loops that
begin with testing the postcondition are reliably identified (since they cannot be
represented using do without coro). In all other cases, it is impossible to give strict
recommendations about how to recognize for.
My advice is the following: If the logic of the loop being analyzed is easier to
represent syntactically through the for statement, use for! Otherwise, use while
or do (repeat\until) to represent loops with a precondition or a postcondition.
Finally, a few words about the "castrated" for loops: The C language allows the
initialization of the loop variable, the termination condition, and the decrement
statement to be omitted separately or altogether. Thus, for degenerates to while
and becomes practically indistinguishable from it.

Loops with the condition in the middle. Popular high-level languages do not
directly support loops with a condition in the middle, despite the frequency of the
need for such loops. Therefore, programmers implement them on the basis of
available loops: while (while\do), and the break statement for quitting the loop.
Listing 200. Implementing a Loop with the Condition in the Middle
while (1)

repeat:

{
wen
if

cmp XXX
(condition)

break;

jxx end
jmp

repeat

end:

The compiler usually unwraps an infinite loop into the unconditional jump ump
directed, naturally, backward (although some compilers generate code like this:
MOV EAX, 1\CMP EAX, 1\JdzZ repeat). The unconditional jump directed backward is rather specific: Except in an infinite loop, it can originate only from the
Goto statement. However, GoTo, as previously mentioned, is out of fashion.
The condition of termination for an infinite loop may only be in the middle of this

470

Part |: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

loop (not considering complex cases of multithread protection, which modify
an unconditional jump into Nop). All that remains is to look up the loop's body and
find this condition.
This is easy — the break statement is translated into the jumpto the instruction next to JMP

repeat, and break itself gains control from the IF (condition) —

THEN- [ELSE] branch. The condition of the statement also is required for the loop
termination.

Loops with multiple termination conditions. The break statement allows the
loop termination to be organized in any place the programmer considers fit; there-

fore, many termination conditions may be scattered throughout the body of any
loop. This complicates the analysis of the program being disassembled; we risk
"missing" one of the loop termination conditions and, consequently, misunderstanding the program's logic.
Identifying the loop termination conditions is easy: They always are directed
"downward" (i.e., to the area of the higher addresses), and they point to the instruction next to the instruction of the conditional (unconditional) jump directed "upward" (i.e., to the area of lower addresses).

Loops with several counters. The support of comma-separated lists in the
C language allows multiple initialization and update counters of the for loop to be

carried out, such as for

(a=0,

b=10;

a!= b; at++, b--). But what about sev-

eral termination conditions? The "old and new testaments" (the first and the second

edition of K&R, respectively); the ANSI C standard; and manuals applied to the
Microsoft Visual C++, Borland C, and Watcom C compilers keep silent on this
point.
If you try to compile the code for (a=0, b=10; a>0, b<10; att, b--),
it will be "swallowed" by practically all compilers. However, none of them will
compile the given example correctly. The (ai, a2, a3, ..., an) logical expression is
senseless, and compilers will reject everything except the rightmost expression, an.
This expression will exclusively define the loop continuation condition. Only
Watcom grumbles in this instance: "Warning! W111: Meaningless use of an
expression: the line contains an expression that does nothing useful. In the example
"i = (1,5);", the expression "1", is meaningless. This message is also generated for a

comparison that is useless,"
If the loop continuation condition depends on several variables, their comparisons should be combined into one expression using the logical operations or, AND,
etc. For example, using for (a=0, b=10; (a>0 && b < 10); a++, b--), the
loop will be terminated as soon as one of two conditions becomes false; using

Step Seven: Identifying the Key Structures of High-Level Languages

471

for (a=0, b=10; (a>0 || b<10); at++, b--), the loop will be continued while at
least one of the conditions is true.
Loops with several counters are translated similarly to loops with one
counter, except that several variables, not one, are initialized and modified simul-

taneously.

Identifying the continue statement. The continue statement causes control to
pass immediately to the code that tests the loop continuation (termination) conditions. Generally, in loops with a: precondition, this is translated into an unconditional jump directed upward, and in loops with a postcondition, into one directed
downward. The code that follows continue does not gain control; therefore,
continue is practically always used in conditional statements.
For example, while (at+ < 10) if (a == 2) continue;... is compiled into
code like this one:

Listing 201. The Result of Compilating Code with a continue Statement
repeat:

; This

is

the

Incna
cmp

10

; The

loop

if

a

>=

is

tested.

10.

2) puevere

is a jump

to

the

case

"else"

if a

!= 2.

repeat

woo:

jmp

condition

woo

; This
jmp

termination

a,2

elds 4 Qe ==

jnz

while.

end

; End

cmp

of

7 att

a,

jae

beginning

J Lhe

LOOp.S

+ body

follows.

repeat

; A jump is made

to the loop's beginning.

LS

Part I: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

472

Complex conditions. Until now, while discussing loop termination and continuation conditions, we only considered elementary relational conditions. Practically
all high-level languages use compound conditions. However, compound conditions
can be schematically represented as an abstract "black box," which has an input, an

output, and, inside it, a logical binary tree. Constructing and reconstructing logical
trees is considered in detail in the "Conditional Ir-THEN-ELSE Statements" section.
Now, our primary interest is the organization of loops, not conditions.
The nested loops. Loops may be nested. No problems would seem to arise. The
beginning of each loop is reliably determined from the cross-reference directed
downward. The conditional or unconditional jump to the loop's beginning is the
loop's end. Each loop has only one beginning and only one end (although there
may be any amount of termination conditions). Loops cannot cross each other —
if the beginning of one loop lies inside another loop, this loop is nested.
However, not everything is that simple. Two stumbling blocks are the continue
statement in loops with a precondition and complex continuation conditions in loops
with a postcondition. Let's consider them in more detail.
In loops with a precondition, the continue statement is translated into an un-

conditional jump directed "upward." This statement becomes practically indistinguishable from the end of the loop. Consider this:
while (condition1)

{
if

(condition2)

continue;

}
translated into:
NOT

conditionl

if NOT

of the

condition2

loop

termination

GOTO

continue

jump

to

the

beginning

unconditional

jump

to the

beginning

the

entire

unconditional
continue:

end-of

the

loop

The two ends and two beginnings are likely to belong to two loops, one of
which is enclosed into another. However, the beginnings of both loops coincide.
May a loop with a precondition be enclosed into a loop with a postcondition?

Step Seven: Identifying the Key Structures of High-Level Languages

473

At first glance, yes. But conditioni of the loop termination is behind the second

end. If it were the precondition of the enclosed loop, it would be behind the first
end. If condition1 were the precondition of the parent loop, the end of the enclosed loop would not be able to pass control to the parent loop. It turns out that
we have one loop, not two. The first "end" is just the result of translating the
continue Statement.

The things are easier with the analysis of complex conditions of continuation of
the loop with a postcondition. Let's consider the example:
do

{
} while(conditionl

||

condition2);

In general, translating this example results in:
continuation

conditionl

continuation

condition2

Tel

This is the same, isn't it?

}while icondstioni)
}while (condition2)

The offered case is logically correct, but syntactically ugly. The parent loop runs
only one enclosed loop in its body and does not contain any other statements. So
why is it necessary? Let's combine it with the enclosed loop!
Disassembler listings of examples. To illustrate thePrevious discussions, let's
consider several examples.
Let's begin with the simplest one: the while\do eect
Listing 202. Identifying while\do Loops
#include

main ()

{

<stdio.h>

474

_‘ Part I: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

>

int

a=0;

while (a++<10)
do

printf("The

while

loop\n");

{

printf("The
} while (--a

do loop\n");

>0);

Compiling this example in Microsoft Visual C++ 6.0, with the default settings,
should give the following:
Listing 203. The Disassembled Code of Identifying a while\do Loop Using
Visual C++ 6.0
main

proc

near
=

varia

push

; CODE
dword

ptr

ebp,

esp

; The

stack

frame

push

ecx

; Memory
mov

is

is

-4

value

opened.

allocated

[ebptvar_
a],

0x0

for

one

local

to the

var_a

variable.

; CODE XREF:

; The

cross-reference

; that

this

is the

; Naturally,

if the

jump

variable.

0

is assigned

loc_40100B:

; the

start+AFYp

ebp

mov

; The

XREF:

that

directed

beginning

downward

of the

cross-reference

refers

this

address

main 401000+29V;

indicates

loop.
is

directed

will

downward,

be

directed

mov
eax,
; The value

[ebptvar
a]
of the var_a variable

is loaded

into EAX.

mov
ecx,
; The value

[ebp+var_
a]
of the var_a variable

is loaded

into ECX.

;

(This

might

be

achieved

in a shorter

way:

MOV ECX,

upward.

EAX)

Step Seven: Identifying the Key Structures of High-Level Languages

add

ecx,.

; ECX

is

mov

; The

incremented

[ebp+var_a],

ecx

is

eax,

; The

by

vara variable

cmp

jge

of the

it was
short

; If var_a

the

1.

updated.

OAh

value

; before

; of

var a variable

updated

is

OxA,

a "forward"

unconditional
this

is

in the

loop's

tested

7 a precondition.
; the

to

To

replace

continuation

; Having

done

;

(var_at+

while

to

the

jump is made,

jump

7 is

need

compared

value

that

a loop.

Since

loop

we

<

as

loop

(i.e.,

instruction

termination

is

the

while

to

the

"backward."

this

termination

condition

this,

the

it

just behind

directed

beginning,

represent

the

is

a loop

replace

condition

with

loop,

condition

with

>=

with

of

the

<).

obtain:

OxA)

; Here

is the

beginning

of the

loop's

body.

push

offset

aOperatorOfWloop

; "The

operator

cali

prner

add

esp,

while

loop\n"

4

; printf ("The while
jmp

OxA.

loc _40102B

>=

; Therefore,

7 we

475

short

loop\n")

loc_40100B

; An unconditional

jump is directed

backward

; There

loop termination

condition

— jge short

loc_40102B

loc_40100B.

Therefore,

the original

is only one

,

between

.
iv

loop

.

loc_40100B

was:

while

and jmp short
(var_at+

< OxA)

printf("The

loop\n")

=

; main_401000+45j
beginning

of the

loop

; However,

we

cannot

be

sure

this

;, We may

only

guess

this

based

> This

while

label.

; CODE XREF: main 401000+1A\;

loc_40102B:
,

to the loc_40100B

is the

of

on

witha postcondition.

the

yet.

presence

of the

—

476

_— Part I: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

; cross-reference

directed

; There

is no condition

; this

is

push

offset

a loop

Call

printf

add

esp,

with

downward.

in the

loop's

a condition

aOperatorOfLoopD

beginning;

at the

; "The

end

or

operator

therefore,
in the middle.
of the

do loop\n"

4

; printf ("The do loop\n")
; The

loop's

body

mov

edx,

[ebptvar_a]

; The value
Supe

follows.

of the var_a variable

Migeok

ee

ee

—

low aie

[ebptvar_a],
edx

othe

var_a variable

emp

[ebp+var_a],

; The

var_a variable

Sicth Set Be TE

dg.

into EDX.

CCX

B EDX is decremented

mov

is loaded

BS

is updated.

0

~

.
is compared

2
to zero.

4 Neneh

short loc _40102B .

a jump is mad

=

=

Sor:

scheint

.

3

Step Seven: Identifying the Key Structures of High-Level Languages

477

The result will be different if optimization is enabled. Let's compile the same
example with the /ox key (the aggressive optimization).
Listing 204. The Disassembled Code of the while\do Loop with Aggressive
Optimization
main

proc

push

near

; CODE

XREF:

start+AFlp

esi

push

edi

; The

registers

mov

; The

esi,

1

value

Oxl

are

saved

is

assigned

; Attention!

Look

; none

of

variables

mov

edi,

the

at

the

on

the

to

stack.

ESI.

original

code;

had

a value.

such

OAh

; The

value

OxA

+ the

loop

termination

is

assigned

to EDI.

This

loc_40100Cc:

; CODE XREF:

; Judging

from the

push

offset

calls,

.pEintt

add

esp,

cross-reference

aOperatorOfWLoop

; Is

this

; If

so,

a body
where

dec

edi

; EDI

is

directed

; "The

4

; printf ("The while

the

decremented

inc

esi

; ESI

is incremented

test

edi,

; EDI

is tested

ja

short

loop\n")

of the

is

is

a constant

for

testing

condition.

while

loop?

precondition?

by 1.

by 1.

edi

for being

loc_40100C

zero.

maint+1DVj
downward,

while

loop\n"

this

is a loop!

478

__ Part I: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

; A jump

is made

to the

loop's

; In a burst

of optimization,

; loop with

a precondition

; a postcondition.
; Why not?!

After

Does

beginning

the

into

the

analyzing

a more

compiler

the code,

has been

corrected,

; That

is why the initial
compiler

has

i GO

Sns.

WHIle

“(C( (int & =

0) rl

+ do...

while

((int

< 10)

a=1)

; Interestingly,

the

; to a constant.

Instead,

; and decremented
; shorter

and

work

value

replaced

compact
have

Therefore,

of the

while

compiler

-< 10)

faster!

loop with

to do this?

has understood

that
loop.

variable

is 1, not

0) < 10)

with:

a =

0.

==
=

did not

it became
This

right

to the end of the

compare

it placed the constant

it until

an inefficient

after the continuation

loop's

((int

!= 0.

and faster

the

it can be moved

; The

EDI

transformed

the compiler

; this loop is executing at least once.
; condition

while

compiler

e
e

is

zero.

fine,

the

Why?

but

loop's

variable

into the register,
To make

the

the

loop

how

can

loop

gives

the following:

; be decompiled?

; A direct

representation in the

C language

# var_ESI = 1; var_EDI = 0xA;
ene

ie |
printf ("The wotle a

Ap while war -EDI > "gy

var A

ee

var-ESI+#?

.

; This:
Pie Shidiy and sees isn't it? Let's try to remove
<
Soo two yeti avicns This is semeeeA ‘since the varaibles are a
S82
is
a
pies
ir
™e
“=e

*

(pene
wey
—

sete

ae
nus) ene

a

ai

THF bes

v=

i

:

pis

Le
ie
~~

——-

a

ae

--

eS
—

:

Step Seven: Identifying the Key Structures of High-Level Languages

; } while(var_ESI

> OxB)

; We may

or

*# with

stop

here

is,

; Now,

is not

used and can

var_EDI

(var_ESI

printf ("The while

; This

is

; since

not

the

limit

the

initial

var_

ESI.=

var

loop\n");

of

ESI =

1;

var

loop

EDI ==

the

with

loop

a

0xA;

be canceled.
var_ESI++;

to var_EDI

is used

< OxB.

only as

can be set

to

zero,

statement

can

be brought

ak

Mi

0;

; while

(var_ESI++ < OxA)

; ar

igene sade gloap in")

Z aes is wonderful,

transformed

illustative

expressiveness,
since

ESI variable

value

having

{

<= 0xA is equivalent

7; and the increment
y

var

<= O0xA)

8

7 its

a

a more

that

; var_ESI

Tt

further,

into

7 precondition,

+ while

:

go

a postcondition

479

In addition,

a counter,
into

the

Leaps

Se Cease

; subtracting 1 from the left and right half

isn't

it?

Compare

this

variant with

; the previous one and see how much simpler and clearer He has become.
gets
+34

doc

A010IF:

a

a ; CODE XREF: maint2rly

; The downward cross-reference

=
=

indicates that

Seay

Sever. o¢ Fase
; this is the loop's FEES. aia Ne
5. epi 2S ea aie eae
tt
;See
SS

,
=

—

Part |: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

480

=

19

short

; The

loop

; This

loop

loc

40101F

is continued
is

easily

; do printf ("The

pop

esi

; The

saved

do

while

var_ESI

represented

loop\n");

registers

are

> 0.

in

while

the

C language:

(--var_ESI

> 0 )

restored.

retn

main

endp

Borland C++ 5.x optimizes loops somewhat differently. Look at this example:
Listing 205. The Disassembled Code of a while\do Loop Optimized Using
Borland C++
_main

proc
push

near

; DATA

XREF:

DATA:00407044vo0

ebp

Mov

ebp,

esp

; The

stack

frame

push

ebx

; EBX

is

saved

on

is

opened.

the

stack.

xor

ebx,

; The

0 value

is assigned

to

; It

is

to

EBX

is

jump

is made.

jmp

ebx

easy
short

; A downward

guess

that

the

register

variable.

a.

loc_40108F
unconditional

loc_401084:
; This

EBX

This

is

like

the

for

loop.

; CODE XREF: _maint1j
is

the

cross-reference

; therefore,

this

is the

push

offset

aOperatorOfWLoop

call

printf

directed

beginning

of

; "The

downward;

some

loop.

operator

of the

while

loop\n"

Step Seven: Identifying the Key Structures of High-Level Languages

pop

481

ecx

; printf("The

while

loop\n")

loc_40108F:

; CODE XREF: _maint+6vj

; The

first

jump

mov

eax,

ebx

; EBX is

copied

is targeted

here.

see

Let's

what

this

is.

to EAX.
.

inc

ebx

; EBX

is

cmp

eax,

incremented.

OAh

; EAX is compared

|

Fn JEL,

OxA.

short...Loc.. 401084

; A jump

4

to the value

is made

to the

(so
loop's beginning if EAX < ae

; This is how Borland optimized the code:
sai at

the end

of the loop. To avoid

with a|precondition into the loop with

™_

It placed the condition

translating

the

loop

a postcondition,

it simply began executing ‘the oe with this same condition!
—

-

‘

Gi

Gat

MRS

: Es

ettoses pareeS

ene

es per:

_e
OY

this loop in the c ei bese gives. the folle wit
- ; Representing
“
(int a=0; a < 10; at+) printf.("The ‘while loop\n") —
for
ni
“

Siariexs 21h is a “seeBROS teeniescsmod janet
’

482

Part |: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

—-

; The

var_EBX

test

ebx,

19

short

; The

loop

; do

variable

xOr

eax,
ebx

pop

ebp

; The

saved

decremented.

ebx

loc 401097

is continued

printf ("The

pop

is

do

while

loop\n");

var _EBX
while

> 0.
(--var_EBX

>

0)

eax

registers

are

restored.

retn

_main

endp

Other compilers generate similar or even more primitive and obvious code.
Therefore, we shall describe the translation methods they use only briefly.
Free Pascal 1.x behaves similarly to Borland C++ 5.0, always placing the condition at the loop's end and starting the execution of the while loops from it.
Watcom C is not capable of transforming loops with a precondition into loops
with a postcondition. Therefore, it places the loop termination condition at the beginning of while loops and inserts an unconditional jump into their ends.
The GCC compiler does not optimize loops with a precondition, generating the
most nonoptimal code. Look at this example:
Listing 206. The Disassembled Code of a Loop with a Precondition Generated
by the GCC Compiler
mov

; The
mov

[ebptvar_
a],

value

0 is

esi,

esi

0

assigned

to

loc_ 401250:
7 The

loop's

mov

the

a variable.

+ CODE XREF:
beginning

eax,

; The value

is

sub40123c+34\3

reached.

[ebptvar_a]

of the

var_a

variable

is loaded

into FAX.

Step Seven: Identifying the Key Structures of High-Level Languages

483
i

inc

[ebpt+var
a]

; The

var_a

variable

cmp

eax,

9

; EAX

is

jle

short

; A

compared

jump

jmp
; An

to

made

short

loc

if

the

value

FAX

What

no

<=

jump

previous

; continuation.

; there

is

; which

simplifies

; makes

0x9

<

to

the

OxA).

loop's

conditional

jump

is

a nonoptimal

code

this

of the

loop

end.

a jump
is!

to

the

loop's

Nevertheless,

continuation

condition,

disassembling.

code

jump

on

faster,

addresses

but

if there

it

are

that

are

multiples

increases

the

size

many

loc 401260:

of

four

significantly

jumps).

; CODE XREF: sub40123c+1pT3

add

esp,

¢ Now,

12°

push

offset

Call=

primer

OFFFFFFF4h

(OxC)

esp,

is

subtracted

ESP.

; "The

operator

of the

while

loop\n"

10h

stack

(OxC + 0x4)

jmp

short

loc_401250

A jump

from

aOperatorOfWLoop

7 The

_j

(FAX

is made

inversion

the

(especially

add

0x9.

4

; Aligning
;

the

by 1.

401272

unconditional

align

incremented

loc
_401260

is

; Hence,

is

is made

to

the

of the

loop

==

0x10

is

restored.
w

beginning

of the

loop.

loc 401272:

; The

end

is reached.

———

Now that we have cleared up while\do, let's look at the for loops in the following example.

484

Part I: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

Listing 207. Identifying tor Loops
#include

<stdio.h>

for

Wa —.0;

a < 10;

va ci)

pranet ("ihe

forsloop\n) ;

Compiling this example in Microsoft Visual C++ 6.0, with the default settings,
should give the following result:
Listing 208. The Disassembled Code of a for Loop Compiled by
Visual C++ 6.0
main

proc

vara

=

push

near

dword

; CODE

ptr

XREF:

start+ARNp

-4

ebp

mov

ebp,

esp

; The

stack

frame

push

eCxX

; Memory
Mov

is

opened.

is allocated
[ebp+var_a],

for the

0 is assigned

jmp

short

loc_401016

; An

immediate

jump

to the

is made

condition,

an

to

; this

var_a

the

local

variable.

code

that

tests

the

indication

that

this

is a for

loc _40100D:
; The

variable.

0

; The value

; continuation

local

loop

loop.

; CODE XREF: main+29V4
cross-reference

is the

directed

beginning

mov

eax,

; The

var_a variable

of the

downward

indicates

that

loop.

[ebptvar
a]

is loaded

into FAX.

eea
O

Step Seven: Identifying the Key Structures of High-Level Languages

add

eax,

1

;

1 is

added

i

Now,

mov

to

[ebptvar
a],

,

EAX

a

Hence,

is

,

++a

EAX.

eax

updated.
the

original

code

was

this:

loc 401016:

; CODE XREF: main+Bvj

cmp
f

The

jge
The

[ebptvar_a],

OAh

vara variable

is

push

offset

call

_printf

add

esp,

jmp

An

to

the

value

OxA.

; "The

operator

of

to

loop"s

OxA.
the

for

loop\n"

4

short

for

toop\n")

loc _40100D

unconditional

Thus,

>=

aOperatorOfFLoop

; printf ("The

,

compared

short loc_40102B
loop is quit if var_a

if

.

485

jump

is made

the

beginning.

we:

Initialize

the variable

Jump

loop

to

the

Increment

the

Test

the

condition
the

Jump

to

Call

printf

Jump

to

Reach

the

the

The

test

that

this

However,

of

the

condition

vara

relative

to vara

termination

if the

loop's

end

at

variable

loop

var-a

termination

true

loop

loop's

beginning

with

representing

for

loop

termination

indicates

a precondition.

it as

a while

we're hindered by the unconditional

which bypasses

the

code

However,

loop

is easily

this

is

beginning

the

is a loop

condition

that

loop

is-not

possible

jump to the middle

—

of the loop,

increments

the var_a variable.

represented

with

the’ for loop:

Part |: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

486

; for

(a =

0; a < OxA;

; The

for

loop

; tests

the

initializes

loop

the

continuation

; termination

condition

by the

; body.

it modifies

the

Then,

variable

counter,

condition

(optimized

compiler),

counter,

loc_40102B:
Mov

pop
; The

tests

the

loop\n")

for

into

the

and

executes

the

loop's

the

condition,

and

so

; CODE XREF:
esp,

of

operator

printf("The

at++)

on.

main+1atj

ebp

ebp
stack

frame

is

closed.

retn

main

endp

Now, let's put the optimization into action and see how the loop changes.
Listing 209. The Disassembled Code of the for Loop Using Optimization
main

proc

push

esi

mov

esi,

; The

near

XREF:

counter

In the source

is

initialized.

code,

the initial

loc 401006:

value

; CODE XREF:

push

offset

(ereE

aisbapliaeni,

add

esp,

aOperatorOfFLoop

; "The

for

is

dec

esi

; The

counter

; in the

was

zero.

maint+14\j
operator

of the

for

loop\n"

Loop\n")

; The loop's body is executed without
; By analyzing the code, the compiler

loop

of the counter

4

; printf ("The

; the

start+ARVp

OAh

variable

; Caution!

; CODE

source

executing

at

least

is decremented,
code.

This

any

tests.

has

figured

out

that

once!

although

is reasonable;

it was
dec

incremented
\ jnz is much

shorter

Step Seven: Identifying the Key Structures of High-Level Languages

487
>

™

than

INC\

; Matters
; the

CMP

reg,

const\

unnecessarily.

loop's

parameter

jnz xxx.
The

used

only

; difference

if it is incremented

jnz

loc

short

; A jump

is made

; But

in

its

; a =

Oxa;

; If

the

to

readability
it

as

it

ators

(au—

Op

aa<a

; But

wait!

On

what

; If
; to

executes

choose

= view):

main

loop's

It

as

a counter.

or decremented

beginning

it

typical:

1s.

10

the

for

to complicate
found

out

It doesn't

make

any

with

iteration!

this

statement

not,

then:

-Sai+)

snes
has

On
is

the

has

each

07

is

author

0.

(--a);

convenient

only

one
or

carried

basis

10 times

a=—)

while

>

for

you,

Loop
\ny ju.

same

used

convenient
>

ronE

the

loop exactly
103;-a

if ESI

loop\n");

Tf

basis

most

(a =

is

of

parameter

the

tor

seems

simple:

loop's

a transformation?

the

; that

the

printf ("The

;eave

; such

compiler

is

401006

appearance,

do

The

reason

ae

as

that

out
the

compiler

a counter,

is correct.

(from

an

for

(2a =.0)

has:

any

statement

It only

remains

aesthetic
aw

point
10s

of

ate).

endp

How will Borland C++ 5.0 deal with this? Let's compile and see.
Listing 210. The Disassembled Code of the for Loop Optimized by Borland C++

_main

proc near
push

; DATA XREF: DATA:004070444o

ebp

mov

ebp,

esp

; The

stack

frame

push

ebx

; EBX

is

saved

xOr,

ebx,

ebx

on

is

opened.

the

stack.

488

Part I: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

; The

value

0 is

assigned

loop's

beginning

to

the

loc 401082:
; The

variable.

; CODE XREF: maint15\j

push

offset

call

SPLENEE

pop

eCcx

+ The

loop

; Borland

is begun
has

the

execution

of

its

that

the

is

executed

ebx

parameter

cmp

ebx,

OAh

; EBX

is

compared

eax,

pop

ebx

pop

ebp

to

is

the

loop

body.
at

least

<

OxA.

once.

incremented.

value

OxA.

loop's

beginning

loc
_401082

is made

xor

; format

with

loop's

short

;

understood

; The

; A jump

is reached.

aOperatorOfFLoop

inc

31

EBX

to

the

while

EBX

eax

retn

_main

endp

Borland C++ 5.0 could not compete with Microsoft Visual C++ 6.0; it understood that the loop was executed only once, but it didn't prove to be smart enough
to invert the counter. Most compilers — in particular, Watcom C — behave in a
similar manner.
Next are the loops with a condition in the middle, or the loops terminated
manually by the break statement. Let's consider the following example:
Listing 211. Identifying a break Statement
#include

main()

{

<stdio.h>

Step Seven: Identifying the Key Structures of High-Level Languages

int

a=0;

while

(1)

489

{
printf("lst
ie

tooe

statement\n");
eNO)

printf("2nd

printf("lst
if

(--a

<

preaks

statement\n") ;

statement\n") ;
0)

printf ("2nd

break;

statement\n") ;

}while (1);

Compiling this example in Microsoft Visual C++

6.0, with default settings,

should give the following:
Listing 212. The Disassembled Code of the break Statement Compiled by

Visual C++ 6.0
main

proc

near

vara

= dword

; CODE

push

ebp
ebp,

esp

; The

stack

frame

push

ecx

mov

is

loc 40100B:
+ The

is

opened.

allocated

[ebptvar_a],

; The value

0x0

start+AEVp

pEers=4

mov

; Memory

XREF:

for

the

local

variable.

0

;

is assigned

var_a

variable.

; CODE XREF: main+3Fj

:
cross-reference

to the

is

directed

downward

—

we

have a loop.

490

_‘ Part I: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

mov

eax,

1

test

eax,

eax

aes

short

loc_401041

; Note:

When

the

optimization

is disabled,

; the unconditional

loop "too literally"

; to EAX,

tests

and

then

; the

loop will

; are

silly

offset

GEMCI

_ jenealiens

add

esp,

Cex;

useless

code

aliOperator

— it assigns
Should

TRUE

In other

words,

these

of the

; "lst

while

=, .

i

"ai

ai

loop.

ebpr vara)

add

nel

is loaded

into ECX,

to ECX.

tebptvar_aly

erecta

FALSE,

instructions

ir

5S oe a

Se a

en

en

;

ee

a

sw

At

ehtenn
Lt iy isSe tn tty

cy ae

A

tens

ee

ses

chOwe

it

;

| Sea

pA The var_a | variable is compared to a value OxA.

ee

Pte
O4-

three

statement\n")

ae
tio. Stabomvar a); 6Cx
ree niabiqi The_var_a variable is- upda:

SL“g

1 (TRUE)

become

statement\n"

of the var_a variable

emp

ever

=

; Now, 1 is added

;

(1)

translates

the value

zero.

; The value
cx

compiler

4

; printf("1st
mov

be terminated.

and

push

it for

the

Tae

-

“

entree

Leary

Bisasits Vinal C4 Gert ws

atin J

=

gl

Step Seven: Identifying the Key Structures of High-Level Languages

jmp

short

; This

is a jump

loc 401041
to the

; Certainly,

break

Therefore,

the

if

> OxA)

See
Me

(++var_a

We have
since

JLE passes

~

and

THEN

loop termination.

terminates

the

loop?

decompilation

<= into

look

as

this:

continuation

code,

>,

control
to the

branch

should

break

passes

loc_401032:

loop

control

to break,

in this

case.

; CODE XREF: maint2Ef3

; The

cross-reference

; this

is not

the

loop's

beginning.

push

offset

a2iOperator

; "2nd

Gig
add

-Joweshalere
esp, 4

is directed

upward;

2
statement\n"

:

; printf("2nd statement\n")

jmp

What

does!

final

inverted

™

the

491

short loc 40/008

~~

a

eke

we

~~

; A jump is made to the loop's beginning.
; Therefore,we have

reached the loop's

end,

; restoring the source code:

; while (1) —
Reta

an

;

ene

printf("lst statement\n");

as
ee

if (#+var_a > OxA) break; =~
ae
On
ee er ee
et ete
printf ("2nd statement\n");

VE

fee eg eee

hoe

ie

Part I: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

492

sub

edx, 1

; EDX

is decremented

by 1.
>

mov

[ebp+var_a],

; The

var_a

cmp

[ebpt+var_a],

0

var_a

variable

jge

short

loc_40105F

is compared

to the value

is made

if var_a

>=

0.

; Note:

The

break

statement

of the

do loop

not

differ

from break

of the

while

; without

Pele

shall

speaking

VEEL

jmp

we

short

Rome
bresks

loc _40105F:

decompile

at

loc_401075 >

¥

Sa =.

se

|

-«g CODE XREF: main+SBty_

Cor

praca)

arth Maagy detteDhts
prin

loop!
away

length.

offset a2iOperator_0
‘,

it right

ASO) cua

push
‘

0x0.

Les

jump

; does

; Therefore,

a

is updated.

; The

; A downward

ce

edx

variable

4

Sl
:

ies

.

3

; "2nd statement\n"
ng poate

+

ond)

.

r

=

|

ie

me

P

Step Seven: Identifying the Key Structures of High-Level Languages

493

The break statement is identical in both loops. It is easily recognized (not at
first glance, but when several jumps are traced). The nonoptimizing compiler has
inadequately translated infinite loops into the code that tests the obviously true
condition. How would an optimizing compiler behave?
Let's compile the same example in Microsoft Visual C++ 6.0, with the /ox key,
and see the result.
Listing 213. The Disassembled Code of the break Compiled by C++ with
Aggressive Optimization
main

proc
push

esi

; ESI

is

xor

esi,

7 The

zero

near

saved

* var _ESI

; CODE

on

the

start+AFVp

stack.

esi

value
=

is

assigned

to

ESI.

0;

loc 401003:
; A

XREF:

; CODE XREF: main+23\j
cross-reference

; This

is

the

loop's

push

offset

call

-printt

add

esp,

forward.

beginning.

; "lst

statement\n"

4

is no

statement\n")
test;

; postcondition
qe

directed

aliOperator

; printf("I1st
; This

is

therefore,

(or with

this

is a loop

a condition

with

a

in the middle).

esi

7; ++var_ESI
cmp

esi,

; The

var_ESI variable

49
;

,

OAh

short
The

loop

; Since

is

this

is compared

to the value

OxA.

loc_401025
terminated

if

var ESI

instruction

is

not

the

>

OxA.

last

one

in

the oop! s body,

*

494

Part I: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

; this

loop

has

a condition

in the middle:

; if (var_ESI > 0xA) break
push

offset

a2iOperator

gall”

prince

add

esp,

; "2nd

statement\n"

>

4

; printf ("2nd

statement\n")

jmp

loc_401003

short

; An unconditional
; Obviously,

the

jump

is made

optimizing

to the

compiler

loop's

beginning.

has eliminated

; the unnecessary
test of the condition,
; making

the

code

simpler

and more

comprehensible.

; Therefore:

=

i Var fSL.=
ry
“ee

0

for... fF
i

@

; printf("1st

statement\n") ;

4

; +¢+var_ESI;

; if (var_ESI > 0xA) break;

|

;printf£("2nd statement\n");

+

<p of

phos

;

>

oi apivediadeem ~tel™'

.

ae

Spee

2

;

.

ipgrmeeel

3

feewnesth

generated for is an infinite loop,
oe

ure

Lam

~ Aeed-:

>

ies

a

Step Seven: Identifying the Key Structures of High-Level Languages

inc

esi

; The

var

ESI variable

is incremented

loc_401036:
; Here

loop's

beginning!

push

offset

a2iOperator_0

calT

prince

; Oddly

enough,

push

offset

Cala

pp raned

add

esp,

; Strange

:
statement\n")
the

loop's

aliOperator

beginning
0°; "Ist

is in its

center.

statement
\n"

statement\n")

things

calivot

the

are

going

De
on.

first. statement

improbable | that

=

We already encountered

_

of the loop above,

and it is

Bold

would be followed by its beginning.

dec

e

statement\n"

~

a=

REIS

; "2nd

8

; printf£("1st
7 the

by 1.

; CODE XREF: main+4Etj

is the

; printf("2nd

lita
en
ad
ish
l

495

the middle

of mc ae

ra

esi

;

.

Sy me eee variable is decremented.—
DED
asc
ae
,
—_—

“=

“nz

short. 1oc_401036 tealnbige LSet

wis ph te

eS

496

_ Part |: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

CONVEX family of processors refuse to compile the loops with branches.
Thus, the compiler has to correct programmer's mistakes.
In general;

it is not

It

is as

and

"dazzling"

bringing

Think

obliged

to do this.

the

compiler

is

the

calls

though
out

of the

processor

as

branches

of the printf

to

the

execution

of the

a racer.

The

code

a racetrack
straightaway,

down

the

racer

will

speed

can

move

the

condition

its

So,

does

it make

end — branching

neither
any

It certainly

does.

becomes

only the

true,

completed,
That

and the

is why the

the

execution

compiler

the

racetrack!
the middle

where
of the

placed

the

it

the

relative

nor by any other

(--a < 10)

second printf has

and

from

is performed

by printf,

difference

When

functions,

as

compiler

to

be thankful!

loop>

the

quicker
loop

the

longer

the

a variable modified

should

end.

The

of the

We

"circling"

to

function.

is tested?

condition
first printf is

no

chance

code

for

to gain

control.

testing

the condition immediately after the first call of the printf function,
and then
Because

than the

it changed

the order

of calling printf in the

the first printf occurs

twice,

second printf did when

the

it executed

loop

loop's

body.

one time more

terminated.

One point is left to clear up: What does incrementing var_ESI mean?
Let's think about what would happen if we threw out the instruction
inc ESI.

Since

during the

the

first

loop's

iteration,

counter is decremented

twice

the loop will be executed

teed Hama? > Agey pices age: from

happenin

one

Step Seven: Identifying the Key Structures of High-Level Languages

497

When translating infinite loops, Borland C++ and Watcom replace code that
tests the loop continuation condition with an unconditional jump. However, they
do not know how to optimize branches by moving them to the end of the loop,
as Microsoft Visual C++ 6.0 does.
Now that we have considered break, let's see how compilers translate the
continue statement. Consider the following example:
Listing 214. Identifying the continue Statement
#include

main

<stdio.h>

()

{
ig

ts) Sar OF

while

(at++<10)

{
if

(a ==

2) continue;

pranie ("Sx\n",

va)s7

do

{
Lf

(a =

2)

continue;

PANEL
CLSX Nn, a);
} while

(--a>0);

Compiling this example in Microsoft Visual C++ 6.0 with default settings
should give the following:
Listing 215. The Disassembled Code of the continue Statement Compiled by
Visual C++ 6.0
<a
main

=

var_a

proc.

near.

= dword
push

ebp

mov

ebp,

esp

; The

stack

frame

7 CODE
ptr

is opened.

-4

XREF:

start+AFtp

.

498

Part I: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

~

push

ecx

; Memory

is allocated

for

mov
[ebptvar_a], 0
; The value 0 is assigned

the

to the

loc_40100B:
; Two

+ a jump to
eax,

of two

var_a

loops

local

forward

variable.

ecx,

indicate

(one of which

of the

that

this

is nested),

loop with the

[ebpt+var
a]

of var_a

is either

or this

continue

is

statement.

=<

is loaded

into EAX.

[ebp+var_a]

; The value
add

directed

the beginning

7 The value
mov

variable.

; CODE XREF: main+221j; main+35\j
cross-references

; the beginning

mov

local

of var_a

is loaded

into ECx.

Ox.

; The value 1 is added to ECX.

—S

ry

Movs

a

jfebipivar
ta), “cx co Ey

>

we

; The var_a variable is updated.
Ss

Sis

=

Big

ey

ois

bee?

Se

ime

7

<<

LoS

ee

2
ath

Ue

NG

35

<4!

Aa

s
-

ee eet Hy

e , 4awee-=) Bisae

2

Enees

tes leg
we

f

Step Seven: Identifying the Key Structures of High-Level Languages

499
>

; to the

loop's

beginning.

; of the

loop

termination.

7 However,

it

is

It

unwise

to

is

likely

that

draw

hasty

conclusions.

; We encountered

two

cross-references

; The

jmp

loc

40100B

; What

is

; To

short

"responsible"

answer

jmp

this

short

; An

; If

is

this

jump

either

the

is

loop"s

the

it

were

;- would

be made
jge

7 and

jnz

7 nested

short

a termination

code

directed

to

the

loop's

beginning.

end,

or

continue.

what

is

for

is

this

the

is unlikely.

loop,

— a much

the

jump

"shorter"

one.

one

a postcondition

of

another

one

— in

a case,

but

improbable

continuation

loop,

such

condition,

Therefore,

it seems

most

likely

loc 401024

\ JUMP loc _40100B

that

continue.

edx,

[ebptvara]

push

edx

push
call

offset asc_406030
printf

add

esp,

short

; This

the

iebeGy)

loc_40100B

is the

; Let's

loop's

loop's

what

located
0xA,

we
at

with

while

var_a

<

before

the

comparison

returns

a

end;

beginning

summarize

condition

‘eo which

; "$x\n"

8

B jolesbolaie
(Ui sel

; The

loc_401037"?

; CODE XREF: main+20Tj

mov

; to

label

a loop

2 \ JNZ

short

loop? No,

of

loc 401024:

jmp

analyzed.

a precondition

is possible,

be

"jge
the

terminating

is

condition.

CMP var_a,

(a==2)

them.

be

end,

loc 401024

would

if

of

must

loc 401024

7 a postcondition

; the

one

one?

code

loc_401037

This

; is

beginning.

forms

of

for terminating

it.

; not

is

to the

short

within

loop's

jump

condition

rest

a precondition

; Maybe

other

the

loop's

; Is it a precondition
; If

the

is the

40100B

unconditional

; This

for

question,

loc

at the

unconditional

this

2a

control

the

last

is jmp

short

loc_40100B.

have:
the

the

the

loop's

beginning

executes

loop's

parameter

incremented

the

is made.
to

reference

One more
loop's

condition

beginning

loop

follows,

if var_a

==

2.

.

500

Part |: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

to the

; The

loop's

; The

incrementation

; Mhe

condi Gtont feoxmiitaic

exe

; The

condition

exit

; The

loop's

for

of the variable
"near"
jump

loop's

end

; The

"near"

continuation

a case,

; would

to

have

the

;

;

loop's

condition
of the

nor

"near"

any

other

statement,

is capable

condition

may

statement.

_

In the

should

Ags

of this.

only be represented

C language,

look

like

this:

// The incrementation

wavs

end;

loop.

continuation

construction

é

be the

continuation

ini
{

cannot

the borders

; while(at++<10)

Saye

condition

"far"

continue

+ the whole

to the beginning

step behind

break,

+ by the

var_a

:

; in such

the

jump

have:*

body

; The

; Thus,

we

beginning

; The unconditional

; Neither

unconditional

an

Therefore,

beginning.

loop's

and

loop,

the

closes

statement

printf

; The

; is made

of var_a and

// the condition
for the "far" exit.
=

a.

ye

;

.

~

[

a

=

‘

; if (a == 2) continue; _// The condition for the "near"

ve

,

— // continuation.

\n"
"a

ace

é

+ printf (#x\te", var_a);

e a oe
o ie
es isSEE
5. eee

i

el

we ee

a

Step Seven: Identifying the Key Structures of High-Level Languages

7 A jump is made to the code that tests
; Undoubtedly,

7 and

the

+ if

(a==2)

this

entire

is

the loop continuation

501

condition.

continue,

construction

looks

as

this:

continue;

loc_40103F:

; CODE XREF: maint+3Btj

Mov

eax,

push

eax

[ebptvar
a]

—

push

offset asc 406034

cali

_
printf

add

esp,

; "$x\n"

8

AeprInce
(sx in",. vara);

7
;

loc 401050:

; CODE XREF: main+3Dfj

mov

ecx,

sub .

ecx, 1

febptvar
a]

mov

[ebp+var_a], ecx

~

a

—
LE

i EE

jor e—Vavse
cmp

[ebptvar_a] rae

=

; The var_a variable is compared to zero.

jg short loc_401037 — come

oe

Soae

sions

e

502

_—swPart |: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

Now, let's see how optimization (the /ox key) affects the code of the loops.
Listing 216. The Disassembled Code of the continue Statement ECInpiod
with Aggressive Optimization
main

proc near
push

esi

mov

esi,

; CODE XREF:

1

loc_ 401006:
; This

start+tArlp

; CODE XREF: maint1FVj

is the
CMD)

loop's

aes,

az

push

*

2

short

7 A jump

beginning.

loc_401019

is made

to

loc 401019

if ESI == 2.

esi

push

offset asc_406030

call.

“print’

4

8

-.

esp,

add

; "%x\n"

FEDEINEE (Mes
\mn ee ESI)

; This branch
; Hence,

is executed

only if ESI t= 2.

it can be represented

‘7 if (EST I= 2) IOP
seks?

as:

ESI)

ge

a

Bese

METS

ehics

te Wits. 7 bay

eOmen
aap
-

(gO

ia

es — s =

; CODE
pore

fe

a]

el

ete
aa

ty
pe

XREF:setae
oF aigy f
ae

Step Seven: Identifying the Key Structures of High-Level Languages

; Does

this

look

worse

than

if

loc_401021:

te
thi
ldho

; This

is the

cmp

esi,

42

short

loop's

_

loc 401034

is made

to

loc

esi

push
Gall”

offset asc_406034
.printt:

add

esp,

_
401034

# This branch

is executed

pe

==

a!

2,

; "%x\n"
z

ST )ls

See

if ESI

8

Perio,

:

continue?

2

push

dec

2)

beginning.

|

only if ESI

fF

!= 2..
:

loc_401034:
™

==

; CODE XREF: main+37\j

; A jump

ae

(ESI

Flaw)

EE

ig

;

ry

=

; CODE XREF: main+24tyesi __

aoetintnastaecleansemmahaia dagieiaan mnie

‘

7, cese

503

esi, ¢esi

ante a

short Loe 401021

; Theee

ee

:

ne

See

BY

Zeek

ee

See

a

continuation condition —esterases whil

eee

.

a

504

Part |: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

Other compilers will generate similar code. In all loops with a precondition, the
continue statement is practically indistinguishable from the nested loop; in loops
with a postcondition, continue is the equivalent of a simple branch.
Now, it only remains to consider the for loops, which work with Several count-

ers simultaneously. Let's consider the following example:
Listing 217. Identifying a for Loop with Several Counters
main

()

{
aEiOne wel
fom

slihe 1eyy

(a sae

be=—

LOr

jokestigueus (UMSpenepial,

sae <

10)

bee

ost

L——)

<Ralyn 10)

The result of compiling this example in Microsoft Visual C++ 6.0 should be the
following:
Listing 218. The Disassembled Code of a for Loop with Several Counters
Compiled by Visual C++
main

proc

near

7 CODE

oO

|=

dword

ptr

-8

<j a) 7” @

ll

dword

ptr

-4

< ie}) 8

push

start+tANp

ebp

mov

ebp,

esp

; The

stack

frame

sub

esp,

8

; Memory

mov

XREF:

is

opened.

is allocated

Le bee Ve re

; The value

Oxl

for

two

local

variables.

Wyo

is assigned

to the

var_a

mov
[ebp+var_b], OAh
; The value 0xA is assigned

to the

var_b variable.

jmp
short loc_ 401028
; A jump is made to the

that

tests

code

variable.

Step Seven: Identifying the Key Structures of High-Level Languages

; the

conditions

for

; This

is a typical

quitting

feature

loc_401016:
cross-reference

; this

is the

|

[ebptvar
a]

mov

[ebp+var_a],

ecx,

[ebptvar
b]
1

mov

[ebpt+var_b],

DS as Saligi

.
ive

ee
p bas ainsi
f
;

indicates

that

type

for.

loop.
the

loop's

is

att

ecx,

me AN oe

downward

S

sub

+ ples
; The

for loops.

eax

mov

cmp

Vei.

that

out

1

loc 401028:

« Ais

figured

eax,

|

em

of the

eax,

DE

b

already

beginning

add

3

of nonoptimized

directed

mov

paver

loop.

; CODE XREF: maint43¥4

; The
7 We

the

505

ecx

oe

:

2

os

; CODE XREF: maint14Tj

[ebptvar_b],
1
short
loop-is

loc 401045
terminated
if var_b <=

‘Only one counter

(the second one

eeu

Sts regards |the

ypeey

Ox1.

from the left)

is

©

(81/2/3;-~eb 7 An) expression

asa SN ag ignoring the:
Se

rs that Iknow,

Lage

:

506

Part I: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques |

; This

is

; Thus,

this

;

(1)

while

the

end

of

the

loop.

loop

can

be

represented

as:

cmt
Ve Beet,

Fe Var
Oo =7

7 2h
pe

(Vansb <=

0x1)

break;

bintia (ex mex\ ie) Valen

Var0)

pos
; For

better

readability,

; as

the

loop:

; for

for

(var_a=1,

RePLINeh ("4x

it makes

sense

to

represent

Vareb>l

var

att,

Valea=)

var_b=0xA;

tx\ a",

Vara,

this

code

Vani)?

,

loc 401045:

; CODE XREF: maint2cTj

mov

esp,

pop

- ebp

; The

stack

ebp
frame

is

closed.

retn

main

endp

We will not consider the optimized variant of the program; it will not show us

anything new. Whichever compiler you choose, expressions for initializing and
modifying counters will be processed correctly — in the order they have been declared in the program's code. However, none of compilers can process multiple
continue expressins correctly.

Mathematical Operators
Identifying the + operator. In most cases, the + operator is translated either into the
ADD machine instruction, which "grinds up" integer operands, or into the FADDx
instruction, which processes floating-point values. Optimizing compilers may replace
ADD xxx, 1 with a more compact instruction — INC xxx. They also may translate
the c = a + b + const expression into the LEA c,[a + b + const] machine instruction. This trick allows several variables to be summed in one stroke, returning
the obtained sum via any general-purpose register, not necessarily in the left summand, as required by the app instruction mnemonics. However, LEA cannot be directly decompiled into the + operator, because this instruction is used for more

Step Seven: Identifying the Key Structures of High-Level Languages

507

than optimized addition. In general, this is only a by-product of its activity; its primary purpose is calculating the effective offset. (See the "Constants and Offsets"
section.)

Consider the following example:
Listing 219. Identifying the + Operator
main

()

{
aneea,

Ce=

bees

last

b>

jsiaemcsa
(US eNe

cenlie

c=ct+1;

jeveragiera(AC oven

copie

Compiling this example using Microsoft Visual C++ 6.0 with default settings
should produce the following:
Listing 220. The Disassembled Code with the + Operator in Visual C++
main

proc

<q o Rk ie)

=|

dword

ptr

-OCh

var _b

=

dword

ptr

-8

var

=

dword

ptr

-4

a
push

near

; CODE

XREF:

start+Arp

ebp

MOV

ebp,

esp

; The

stack

frame

sub

esp,

; Memory

is

is opened.

OCh

toe

allocated

mov

eax,

[ebptvar_a]

; The

value

of the

add

eax,

[ebptvar_b]

var_a

the

local

variables.

variable

is loaded

into EAX.

var_b variable

is added

to EAX,

; The value

of the

; the

is placed

result

for

into

EAX.

and

«

508

_— Part I: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

mov

_

; The

[ebptvar_c],

eax

sum of: var_a

and

; Hence,

var_c

mov

ecx,

push

eCxX

var_b

= var_a

into

the

var_c variable.
5

[ebptvar_c]

push

offset asc_406030

Cull

engalgyese

add

esp,

; "%x\n"

8

# printt ("$x\n",
mov

is copied

+ var _b.

edx,

var ¢)

[ebptvar
c]

; The value

of the var_c variable

is loaded into EDX.

add == edx;.1

Se

; The

Oxl value

is added

mov

Sie

e]);-edx

to EDX,

and

-

A

mov

.

a

el

>

Blea

result

is placed

in EDX.
:

4. The var,cevariable is updated: eet
RCL RES ER Warne. Ft
eae etn
hoo
_—

the

PRS

gat ep

‘

a

se

Cl: ie = TAD;

=,

Step Seven: Identifying the Key Structures of High-Level Languages

509

a

oS
ee
le ee
a
a
Listing 221. The Disassembled Code with the + Operator Compiled Using
Aggressive Optimization
a
a
i ce
eS ee =
ae
main

proc

push

near

; Memory

;

; CODE

(The

is

allocated

compiler

; three

has

variables

eax,

; The

value

mov

ecx,

[espt+0]

; The

value

of the

start+Arp

one

local

to

variable.

squeeze

one.)

[esp+0]

(Because

; load

for

decided

into

mov

;

XREF:

ecx

of

the

the

from

var_a

variable

is

var_b variable

variable

is not

loaded

into

EAX.

is loaded

into

EAX.

initialized,

it

push

esi

; The

ESI

register

lea

esi,

[ecxteax]

used

to

is saved

add

ECX

on-the

is

; to

write

the

sum

into

; not

mean

that

the

instruction

LEA

executes

; Each

uses

the

same

number

clock

cycles,

and

EAX

quickly

and

the

ESI

register.

Adding

the

; but

LEA

gets

rid.of

; to

save

the

intermediate

; and

the

result

7 anstruction

of

need

is placed

as decompiied

to

create

result

of

offset

Cali

praace

asc_406030

into

as

St = Varea

Sas

; ESI

is

; veg

ESI =

push

esi

; "%x\n"
:

7 printf ("tx\n",

es

reg. ESI)

incremented

by one:

reg ESI + 1

a temporary

directly

regu

quickly

faster

than

-

ESI.

Thus,

does

ADD:

variable

addition,

esi

push

LG

to

stack.

; LEA

push

is possible

anywhere. )

this

a vareb.

510

Part |: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

push

offset

Gall

printer

add

esp,

7

asc_406034
10h

printf ("tx\n",

pop

esi

pop

ecx

; "$x\n"

reg

ESI)

retn

main

endp

Other compilers (Borland C++, Watcom C) generate almost identical code. It
offers no new insights; therefore, it will not be considered here.

Identifying the - operator. The - operator generally is translated either into the
SUB machine instruction (if the operands are integer values), or into the FsuUBx in-

struction (if the operands are floating-point values). Optimizing compilers may replace suB xxx, 1 with a more compact instruction — DEC xxx. They also may
translate SUB a, const into ADD a, -const. The latter is not more compact or
faster (both fit into one cycle), as the following example shows.
Listing 222. Identifying the - Operator
main ()

{
iggy

euerelpeed oearey

C=

a.—"b3

rie

aeex

e=-e

=—al0;

ey,

ajar

jcxonbguennt(ve
erNan:

ee!)

The nonoptimized variant should be approximately as follows:
Listing 223. The Disassembled Code with the - Operator
main

proc

var _c

= dword

near
ptr

; CODE
-0Ch

XREF:

starttAFp

Step Seven: Identifying the Key Structures of High-Level Languages

var_b
var a

= dword ptr -8
= dword ptr -4
push

ebp

mov

ebp,

esp

; The

stack

frame

sub

esp,

OCh

+ Memory
mov
7 The

is

eax,
value

sub

is opened.

4

allocated

for

local

variables.

[ebptvar a]
of the

var _a local

variable

eax,
; The value

[ebptvarb]
of the var_b variable

; The

is placed

mov
; The

result

eee
difference

is loaded

is subtracted

EAX.

from var a.

into EAX.

es

:

between var_a

age ae

and

var_b

push — _ offset |asc 406030 ss"ex\n"

S

} varCc = vara — var b

ass

into

mov

eCx, [ebptvar_c] a|

push

eCx

i
ary

is placed

into

var_c:

511

512

‘Part |: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

push

offset

Cali,”

print

asc_406034

add

esp,8

; "%x\n"

Po printh("4x\n" 7 vane)
mov

esp,

ebp

pop
; The

ebp
stack

frame

>

is closed.

retn

main

endp

Now, let's consider the optimized version of the same example.
Listing 224. The Disassembled Code with the - Operator Compiled Using
Aggressive Optimization
main

proc
push

; Memory

mov

near

; CODE

XREF:

is allocated

for the var_a local

start+AFp

eCX

eax,

variable.

[esptvar_a]

2

+The value of ae vara 2 local variable is loaded into EAX.
La

=

push o esi:

Memory

ioe
ie

ee
SPY

ee

:
eae

ae

Pee

is allocated for the var_b local variable. —
;

Po

oe

a

;
fa

ae
a DLS) WIG

te
2) ine

ee

———e
aie

:

Step Seven: Identifying the Key Structures of High-Level Languages

; The

value

OxFFFFFFF6

(the

difference

*; and

var_b)

is added

to ESI.

Since

; this

line

feo lL) a

push

of

code

vara

look

asc

406034

; "%$x\n"

var.a)—

var.

=

(—

OxA))

a

-OxA,

follows:

as

Var iD)

var

==

=

(Valea

varb) —

OxA

esi

push

offset

calla

Spmaner

add

esp,

10h

3 printe("2x\n",
pop

should

—

between

OxFFFFFFF6

513

Dea-0xA)

esi

pop

ecx

; The

stack

frame

is

closed.

retn
main

endp

Other compilers (Borland, Watcom) generate practically the same code. Therefore, they are not considered here.

Identifying the / operator. The / operator generally is translated into the Div
machine instruction (unsigned-integer division), IDIVv (signed-integer division), or
FDIVx (floating-point division). If the divider is a multiple of a power of 2, DIv is
replaced with SHR a, N, a faster instruction of the bit shift to the right, where a is a
dividend and nN is an exponent of base 2.
The fast division of signed numbers is a little more complex. The arithmetic
shift to the right is insufficient. (The sar instruction of the arithmetic shift to the
right fills in the high-order bits, taking into account the number's sign.)
If the absolute value of the dividend is less than the absolute value of the divisor,

the arithmetic shift to the right will remove all significant bits into a "bit bin," resulting in 0xFFFFFFFF (i.e., -1, rather than the correct value, 0). In general, using
the arithmetic shift to the right to divide signed numbers rounds up the result. This
goes against what is desired here: To round off the signed result to smaller numbers, the number 2N—1 should be added to the dividend before shifting (N is the

quantity of bits the number is shifted). This increases all shifted bits by one, and
adds the carry to the most significant bit if at least one bit is not equal to zero.
It must be noted that division is a slow operation, much slower than multiplication. (Executing piv may take more than 40 clock cycles; muL usually fits in 4.)

514

Part |: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

Therefore, the advanced optimizing compilers replace division with multiplication.
There are many formulas for similar transformations; the most popular version is
as follows:

a/b = 2N/b x a/2N
In this case, Nis a bit capacity of the number. The distinction between multiplication and division appears to be slight, which makes their identification rather difficult. Consider the following example:
Listing 225. Identifying the / Operator
main

()

{
nem

aly

printe ("tx

tx\n",

a/sz,a/ 10);

Compiling this example using Microsoft Visual C++ with default settings
should give the following.
Listing 226. The Disassembled Code with the / Operator in Visual C++
main

proc

near

vara

= dword

ptr

push

ebp

mov

ebp,

esp

; The

stack

frame

push

ecx

; Memory

is

mov
eax,
7; The value

7 CODE

XREF:

start+AFp

a local

variable.

var_a

variable

is-copied

to the

quadword

EDX:EAX.

-4

is

allocated

opened.

for

[ebptvar
a]

of the

cdq

; EAX

R

is extended

to EAX.

Step Seven: Identifying the Key Structures of High-Level Languages

mov

ecx,

; The

OxA value

OAh

idiv

eCcx

is placed

; Taking

into

7 and

quotient

the

7; EAX = var_a
push

account

ECX.

sign,

EDX:EAX

is placed

/ OXA

is divided

.

computation

mov

eax,

result

is passed

to the

of var_a

is loaded

function.

into EAX.

cdq

:

; EAX is extended to the quadword EDX:EAX.

|

printf

[ebptvar
a]

’

|

by OxA,

EAX.

into

c

eax

; The

7 The value

the

into

se

Fh

and

edx,

; Five

low-order

add

eax,

ae
bits

edx

; The number's Be,

of EDX are

ees

selected.

3%
Or

soe

off

the Rese

values

515

Part |: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

; The

stack

frame

is

closed.

retn

main

endp

Now, let's consider the optimized version of the same example.
Listing 227. The Disassembled Code with the / Operator Compiled by Visual
C++ with Aggressive Optimization
main

proc
push

near

; CODE

; Memory
mov

is allocated

ecx,

start+AFYp

of the

var_a

mov

eax,

66666667h

; Where

did

this

; There

was

nothing

imul

ecx

; This

strange

; of

var_a

the

; Note:

number

local

variable.

number

code

; nothing

strange

edx,

the

; Our

first

come

from?

this

in the

is multiplied

not

carry

7 source

All

is loaded

into

source

code.

by the

value

we

not

ECxX.

variable.

let's
of

the

divided.
on

as

though

example,

in using

and

as

did

though

have

there

the

was

multiplication.

2

bits

; dividing

var_a

variable

like

multiplied,

+ However,

sar

for the

[esptvar
a]

; The value

=

XREF:

eCcx

of EDX are

guess

may

it by 4.

shifted

be that

However,

two

this

positions

is the

EDX contains

to

the

equivalent
the

of

higher

; double word of the multiplication result. Therefore,
; the three previous instructions can be represented as
; EDX

7; =

=

(66666667h

; Closely

i

(66666667h

>>

(32

+ 2)

=

* var a) / 0x400000000;

examine

(66666667h

* var_a)

this

code

for

anything

* var a) / 0x400000000

=

right.

strange.

follows:

—

Step Seven: Identifying the Key Structures of High-Level Languages

= var a * 66666667h

/ 0x400000000

517

=

= var a * 0,10000000003492459654808044433594
Strictly

following

with

division

The

result

will

mathmatical

rules,

replace

multiplication

round

result

to

smaller

be

as

var_a

* 0.1000000000

After

the

off

= var_a

transformation,

Is

code

has

it possible

to

comprehensible,
a situation

in another

the

source

of which

program,

is unknown?

Actually,

and

is followed

the

right,

the

indication

the

any normal

mathematician

expression

using

eax,

eax,

will

above

it is

easy:

by

of division,

abbreviate

such

an

method.

edx

The obtained
vshr

the

= var_a/10

recognize

person's

occurs

to

integer.

become

If multiplication
shift

the

* (1/0.1000000000)

the

such

code

the

follows:

more

mov

ve

and

quotient

is copied to EAx.

1Fh

EAX is shifting

31 bits to the

right.

—

add
.
vA

edx,

eax

Addition:

EDX = EDX

What

this nes

does

+

(EAX >> Sys

Obviously,

to the right, only the

=

after EDX is shifted Sloss

sign bit of ‘the number will remain...

nsFe number is Pare eoen ee is eet! a
=

os
yiieite
5

result.

—
sae

ane

518

Part I: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

mov

eax,

eCx

; What

is

in ECX?

; Scrolling

the

; shows

the

that

; was

that

push

edx

; The

result

disassembler
last

of the

value

var_a

window

upward

loaded

into

ECX

variable.

of dividing

var_a

by 10 is passed

to printf.

cdq
; EAX

(var_a)

is

extended

and

edx,

; The

lower

5 bits

; the

sign

of vara,

add

eax,

edx

down

eax,

the

quadruple

word

EDX:EAX.

1Fh

; Rounding
sar

to

of

the

EDX

are

selected.

register,

containing

5

; The

arithmetic

push

eax

push

offset

call

Lekenjeeie

add

esp,

shift

aXX

by 5 is

identical

Peleg

to dividing

var_a

by 32.

ESR Neat

10h

; printf ("tx %x\n",

var_a/10,

var_a/32)

retn

main
endp
ees

It is interesting to compare compilers and see how advanced they are in terms
of optimization. Unfortunately, neither Borland nor Watcom is capable of replacing division by the faster multiplication of numbers that are not powers of 2.
To demonstrate this, let's consider the result of compiling the same example
in Borland C++.

e

Step Seven: Identifying the Key Structures of High-Level Languages

Listing 228. The Disassembled Code with the / Operator Compiled by
Borland C++
eS

_™main

proc near
push

; DATA XREF:

DATA:00407044to

ebp

mov

ebp,

esp

; The

stack

frame

push

ebx

is opened.

; EBX is saved.

~ipsesl

|

mov

eax,

; The

contents

~

of

; variable

are

LONG

OAh

; The

435

ECX

pata

the

copied

OxA

=}

xt

25

-~

<<

eae

EBX.

5

cdg

to the quadruple.

te

;

~ me.
dissadipush /2

Bis: ht

ee,

word EDX:EAX.

ssa peong: bare se es 20 fais.

sit
Byory more) o : atte
seit ‘ Ji

tei
e230

.

is Sess: into

ided by
ae

mei

ECX register

to EAX.

mar

; EAX is extended

=

uninitialized

4 mee 27

Gy
dhotesie
"a?

.
7s
ci Seentet

See *

F<

oz fe!

a?

, Pan.

cr

polingot doraals =f Kidda tuto adhd =

Set aeTs

rh:
aed euks
EsPe

519

520

Part I: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

push

ecx

push

offset

call

Yprantt

add

esp,

; printl ("tx
xor

axX

OCh

tx\n",

eax,

eax

; Returning

zero

pop

eh Xa NT

var

a/10,

var _a/32)

ebx

pop

ebp

; The

stack

frame

is

closed.

retn

_main

endp

Identifying the % operator. The instruction set of the 80x86 microprocessor
family does not include a special instruction for computing the remainder. Instead,
the remainder, with the quotient, is returned by the Div, IDIv, and FDIvx division
instructions.
If the divider is a power of 2 (2% = b), and the dividend is an unsigned number, the remainder will be equal to the number represented by n low-order bits of
the dividend. If the dividend is signed, all the bits (except for the first nN), must

equal the sign bit to preserve the number's sign. However, if the first N bits are zeroes, all the bits of the result should be cleared, regardless of the value of the sign bit.

Thus, if the dividend is an unsigned number, the a%2" expression is translated
into AND a, (b-1); otherwise, the translation becomes ambiguous: The compiler
may insert an explicit test for zero into a branch statement, or it may use cunning
mathematical algorithms, the most popular of which is Dec x\ OR x, -N\ INC x.
The point is that if the first w bits of the number x are zeros, all the bits of the result,

except for the most significant — the sign bit — will equal 1. In addition, or x,-N
will force the most significant bit to be set to zero as well (i.e., the resulting value
will be -1). As for 1nc-1, it will give zero. On the contrary, if at least one of n low-

order bits is 1, there is no carry from the high-order bits, and Inc x restores the
initial value of the result.
Using complex transformations, advanced optimizing compilers may replace
division with one of several faster operations. Unfortunately, there are no algorithms for the fast calculation of the remainder for all dividers, and the divider

E

Step Seven: Identifying the Key Structures of High-Level Languages

521

should be a multiple of k x 2t, where k and t are integers. Then the remainder
can be calculated using the formula

a%b=a% kx 2t=a— (2N/k + (a/2N)(—2) — 2k) x k
This formula is complex, and identifying the optimized % operator may appear
to be a tough task, especially with optimizers' tendency to change the order of instructions.
Consider the following example:
Listing 229. Identifying the : Operator
main

()

{
ant

a?

Denimex ooeN 7 ato,

aS Ors

Compiling this example in Microsoft Visual C++ with default settings should
give the following:
Listing 230. The Disassembled Code with the + Operator
main

proc

near

var 4

push
mov

XREF:

=

ptr

dword

start+ANp

-4

ebp
ebp,

esp

; The

stack

frame

push

-

eCx

; Memory
mov

7 CODE

is

eax,

; The value

is

allocated

opened.

for

a local

variable.

variable

is placed

quadword

EDX:EAX.

[ebptvar
a]

of the

var_a

cdq

; EAX

is

extended

mov

ecx,

OAh

to

the

into

EAX.

.

522

_— Part |: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

; The

OxA value

is placed

Ldtv,
gecxm
; EDX:EAX (var_a)
push

edx

; The

remainder

into

is divided

from

ECx.

by ECxX

division

(0xA).

of var_a

>

by OxA

is passed

to the

jOLINeCLetaneeLon.
mov

edx,

[ebptvar_a]

; The value

of the var_a variable

and

edx,

8000000Fh

; The

sign bit and four

is placed into EDX.
3

low-order

bits

of the number

are

"cut

out."

; Four low-order bits contain the remainder from dividing EDX by 16.
jns

short

loc 401020

pale sate number

dec
wae

edx
ile

inc

Glebe po

is not

negative, a jump

el aa
ay

BS A
7ifie

is made

ORT Fe

to loc_401020.

ae Dect

shen Heaikrenceei

PR

8

afT AS. oniiail

> This’ sequence, / asrereranstes
y mentioned, is typical for the
potas STS
eeof the remainder of the signed number.
:
,weve lastaas
can bewwritten 5 folios:
ha

|

OLR

reste Miesyes.

;

Step Seven: Identifying the Key Structures of High-Level Languages

523
>

al

It is curious that optimization does not influence the algorithm for calculating
the remainder. Unfortunately, neither Microsoft Visual C++ nor any other com-

piler I know of is able to calculate the remainder using multiplication.
Identifying the « operator. The * operator is generally translated into the MUL
machine instruction (unsigned-integer multiplication), mu (signed-integer multiplication), or FMULx (floating-point multiplication). If one of the multipliers is a
multiple of a power of 2, MUL (IMUL) usually is replaced with the sH instruction,
which shifts bits to the left, or with the LEA instruction, which multiplies the con-

tents of the registers by 2, 4, or 8. The two latter instructions require two clock cycles for execution; MUL requires between two and nine cycles, depending on the
processor type. In the same clock cycle, LEA has time to add the multiplication result to the contents of the general-purpose register and/or a constant; this multiplies the register by 3, 5, or 9, simply by adding its own value to it. This may sound
ideal, but LEA has a shortcoming: It may cause Address Generation Interlock
(AGI), which will "eat up" the gain in performance.

Consider the following example:
Listing 231. Identifying the * Operator

Princ"sx ox.

ox NN,

a i6,

aM4ta

at

3)

Compiling this example using Microsoft Visual C++, with default settings,
should give the following:
Listing 232. The Disassembled Code with the * Operator Compiled
by Visual C++
proc

var a

= dword
push

7; CODE_XREE:

near

main

ptr

-4

ebp

mov

ebp,

esp

; The

stack

frame

is opened.

start+AFYp

524

‘Part I: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

push

ecx

; Memory
mov

is allocated

eax,

of the

imul

eax,

ODA

; This

multiplies

push

eax

; The

product

ecx,

var_a

var_a

var_a

lea

ds:5[ecx*4]

; ECX is multiplied

7

local

by

ar

eee

variable

OxD,

into

is loaded

is loaded

and places

the

into EAX.

result

to the printf

into

function.

into

ECxX.

by 4.

Then,

5 is added,

and

EN

aie

SS

the result

EDX.

Note that this only takes one clock are

=pish-edx—

EAX.

:

se
_—

variable.

[ebptvar
a]
of var_a

7 is placed

local

* 0xD is passed

; The value
edx,

var_a

[ebpt+var
a]

; The value

mov

for the

2

ie

on

iOci?
-

=
~

x
2

“3 gs
Ry

;

“tic
-

=~

+4

pp

ee

ag ese EG

i The value"of the var_a*4-+ sd ese
; thePRG iaesfunction.

;
ne

=

>

"

—

ad

<a

i
ee

ree
}

Step Seven: Identifying the Key Structures of High-Level Languages

MOv

esp,

525

ebp

pop

ebp

; The

stack

frame

is

closed.

retn
main

endp

Except for calling the printf function and loading the vara variable from
memory, executing this code will take just three processor clock cycles. Compiling
this example with the /ox key will give the following:
Listing 233. The Disassembled Code with the * Operator Compiled by
Visual C++ with Aggressive Optimization
proc

main

push

near

7 CODE,

KREP:

start+ANp

ecx

; Memory
mov

is allocated

eax,

ecx,

Ge

with

the value

edx,

32

Aa

; That

is how

; using

just

; paired

on

ecx,

edx

Dusit

s CCX

; Passing
shl

; var_a

eax,

the
one

4.4

of the

Varia

Vara

compiler
clock

Pentium

variable.

var_a

variable.

53

MMX

= Vat-a,*

manages

cycle!

Both

and

Pentium

13

to multiply
LEA

var_a@

instructions

by 13

can

be

Pro.

ds:5[eax*4]

7 ECX = EAX*4
push

local

[eaxtecx*4]

3. EDX:=.(vara *,3)*.

lea

var_a

[eaxteax*2]

VAL ua"

lea

the

[esptvar
a]

; EAX is loaded
lea

for

+. 5

é

var_a*13

and

:

var_a*4

4

is multiplied

by 16.

+ 5 to the printf

function

Part |: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

526

push

eax

push

offset

call

_printe

add

esp,

p) printh

axXXX

7 USK

BXe SX

a*l6,

varvat4

14h

("tx

Sx

Sh\n",,

var

+57

war_a*is)

retn

main

endp

This code is no faster than the previous, nonoptimized version, and it takes
three clock cycles. In other areas, however, the gain may be substantial.
Other compilers use LEA to multiply numbers quickly. For example, Borland
C++ produces the following:
Listing 234. The Disassembled Code with the * Operator Compiled in Borland

_main

proc near
lea

edx,

RAD
mov

ele els}
€CX,

€aXx

; ECX is loaded
shl

; DATA XREF: DATA:00407044vo

[eaxteax*2]

SOx

with

the

uninitialized

var_a

register

variable.

mee

7 BCX = Valrta*4:
push

ebp

; EBP

is

add

ecx,

saved.

a

5

; The value

5 is added

; Borland

not

lea

does

edx,

to

var _a*4.

LEA

for

[eaxtedx*4]

; EDX = var_a
; In this

use

+ (var_a*3)

case,

Borland

mov

ebp,

esp

; The

stack

frame

addition,

which

is a pity.

:

* 4 = var_a*13
and Microsoft

is opened —

are

unanimous.

Step Seven: Identifying the Key Structures of High-Level Languages

527
~~

;

in

the

middle

; By

the

way,

edx

; The

product

eax,

POUCrey

the

the

push

shl

of

of

function.

"missing"

var _a*i3

(Vane
*4)— 7)

is

this?

; which

has

bug

decided

that

the

necessarily
Ae

eCx
eax

passed

instruction

to

multiplied

is*a

de

Was

1s

It

7 not

push

is

EBP

the

is

printf

above.

function.

4

; What

push

push

nO

push

offset

call

prant£

be

loaded

sind

alazed

aXxX

add

esp,

10h

xor

eax,

eax

pop

ebp

in

sioy= 1G.

the

compiler,

var_a

variable

Pe SK

should

See NTI

retn
_main

endp

Although Borland generates less interesting code, executing it takes three processor-clock cycles as well. Watcomis another matter: It shows a disappointingly
low result compared to two compilers just considered.
Listing 235. The Disassembled Code with the *Operator Compiled in Watcom
main

proc
push

ebx

; EBX

is

mov

eax,

near

saved

on

the

stack.

ebx

; EAX is loaded with the value
; variable.

shl

eax,

2

of the uninitialized

var_a

register

528

_— Part I: Getting Acquainted with Basic Hacking Techniques

; EAX =
sub

var_a*4
eax,

ebx

; EAX = var_a*4 — var_a = var_a*3
; This

is how Wactom

works:

; then

it subtracts

the

shl

eax,

eax,
that

; Visual
push

*

+ var_a

= var_a*13

so?

Four

instructions

C++,

hated

by many

have

people,

Es
been Ares

manages

eax

pe the var 2a*13 Hesse is passed
mov

eax,

7 The value

a "surplus,"

* 4 = var_a*l12

ebx

; EAX = var_a*12
; Is

with

2

; EAX = var_a*3
add

It multiplies

excess.

to printf.

ebx

of the uninitialized

; variable is loaded

into EAX.

var_ a See

with

whereas

two

Microsoft

instructions.

Step Seven: Identifying the Key Structures of High-Level Languages

add

esp,

pepeantl (Vex
pop

529

10h

tx 2x \n",

varsa*l6,

var a*4 + 5) var a@*i3)

ebx

retn

main_

endp

The code generated by Watcom requires six clock cycles (i.e., twice as many as
the code generated by its competitors.)
Complex operators. C/C++ differs favorably from most of its competitors in
its support for complex operators: x= (x is any simple operator,) ++, and --.
Complex operators of the type a x= b are translated into a = a x b, and are
identified in the same way as the simple operators mentioned previously.
The ++ and — operators. In their prefix forms, these operators can be repre-

sented as simple expressions
of the type a = a + 1 anda = a - 1, which are of
no interest here. Their postfix forms, however, are another matter.
Sam.
——

ae

‘

eee

sone

fee

4

ny

—

”

ee

‘y

i

vepes

Het

eal

£59

45

’

Pict
Pe

coed
SEI

A

a

-

;
fs

COR

27OSer
SSO

5 eto

+

she Fetie

’

Peo 8s¥) tte VP)

Die
+e eT

ae
ee

pee signe te Detises)

I Bebe a4ST ot pane ode|

Introduction

The three basic stages of cracking protection mechanisms are locating the protection
code in hundreds of kilobytes (or megabytes) of application code, analyzing the algorithm of its work, and breaking. These stages are equally important: For example,
if the second stage is not passed, it makes no sense to start cracking.

It is possible to classify protection typographically. Cryptographic protection,
for example, is used at the third stage. As a rule, its algorithm is widely available,
well documented, and known to the hacker. Nevertheless, this does not aid crack-

ing greatly (unless it simplifies the writing of a program for a brute-force attack).
Protection based on registration numbers, however, stresses imposing secrecy on
the algorithm that generates the registration numbers and hampering the search for
and analysis of the algorithm in the program code. (Once the algorithm is known,
it is easy to write the key generator.)
However, even protection that employs cryptographic methods, such as by ci-

phering the bodies of crucial functions using a strong cipher and a long key, may be
separated from the key (for example, by saving a dump of the program after deciphering). Distributing the program with an applied key is a simpler tactic commonly used by pirates. One way of thwarting such an unlawful action is to include
the encoded specification data of the computer into the key, or to check the authenticity of the copy through the Internet. (It is even possible, although considered bad form, to do this without notifying the user.) But what prevents a hacker
who owns a licensed copy of the program from deciphering it with his or her own
key and removing any checks from the program?

534

Part Il: Ways of Making Software Analysis Difficult

Therefore,.any protection should be able to effectively counteract attempts at
detection and analysis, and poison the disassembler and the debugger — the main
tools of the cracker — along the way. Without this, protection is no protection at all.
During the reign of MS-DOS, the computer world was governed by real-time
programs that used the processor, memory, and other hardware exclusively, and
that switched to protected mode or back at any moment. At that time, debuggers
(still shaky, feeble, and impractical) could easily be deceived (frozen, or forced to
abort execution) by simple programming tricks actively used by protection mechanisms. Disassemblers fell into a stupor upon merely seeing ciphered or selfmodifying code. It was paradise for protection-mechanism developers.
Now, everything has changed. Windows applications are not allowed to show
off. Pressing ahead with the protected mode is no longer possible — only prosaic,
nonprivileged instructions can be used, and tricks of different kinds can be only
dreamed of. A few protective measures that can function even in such
a "user friendly" environment fails against wise debuggers and disassemblers.
The hardware support for debugging in 386+ processors, along with v86 mode,

privileged instructions, and virtual memory, allow the creation of debuggers that
are almost undetectable by the application program. Moreover, it is impossible for
the application to gain control over such debuggers. There are also debuggeremulators, true-to-life virtual machines executing code independently, instead of
running it on a "live" processor. The emulator always runs in supervisor mode,
even in relation to the zero-ring code being debugged. Protection mechanisms have
little chance of detecting the debugger or hindering it (only possible if the emulator
is implemented with mistakes).
Interactive disassemblers (like IDA) also have appeared. Their close relationship
with the user (i.e., the hacker), allows them to bypass traps left by the developer.
The application sets up its own vxd. (This is executed in the zero-level protection
ring and can do whatever it wants.) However, this only facilitates the hacker's task: The
interaction of protection mechanisms and vxd is only possible through a special API,
which simplifies the study of the protection algorithm and the emulation of vxd for unbinding the application from the electronic key or key diskette.
Even hiding something in the zero-ring protection is a problem in Windows.
To guarantee compatibility with all Windows-like operating systems, only the system's documented capabilities can be used. Building protection in Windows is like
trying to get lost in a park with a million trees, all of which are laid out geometrically and hung abundantly with signs reading "Exit this way."
Thus, it is very difficult, if not impossible, to reliably thwart the study of a program. However, many techniques for ee
debuggers and disassemblers
are interesting in themselves.

O
a

Counteracting Debuggers

A Brief History
The first debugger, debug.com, bore slight resemblance to today's debuggers.
Moreover, it came as part of a regular MS-DOS package. Today, it is probably only
suitable for entertainment and for studying assembler. Few people were delighted
with it when it first appeared, and new debuggers mushroomed. However, most
did not make significant advances as compared with the prototype. For example,
some differed from the original only in the interface.
It was the golden age for protection developers. To make it impossible to debug
a program, it was enough to lock the keyboard, disable interrupts, and clear the
trap flag.
The first debuggers even slightly suitable for cracking appeared only after computers equipped with the 80286 processor. Hackers may remember AFD PRO, presented in 1987 by AdTec GmbH; the well-known Turbo Debugger, created by two
brothers, Chris and Rich Williams, a year later; and the first emulating debugger by

Sergey Pachkovski, written much later, in 1991. Protection developers withstood
the assault: Debuggers still allowed the program being debugged to gain control
over them, and they hardly withstood operations onthe stack, the screen, the key-

board, and so on.
The situation changed when 80386 processors appeared. Major complications
in the software (and, consequently, enormous complications in debugging)
demanded the presence of advanced means of debugging in the processor itself.

536

Part Il: Ways of Making Software Analysis Difficult

As a result, these appeared in 386. From that moment, protection developers began

to feel uneasy.
Fuel was added to the fire by NuMega, which presented its remarkable Softlce at
the end of the 1980s. SoftIce gained huge popularity among hackers and, adapted
for Windows 9x/NT/2000, remains an undisputed favorite (although not without
competitors). However, it would be incorrect to consider NuMega a criminal company and SoftIce a product only used by hackers: The debugger was intended
primarily for driver-developers and for legal investigations of the operating system.
(Writing drivers is a tough task unless the intricacies of the OS are understood.)
Nevertheless, SoftIce gave protection programs and their developers a lot of
trouble. Certainly, it was not (and is still not) a stealth debugger, completely invisible to the program being debugged, and it had (and still has) several bugs that allow
the protection to detect it, freeze it, and/or to escape from its control. Nevertheless,
in skilful hands, it coped successfully with all these limitations and bypassed carefully set "traps." Each new version of SoftIce became more difficult to counteract.
(Old bugs were fixed faster than new ones were introduced.)

Anti-debugging tricks gradually came to nothing; they have disappeared as a result of the victorious advance of Windows. The ridiculous belief that it is impossible to stop someone working in Windows with a debugger at the application level
has become common. This brings smiles to the faces of professionals who build different traps into their programs (more for fun than to combat hackers seriously).
In view of the current possibilities for analyzing applications, struggling against
hackers is a useless occupation. However, another serious threat comes from yesterday's beginners, who have read a lot of different "how-to-crack-programs"
FAQs. (Thank goodness they are accessible to everyone.) These beginners now are
looking for something on which to test their powerful capabilities.

How the Debugger Works
Struggling against a debugger without knowing how it works would, at best, be an
indication of ill manners; therefore, the basic principles underlying it must be considered. The description that follows is not exhaustive. Nevertheless, it will give
the reader a general idea about the issue. Full technical details can be found in the
"Debugging and Performance Monitoring" chapter of the technical manual "IA-32
Intel Architecture Software Developer's Manual. Volume 3: System Programming
Guide," distributed free of charge by Intel.

Counteracting Debuggers

537

All existing debuggers can be divided into two categories: ones that use the
processor's debugging capabilities, and ones that emulate the processor independently, monitoring the execution of the program being tested.
A high-quality emulating debugger cannot be detected or bypassed the code being debugged. However, there are no high-quality emulators of Pentium processors, and they are unlikely to appear in the foreseeable future.
In general, it is worth asking if it makes sense to create such emulators. Pentium
microprocessors provide immense debugging opportunities, allowing the developer
to monitor even privileged code. They support step-by-step execution of the program,
control execution of an instruction at a given address, monitor references to a given
memory location (or to input-output ports), signal task switching, and so on.
If the trap bit of the flags register is set, the Int 1 debug exception is generated
automatically after each machine instruction is executed, and control is transferred
to the debugger. The code being debugged may detect tracing by analyzing the flags
register. Therefore, to stay invisible, the debugger should recognize the instructions
for reading the flags register, emulate their execution, and return zero for the value
of the trap flag.
One point must be noted: After executing the instruction that modifies the
value of the ss register, the debug exception is not generated. The debugger should
be able to recognize this situation, and independently set a breakpoint on the following instruction. Otherwise, the automatic tracer will not be able to enter the

procedure preceded by the Por ss instruction (for example, PUSH SS; POP SS;
CALL MySecretProc). Not all contemporary debuggers take this subtlety into account. Such a decision, despite its archaic nature, may appear helpful.
Four debug registers, DRO through pr3, store the linear addresses of four
checkpoints. The pR7 debug register contains a condition for each of the points.
When any condition is true, the processor generates the INT 0x1 exception and
control is transferred to the debugger. There are four conditions: an instruction is
executed; the contents of a memory location are modified; a memory location is read or
updated, but not executed; and an input-output port is referenced.
Setting a special bit enables the generation of the debug exception following any
reference to debug registers, even when the privileged code tries to read or modify
them. A competently designed debugger can hide its presence by not allowing the
code being debugged to detect the debugger, no matter what privileges the code
may have. (However, if the code under study debugs itself, involving all four
breakpoints, the debugger will not be able to work.)
If the T bit in tss of the task being debugged is set, each time this task is
switched to, it will cause the debug exception before the first instruction of the task

538

Part Il: Ways of Making Software Analysis Difficult

is executed. To prevent detection, the debugger may trace all references to Tss and
return counterfeit data to the program. Note that to improve performance, Windows NT does not use Tss (to be more precise, it uses only one), rendering this de-

bug opportunity useless.
A software breakpoint is the only thing that cannot be hidden without writing a
full-scale processor emulator. This is the one-byte code oxcc that, placed at the beginning of the instruction, causes the INT 0x3 exception when an attempt is made
to execute it. To discover whether at least one point has been set, it is enough for
the program being debugged to count its checksum. To do this, it may use Mov,
MOVS, LODS, POP, CMP, CMPS, or any other instructions; no debugger is capable of
tracing and emulating any of them.
Software breakpoints are recommended only when hardware capabilities are
insufficient. However, by default, practically all contemporary debuggers (including SoftIce) always set software breakpoints, rather than hardware ones. This can be
successfully used in protection mechanisms, examples of which are given in the
"How to Counteract Tracing" section.

Processing Exceptions in Real
and Protected Modes
When the debug exception (or any other exception) arises, the processor places the
contents of the flags register and the address of the following instruction (or the
current one, depending on the exception) to be executed onto the stack. Only then
does it pass control to the debugger.
In real mode, the flags with the return address are placed onto the stack of the
program being debugged, making debugging easy to detect. It is enough to keep control over the integrity of the stack contents above the stack pointer. One option is
to point to the top of the stack. In this case, it will be impossible to add new data on
the stack, and the debugger will be unable to work.

Another situation that arises in protected mode is that the exception handler
may reside in its own address space and not use any resources (including the stack)
of the application being debugged. In principle, a debugger competently designed
for protected mode cannot be detected or disabled — even by the privileged code
being executed in the zero ring.
This is true for Windows NT, but not for Windows 9.x; the latter operating systems do not use all the advantages of protected mode, and they always litter the
stack of the task, whether or not it is being debugged.

—

Counteracting Debuggers

539

How Hackers Break Programs
Generally, revealing a protective mechanism is no problem for the hacker. What is
really difficult is finding it in many megabytes of the application being cracked. Today, few people use automatic tracing for this purpose; hardware breakpoints have
supplanted it.
For example, let's suppose that a protection requests a password, then checks
its authenticity (for example, by comparing it with a reference value). Depending
on the result of the check, the protection passes control to an appropriate branch of
the program. The hacker may crack this protection without even going into the
authentication algorithm. The hacker simply enters the first password that comes
to mind (not necessarily the correct one), finds it in the memory, sets a breakpoint
on the first character of the password string, waits for the debugger to appear that
has tracked referencing the password, exits the comparison procedure, and corrects

the condition of the jump so that the desired branch of the program always gains
control.
The time needed to remove this sort of protection is measured in seconds! Such
programs are usually cracked before they reach a legal consumer. Fortunately, this
can be counteracted.

Protecting Programs
No matter where the key information comes from — a register, a file, the keyboard —
a hacker can determine its location in memory and set a breakpoint on it almost instantly. Preventing this is impossible, but a mean trick can be played on the hacker:
Instead of allowing the key information to be analyzed immediately after it is received, it can be passed as an argument to several functions that do something with
it, then transfer it to other functions. These functions, in turn, transfer it to the fol-

lowing ones.
The protective mechanism may be built into everything (the file-open procedure,
a program for calculating salaries, etc.). Explicit checks are not recommended:
It is better if, in the case of incorrect key information, the called function returns an
incorrect result but does not signal the mistake. At first glance, the broken program
will work normally. The fact that it works incorrectly will be detected only later
(for example, if it displays one result and prints another). To secure the legal user
against the erroneous input of the password, it is enough to explicitly compute the
checksum in one place; the checksum will not give the hacker any information about
the true value of the password.

540

Part Il: Ways of Making Software Analysis Difficult

Thus, protection is "smeared" around the program and buffers containing
key data are duplicated repeatedly. The hacker will not have enough breakpoints
or the patience to analyze the huge volume of code manipulated with, tracing references. It is even better if the buffers that check the key information also are used
to store service data, accessed as frequently as possible. This will prevent the hacker
from quickly separating the protective mechanism from other code of the
application.
Since most hackers set a breakpoint on the beginning of the control buffer, it is
reasonable to place the "stub" in the first four bytes of the key; the stub is either not
referenced at all, or it is manipulated by a protection simulator, which keeps the
hacker on the wrong track.
In such a situation, the hacker only can undertake a laborious study of all code
that directly or indirectly manipulates key information (and that comprises many
megabytes of disassembler listing). If the crucial part of code is encrypted but not
decrypted completely at any moment of running the program (i.e., each function is
decrypted when entered and encrypted again when exited), the hacker will be unable to obtain a dump ready for disassembling, and will be compelled to trace. This
is where the second surprise will be waiting.

How to Counteract Tracing
The basic possibility of creating completely "invisible" debuggers mainly remains
a possibility: Most can be detected by even nonprivileged code.
The severest criticism is caused by using the 1-byte 0xcc code to set a breakpoint, instead of charging with the task the debug registers specially intended for
this. SoftIce, Turbo Debugger, Code Viewer, and the debugger integrated in Microsoft Visual Studio all use oxcc. The last debugger uses breakpoints when it runs
a program in step-by-step mode, placing the notorious 0xcc byte at the beginning
of the next instruction.
A trivial integrity self-check reveals breakpoints that indicate debugging.
Statements like if

(CalculateMyCRC() !=MyValidCRC)

{printf("Hello,

Hacker!\n");

return; } are not recommended, because it is easy to discover and neutralize them
by correcting the conditional jump so it always transfers control to the necessary
branch of the program. It is better to decrypt the critical data or some code using
the obtained checksum value.

—

Counteracting Debuggers

541
yr”

A simple protection mechanism may look like this:
——

Listing 236. A Simple Protection Mechanism
et
int

main(int

argc,

char*

argv[])

{
// The
char

ciphered

string

"Hello,

Free

World!"

sO[]="\x0C\x21\x28\x28\x2B\x68\x64\x02\x36\

\x21\x21\x64\x13\x2B\x36\x28\x20\x65\x49\x4E";

__asm

{
BeginCode:

;

The

beginning

; being
pusha

; All

ebx,

sO

code

are

saved.

ebx=&s0 [0]

GetNextChar:

do

XOr

eax,

eax

eax

=

0;

lea

esi,

BeginCode

esi

=

&BeginCode

le

ecx,

EndCode

The

length

sub

ecx,

esi

;

; being

HarvestCRC:

of

code

debugged

is

computed.

is

loaded

is

computed.

do

lodsb

Add

eax,

eax

loop

HarvestCRC
ah

; The

next

; The

checksum

byte

into

al.

until (~-cx>0)

xor

[ebx],

Inc

ebx

; A pointer

to

the

cmp

[ebx],0

; Until

end

of the

jnz GetNextChar
popa
EndCode:

the

general-purpose

registers
lea

of

debugged

;

The

next

character

the

is

decrypted.

next

character

string

; Continue

PALI
The

decryption
registers are restored.

end

of the

; A breakpoint

; The

string

is

code

being

safe

here.

debugged

is diplayed.

After starting the program normally, the line "Hello, Free World!" should
appear on the screen. But when the program is run under the debugger, even with

542

Part Il: Ways of Making Software Analysis Difficult

at least one breakpoint set within the limits of BeginCode and EndCode, senseless
garbage like "Ugnnm."Dpgg"Umpnf£#0"

will show up on the screen. Protection can

be strengthened considerably if the procedure computing the checksum is placed
into a separate thread engaged in another useful process, making the protective
mechanism as unobtrusive as possible.
In general, threads are great things that demand a special approach. It is
difficult for a human to recognize that a program can run simultaneously in several
places. Commonly used debuggers have a weak point: They debug each thread
separately, never simultaneously. The following example shows how this can be
used for protection.
Listing 237. The Weakness of Debugging Threads Separately
// This
//

Its

function
purpose

// in the
void

string

My(void

will

be

to

alter

that

contains

is

executing

in a separate

imperceptibly

the

user

the

case

thread.
of

the

characters

name.

*arg)

{
int p=1;

// This is a pointer to the byte being encrypted.
// Note
// from

that encryption
the first byte,

is not carried out
since this allows the

// set

at the beginning

of the buffer

// If the
while

line

feed

( ((char

*)

is not

breakpoint

to be bypassed.

encountered,

execute.

arg) [p]!='\n')

{
// If the

next

character

((char

// The

fifth bit

is inverted.

// This

toggles

the

Uichars*)

*)

arg)

// BD pointer

argc,

char*

{
char

name[100];

[p]<0x20

case

initialized,

to the

argv[])

next

of the

byte

wait.

);

Latin

characters.

<arg) [pilsc=0x20%

(Oe

int main(int

is not

while(

being

processed

:
;

Counteracting Debuggers

543
Pr”

// A buffer

containing

the

user

name

the

password

echaruburLel 100i.

// A buffer

//

The

//

(Some

memset

containing

buffer

of

the

compilers

(&name[0],

user

do
0,

name

this,

is

but

stuffed

not

with

100);

// The My routine

is executed

in a separate

_beginthread(&My,

NULL,

*)

// The

is, requested.

user

name

printf ("Enter

// The

name:");

password

is

zeroes.

all.)

(void

thread.

éname[0]);

fgets(&name[0],

66,

stdin);

requested.

// Note:

//
//
//
//
//

While the user enters the password, the second
thread has enough time to alter the case of all
characters of the user name. This is not evident
and does not follow from the analysis of the program,
especially if it is studied under a debugger that poorly
shows the mutual influence of the program's components.

printf

("Enter

// The

user

name

// with

the

reference

if

password:");

and

the

Since

the

// transformed

to

password

are

66,

stdin);

compared

values.

(!(stremp(&buff[0],

// Note:

fgets(&buff[0],

"password\n")

name

entered

by the

stremp(&name[0],

user

has

been

"Kpnce\n"),

// not stroemp(&name[0],
"KPNC\n"), it is compared.
//ATthis is not apparent at first- glance.)

|| stremp(&name[0],

"KPNC\n")))

// The

and password

correct

printf ("USER

name

=

OK\n");

else

// Error:

Wrong

printf ("Wrong
return

0;

user

user

name

or

or password

password!
\n") ;

:

eee
Eo
ee

——=_

544 _—s—Part Il: Ways of Making Software Analysis Difficult

Initially, the program expects to receive KPNC: password. But the true answer is
Kpnc:password. As the user enters the password, the second thread processes the
buffer that contains the user name, and toggles the case of all characters except the

first one. When one thread is traced step by step, all other threads are functioning
independently. These other threads may intervene randomly in the functioning of
the thread being debugged (for example, to modify its code).
The threads can be controlled if a breakpoint is placed in each of them. However, if there are more than four threads (nothing prevents the protection devel-

oper from creating them), the quantity of debug registers will become insufficient
for all threads. In this case, the necessity arises of using the 0xcc opcode, which can
easily be detected by the protective mechanism.
The situation is aggravated by the poor tolerance of most debuggers, including
SoftIce, for programs with structural exception handling (SEH). The instruction that
causes the exception being processed either "defeats" the debugger, releasing itself
from the debugger's control, or passes control to the library exception filter, which
only passes control to the application's handler after it calls several service functions that may "drown" the hacker.
However, when compared to early SoftIce versions, this is progress. Formerly,
SoftIce strictly held certain interrupts. For example, it would not allow the program
to process independently division by zero.
If the following example is run under any SoftIce version through 4.05,
the debugger, having reached the int c=c/(a-b) line, suddenly will abort execution, losing the control over this application. Theoretically, the situation can be
corrected by presetting the breakpoint on the first instruction of the block
__except. Then, the question is how to find the location of this block without
looking in the source code, which the hacker would not have.
Listing 238. An Example That Employs Structural Exception Handling
int main(int

argc,

char*

argv[])

{
// A protected

block

ate
int

a=1;

int b=1;

int

c=c/(a-b);

// This is an attempt
// Several statements

to divide

by zero.

are

because

used

most

compilers

Counteracting Debuggers

545
>

id
ke
//
//
Vt
//
ei
//
i
//

return

an

error

int

a=a/0;

When

SoftIce

control
code
If

over

that

the

their

executes

the

by

the

program
waste

the

control

is

time

are

functions,

will

not

be

disassembled.
analyzing

a

following

being

b variables
some

equality

may

encountering

program
gains

never

a and

returned

after

statement

but

may

assigned
not

As

useless

be

It

it

"falls

loses

off"

to

misleading.

values

immediate

obvious

like

instruction,

debugged.

ae

values,

when

a result,

the

hacker

code.

__except (EXCEPTION EXECUTE HANDLER)
{
// This code will gain control when the exception "division by
(ee zero" arises, but SoftIce will not recognize this
// situation. Instead, it will ask that a breakpoint be
except.
ed set manually on the first instruction of the block
._ except, the hacker
// To determine an address of the block
// will have to figuré out exactly how SEH support is
// implemented in a particular compiler.

To cope with such protection, the hacker will have to study in depth how structural
exceptions are processed, both at the operating system level and at the level of a particular compiler. Most of the existing literature bypasses this theme, probably because implementing SEH is complex and bulky. As a result, most programmers and technical
writers do not know what is "under the hood."
Since SEH is implemented differently in each compiler, it is not surprising that
SoftIce refuses to support it. Therefore, the previous example is highly resistant to
breaking and, at the same time, is easy to implement. It works equally well under all
operating systems of the Windows family, starting from Windows 95.

Counteracting Breakpoints
Breakpoints set on major system functions are powerful weapons in the hands
of a hacker. Suppose that protection tries to open a key file. Under Windows, the
only documented way of doing this is to call the createFile function (actually,

546

Part Il: Ways of Making Software Analysis Difficult

CreateFileA or CreateFilew for the ASCII or UNICODE name of the file, respectively). All other functions inherited from early Windows versions, such as
OpenFile,

serve as wrappers to CreateFile.

Knowing this, the hacker may set a breakpoint on the starting address of the
beginning of this function (which is known to the hacker), and instantly locate the
protection code by calling this function.
However, not all hackers know that the file can be opened in other ways: by
calling the zwcreateFile (or NtCreateFile) function exported by NTDLL.DLL, or
by addressing the kernel directly via a call to the INT 0x2Eh interrupt. This is true
not only for CreateFile, but for all functions of the kernel. Interestingly, no privileges are needed for this. Such a call can even originate from an application code.
This trick will not stop an experienced hacker for long, but it is worth preparing
a small surprise by placing the call of InT 0x2E in the try block. Control will be
gained not only by the system kernel, but also by this exception's handler in the
__try block. The hacker, without the source code, cannot determine quickly
whether this call has any relation to the __ try block. Hence, the hacker easily can
be led astray — it is enough to simulate opening a file without actually opening it.
Besides, nothing prevents the INT 0x2E interrupt from being used to organize the
interaction of the program components; it will be difficult for the hacker to
distinguish the user's call from the system's call.
Now, what can be done with functions of the USER and GpI modules (for example, GetWindowsText) that are used to read the user-entered key information

(as a rule, a serial number or a password)? Fortunately, practically all these functions begin with the PUSH EBP\MOV EBP, ESP instructions. This can be executed
independently by the application code: Control can be passed not to the beginning
of the function, but to three bytes lower. (Since PUSH EBP modifies the stack, control
must be transferred using ump instead of CALL.) The breakpoint set at the beginning
of the function will not produce any effect. Such a trick may temporarily lead even
a skilled hacker astray.
Finally, if the intention is to poison the hacker's life, the system function should

be copied to its own stack, and control should be transferred to it. The hacker's
breakpoint will have to "retire." The greatest complexity is recognizing all instructions with relative address arguments appropriately corrected. For example, the
double word after the CALL instruction represents not an address of the jump, but

the difference between the target address and the address of the instruction next to
the CALL instruction. Moving the caL1 instruction to a new place requires a correction of its argument. This task is not as complex as it might initially seem to be.

Counteracting Debuggers

547
i.

ail

In addition, the result justifies the means: Each time the function starts, its address
can be changed randomly. Moreover, by checking the integrity of code, the software breakpoints can easily be revealed; the number of hardware points simply will
not be sufficient for all calls.
Hardware breakpoints set on memory are even easier to counteract. There are
only four such breakpoints, and each may control no more than a double word.
Therefore, the hacker may control simultaneously no more than 16 bytes of memory. If references to the buffers containing the key information do not occur consecutively (byte-after-byte from beginning to end), but occur randomly, and if the
quantity of buffers is more than four, it becomes impossible to trace all read or
write operations on them.
Some debuggers can set a breakpoint on a memory range, but this feature is
questionable: The only way to control the whole area is to trace the program being
investigated. This is done by checking whether the next instruction addresses this
area and, if it does, generating an exception.
Many instructions work with memory. It is possible to invent unexpected combinations. (For example, to point the stack pointer to the required memory location, then to call RET to read the value it contains.) The exception that will arise in

this case can get rid of the debugger. (See the "How to Counteract Tracing" section.)
Thus, counteracting checkpoints is no problem for the protection mechanism.
As previously mentioned, the software breakpoint is a one-byte instruction,
Oxcc, that generates the 0x3 exception on an attempt to execute it. The handler of

INT 0x3 gains control and can do whatever it wishes with a program. However, before the interrupt handler is called, the current values of the flags register, the pointer
of the code segment (the CS register), and the instruction pointer (the IP register) are
placed onto the stack. In addition, the interrupts are disabled (the iF flag is cleared),

and the trap flag is cleared. Therefore, a call of the debug interrupt does not differ
from a call of any other interrupt (see Fig. 9).
To learn the point of the program in which the halt has occurred, the debugger
pulls the saved values of registers off the stack, taking into account that cs:IP
points to the next instruction to be executed.
Breakpoints can tentatively be divided into two categories: breakpoints built into
the program by the developer and dynamic breakpoints set by the debugger itself. The
first category is clear: To stop the program and pass control to the debugger at a
certain place, it is necessary to write__asm{int 0x3}.
It is more complex to set a breakpoint in an arbitrary place of the program.
The debugger should save the current value of the memory location at the specified
address, then write the code

oxcc

there. Before exiting the debug interrupt,

548

Part Il: Ways of Making Software Analysis Difficult

the debugger should return everything to its former place, and should modify IP
saved in the stack so that it points to the beginning of the restored instruction.
(Otherwise, it points to its middle.)

x
SP +0

{|

SP +4

VA

Stack-top pointer

CS

Leas Biter

4
Flags register

SP.0C

Fig. 37. The contents of the stack when the interrupt routine is entered

What are the drawbacks of the breakpoint mechanism of the 8086 processor?
The most unpleasant is that the debugger must modify code directly when it sets
the breakpoints.

SoftIce implicitly places the breakpoint at the beginning of each next instruction when it traces the program using Step Over (the <F10> key). This distorts the
chesksum used by protection.
The simplest solution to this problem is instruction-by-instruction tracing.
Of course, this is a joke; it is necessary to set a hardware breakpoint. In a similar
situation, our ancestors (the hackers of the 1980s) usually decrypted the program
manually and replaced the decrypting procedure with the Nop instructions. As a result, debugging the program did not present a problem (if there were no other
traps in protection). Before IDA appeared, the decrypting procedure had to be
written in C (Pascal, BASIC) as an independent program. Now this task is easier,
since decrypting has become possible in the disassembler itself.
Decrypting is reduced to the reproduction of the decrypting procedure in
the IDA-C language. In this case, the checksum from BeginCode to EndCode must
be calculated, taking into account the sum of the bytes and using the lower byte of
the checksum to load the following character. The obtained value is used to process

*

.

Counteracting Debuggers

549

the sO string using the exclusive or operation. All this can be done using the following script (assuming that the appropriate labels are already in the disassembled
code):

Listing 239. Reproducing the Decrypting Mechanism in IDA-C
auCOnDpeallwonu

auto

a;

for

(p=LocByName

Cre)

("sO");

aliro.

Chis

Byte(p)

!=0;

p++)

{

for (a=LocByName

("BeginCode")

; a<(LocByName

("EndCode")

);

a++)

{
ch

=

Byte(a);

// Since

IDA does

//

is

(which

// operations.

// and then

not

a pity),
The

support
it

lower

the value

cre

=

cre

& OxFFFFFFOO;

fetgcl

=

fexatel

Gimerelaye

is

the byte and

necessary

byte,

CRC,

to

is

of CH is copied

word types

engage

in bit

cleared,

to it.

crc=crce+crc;
}
// The

high-order

erc

=

crc

& OxFFFF;

cre

=rerc

7/3/0%1-007

// The

next

byte

PatchByte(p,

byte

is taken

from

of the

string

is decrypted.

Byte(p)

CRC.

“* crc);

SF

If IDA is not available, HIEW can be used to carry out this operation as follows:
NoTrace.exe

LW

PE 00001040

a32 <Editor>

28672 ? Hiew 6.04 (c)SEN

00401003:

83EC18

sub

esp

00401006:

53

push

ebx

00401007:

56

push

esi

00401008:

57

push

edi

00401009:

B905000000

Ole

ae

000005

Part Il: Ways of Making Software Analysis Difficult

550
Bi

0040100E:

BE30604000

p=[Byte/Forward

00401013:

8D7DE8

|

1>mov

bi,

00401016:

F3A5

| 2 add

ebx,

A4

| 3

00401018:

) =;

406030

| Ax=0061
| Bx=44C2
| cx=0000
| Dx=0000
| st=0000
| pr=0000

ebx

00401019:

6660

0040101B:

8D9DE8FFFF

4
| 5
6

00401021:

330

|
[Saeco
ak Ta
a
el

-0040101B:

8D9DE8FFFFFF

.00401021:

33C0

-00401023:
.00401029:

run

from

here:

+"

@°0"

lp] [-0018]
||
|
|
| [OFFFFFFES8 ]
||

eax,

eax

8D3519104000

esi,

[000401019]

; < BeginCode

8D0D40104000

eCX,

[000401040]

; < EndCode

-0040102F:

2BCE

eCX,

esi

-00401031:

AC
eax

00401032:

03C0

eax,

00401034:

E2FB

000001031

00401036:

3023

[ebx],

00401038:

43

ebx

00401039:

803B00

b,

0040103C:

75E3

000001021

0040103E:

6661

ah

[ebx],

000

eo

"

t

to here:

00401040:

90

00401041:

8D45E8

lea

eax,

00401044:

50

push

eax

00401045:

E80C000000

call

000001056

0040104A:

83C404

add

esp,

1Help

nop

3Direct

2Size

4Clear

5ClrReg

6

[ebp] [-0018]

a
ee

004

FEC

6

9Store

10Load

At the first stage, the checksum is computed. The file is loaded in HIEW, and

the necessary fragment is found. Then, the <Enter> key is pressed twice to toggle in
the assembler mode, the <F8>+<F5> key combination is pressed to jump to the
entry point, and the main procedure in the start code is found. Next, the <F3> key

is pressed to enable editing the file. The editor of the decryptor is called using the
-<Ctrl>+<F7> key combination. (This combination varies from one version to another.) Finally, the following code is entered:
TiO

eye

eats

add

ebx,

ebx

Counteracting Debuggers

551

Another register can be used instead of EBx, apart from for EAx, since HIEW

clears EAx as it reads out the next byte. Now, the cursor is brought to the 0x401019
line and the <F7> key is pressed to run the decrypt up to, but not including, the
0x401040 line. If all is done correctly, the high-order byte Bx should contain the
value 0x44, precisely the checksum.
In the second stage, the encrypted line is found (its offset, . 406030, is loaded
into ESI), and "xor-ed" by 0x44. (The <F3> key is pressed to toggle the editing
mode, the <Ctrl>+<F8> key combination is used to specify the key for encrypting,
0x44, then the <F8> key is pressed to conduct the decryptor along the line.)
NoTrace.exe

00006030:
00006040:

JW

PE 00006040

<Editor>

28672

? Hiew

6.04

(c)SEN

48 65 6C 6C-6F 2C 20 46-72 65 65 20-57 6F 72 6C Hello, Free World
20 65 49 4E-00 00 00 00-7A 1B 40 00-01 00 00 00 eIN
2@e

All that is left is to patch xor in the 0x401036 line with the Nop instructions; otherwise, when the program is started, xor will spoil the decrypted code (by encrypting it again), and the program will not work.
After the protection is removed, the program can be debugged without serious
consequences for as long as necessary. The checksum is still computed, but not
used. (If a check for crc correctness is in the protection, it must be neutralized as
well. For clarity, such a check was not included in this example.)

How to Reveal Debugging
Using Windows
In his book "Windows 95 System Programming Secrets," Matt Pietrek describes the
structure of the Thread Information Block (TIB), after discussing the purpose of
many undocumented fields. The double word located at the offset 0x20 from the

beginning of the TIB structure is of special interest: It contains a context of the
debugger if the given process is debugged; otherwise, it contains zero. The TIB is accessible through the selector loaded into the Fs register. It can be read by application code without any problems.
If the FS: [0x20] double word is not equal to zero, the process is being debugged. This is so tempting that some programmers have included a check for this
in protection code, ignoring the fact that it is undocumented. As a result, these
programs cannot be executed under Windows NT; this OS stores not the context of
the debugger in this field, but the process identifier, which never equals zero.
The protection wrongly believes that the process is being debugged.

552 __— Part Il: Ways of Making Software Analysis Difficult

This issue was considered in detail by Pietrek in Microsoft Systems Journal, May
1996, in the paper "Under The Hood." Pietrek presented the following structure:
a
re

—————————————————————eee

Listing 240. Checking for Fs: [0x20]
union

:

{
struct

// Win95

// 1Ch

(NT/Win95

differences)

fields

{

WORD
WORD

TIBFlags;
WinléMutexCount;

Tf Ck
// 1Eh

DWORD

DebugContext;

// 20h

DWORD

pCurrentPriority;

// 24h

DWORD

pvQueue;

// 28h Message

;
Queue

selector

} WIN95;

struct

// WinNT

fields

di
DWORD

unknownl;

DWORD

processID;

// 20h

DWORD

threadID; >

// 24n

DWORD
.
ae

}

PIBLUNION2;

unknown2;

Mie

eet oe

if mShy gz

ie}

Soe

.

oF

=
:

>
Sn

Saree

:
et

Bie

en

3SSIGR

4¥

Gt

—

4

*wahny smel 3

Counteracting Disassemblers

Self-Modifying Code
in Contemporary Operating Systems
A decade or two ago, in the prime of MS-DOS, programmers often used self-

. modifying code. No serious protection could do without it. It also could be encountered in compilers that compiled code into memory, unpackers of executable
files, polymorphic generators, and so on.
In the mid-1990s, users began a massive migration from MS-DOS to Windows
95/NT. Developers had to think about porting the gained experience and pro-

gramming techniques to the new platform; the uncontrolled access to hardware,
memory, and operating-system components, and smart programming tricks concerning them, had to be forgotten. In particular, directly modifying the executable
code of applications became impossible, since Windows protects it from inadvertent changes. This gave birth to the ridiculous belief that, under Windows, creating
self-modifying code is impossible without using vxD and the undocumented capabilities of the operating system.
Actually, at least two documented ways of changing application code work
equally well under Windows starting from 95, with guest-user privileges being
sufficient.

554

Part Il: Ways of Making Software Analysis Difficult

First, kernel32.dll exports the writeProcessMemory function, intended, as follows from its name, for modifying the memory of a process. Second, practically all
operating systems, Windows and Linux included, allow the code placed on the stack
to be modified.
The task of creating self-modifying code can be solved just by using high-level
languages (for example, C/C++, or Pascal), without employing the assembler.
The material of this section mostly focuses on the Microsoft Visual C++ compiler and on 32-bit executable code.

The Architecture of Windows Memory
Creating self-modifying code requires knowledge of certain subtleties of the Windows architecture. These subtleties are not elucidated in the documentation, but

they do not yet have the status of undocumented features, because they are implemented on all Windows platforms and are used actively by Microsoft Visual C++.
Hence, the company does not plan any changes; otherwise, the code generated by
this compiler will not work, an unacceptable situation for Microsoft.
To address 4 GB of virtual memory allocated for a process, Windows uses two
selectors. One is loaded into the cs segment register; the other is loaded into the ps,
ES, and ss registers. The selectors use the same base address of memory equal to
zero, and have identical limits of memory space equal to 4 GB.

PS

Note
Besides the segment registers listed above, Windows also uses the Fs register, which it

loads with the segment selector containing the Thread Information Block (7/B).

Actually, only one segment contains both code and data, as well as the stack of
a process. Therefore, control of the code located in the stack is passed using the
near call, or a jump. Using the ss prefix to access the contents of the stack is
unnecessary. Although the value of the cs register is not equal to the value of the ps, Es,
and ss registers, the MoV

dest,

CS:[src], MOV

dest,

DS:[src], and Mov

dest,

SS: [src] instructions address the same memory location.
Memory areas containing code, the stack, and data differ in the attributes of pages
belonging to them. Code pages admit reading and executing, data pages admit reading
and writing, and the stack admits reading, writing, and executing simultaneously.
:
In addition, each page has a special flag that determines the level of privilege
necessary for accessing the page. Certain pages, such as those belonging to the
operating system, require the rights of the administrator, granted only to the code

Counteracting Disassemblers

555

of the zero ring. Application programs executing in ring 3 have no such rights, and
any attempt to reference a protected page causes an exception.
Only the operating system or the code executing in the zero ring can manipulate page attributes or associate pages with linear addresses. There are hatches in
Windows 95/98 protection that allow an application code to raise the privileges to

the administrator level. However, the benefit of using them is doubtful: The user is
bound to this operating system and is denied the opportunity to use the same trick
on Windows NT/2000.

PS

Note
A ridiculous fable circulating among novice programmers says that if someone addresses
the code of a program using the instruction preceded by the DS prefix, Windows will allow
modification of this code. This is incorrect. Regardless of the addressing used, the system
allows the code to be addressed,

not modified, since the protection works at the level of

physical pages, not logical addresses.

Using the WriteProcessMemory Function
If the number of bytes of a process needs to be changed, the simplest method is to
call the WwriteProcessMemory function. This modifies the existing memory pages
whose supervisor flags are not set (i.e., all pages accessible from ring 3 in which applications are running). Trying to change critical data structures of the given operating system (page directory, or page table, for example) using writeProcessMemory
is senseless, since these are accessible only from the zero ring. Therefore, this function does not represent any threat to the safety of the system, and is successfully
called irrespective of the level of the user privileges. (I once heard the statement
that WriteProcessMemory requires rights for debugging applications, but this is
not so.)

The memory process on which the write operation is to be carried out should
first be opened by the openProcess function, with the PROCESS_VM_OPERATION and
PROCESS VMWRITE access attributes. Programmers often choose a shorter way, setting the PROCES S ALL ACCESS value to all attributes. This is admissible, although it
is considered bad programming style.
A simple example of using the writeProcessMemory function to create the selfmodifying code is given in Listing 241. It replaces the instruction of the infinite
loop MP short $-2 with a conditional jump Jz $-2, which continues normal
execution of the program. This is a good way of complicating the analysis of the

program for the hacker, especially if the call of writeme is located not in the vicinity

556

Part Il: Ways of Making Software Analysis Difficult

of changeable code, but in a separate thread. It is even better if the modified code
looks natural and does not arouse any suspicions. In such a case, the hacker may
waste a lot of time wandering along the branch of code that never gains control

during the program execution.
Listing 241. Using writeProcessMemory to Create Self-Modifying Code
int

WriteMe

(void

*addr,

int

wh)

{
HANDLE

h=OpenProcess

(PROCESS

VM OPERATION| PROCESS

true,

GetCurrentProcessId()
);

return

WriteProcessMemory(h,

intemaini(ank

iarge;

char

push

0x74

addr,

&wb,

1,

VM WRITE,

NULL);

argv)

{
Pasm<{

2

; JMP

push

offset

call

WriteMe

add

esp,

-->

> JZ

Here

8

Here:

JMP

short

here

}
printf ("#JMP
return

SHORT

$-2

was

changed

to

JZ

$-2\n");

0;

To save random-access memory, Windows shares code between processes.
What will happen if the second copy of the self-modifying program is started? Will
the operating system create new pages, or will it send the application to the code already being modified? The documentation on Windows NT/2000 says these systems support copy on write (i.e., the code pages are automatically duplicated on an
attempt to update them). On the contrary, Windows 95/98 do not support this feature. Does this all mean that all copies of the self-modifying application will be
compelled to work with the same code pages, which inevitably will result in conflicts and failures?
No, although copying on write is not implemented in Windows 95/98, this is
taken care of by the writeProcessMemory function, which creates copies of all

pages belonging to different processes and being modified. Due to this, the self-

Counteracting Disassemblers

557

modifying code works well under Windows 95/98/Me/NT/2000. However,
remember that all copies of the application modified in any other way (the mov in-

struction of the zero ring, for example) and started under Windows 95/98 will
share the same pages of a code, with all consequences following from this.
Now, a few words about limitations: Using writeProcessMemory is only reasonable in compilers that compile into memory, or in unpackers of executable files.
Using it in protection is a little naive. A fairly experienced hacker will quickly find
a dirty trick, having seen this function in the import table. Then, the hacker will set
a breakpoint on the call of writeProcessMemory, and will control each operation
of writing to memory, which does not fit the plans of the protection developer.
Another limitation of WriteProcessMemory is its inability to create new pages;
only the pages already existing are accessible to it. But what can be done, for exam-

ple, if another amount of memory must be allocated for the code dynamically generated "on the fly?" Calling the heap-control functions, such as malloc, will not be
helpful, since executing the code in the heap is not permitted. But the possibility of
executing code in the stack is helpful.

Executing Code in the Stack
Executing code in the stack is permitted because many programs and the operating
system need an executable stack to perform certain system functions. This makes it
easier for compilers and compiling interpreters to generate code.
However, the potential threat of an attack increases with this. If the execution
of code in the stack is permitted, under certain conditions, the implementation
bugs cause control to be passed to user-entered data. This gives the hacker the opportunity to pass harmful code to the remote computer and execute it. Patches for
the Solaris and Linux operating systems can be installed to prohibit the execution
of code in the stack, but they have not become commonly used since they make it
impossible to run several programs. Most users find it easier to resign themselves
to the threat of an attack than to remain without necessary applications.
Therefore, using the stack to execute self-modifying code is admissible and independent of the system (i.e., it is universal). Besides, such a solution eliminates the
following drawbacks of the WriteProcessMemory function.

First, it is extremely difficult to reveal and trace the instructions that modify an
unknown memory location. The hacker will have to laboriously analyze the protection code without any hope of quick success (provided that the protective mechanism is implemented without serious bugs that facilitate the hacker's task).

558

Part Il: Ways of Making Software Analysis Difficult

Second, at-any moment, the application may allocate as much memory for
the stack as it sees fit, and then, when it becomes

unnecessary, free that space.

By default, the system allocates 1 MB of memory for the stack. If this memory appears to be insufficient to solve the task, the necessary quantity can be specified
when the program is configured.
Fortunately, for programs being executed in the stack, John von Neumann's
principle is fair: Program code can be considered data at one moment and executable code at another. This is just what is needed for normal functioning of all unpackers and decryptors of executable code.
However, programming code that will be executed in the stack involves several
specific issues that will be covered in the following sections.

The Pitfalls of Relocatable Code
When developing the code that will be executed in the stack, you take into account
that the location of the stack is different in Windows 9x, Windows NT, and Win-

dows 2000. To retain operability after a migration is made from one system to another, the code should be indifferent to the address at which it is loaded. Such code

is called relocatable. There is nothing complex about creating it; you only need to
follow several simple conventions.
Fortunately, in microprocessors of the Intel 80x86 family, all short jumps and
near calls are relative (i.e., they do not contain a linear target address, but rather,

the difference between the target address and the address of the next instruction).
This considerably simplifies the creation of relocatable code, but, at the same time,
it imposes certain restrictions.
What happens if the void Demo() {printf("Demo\n") ;} function is copied
to the stack, and control is passed to it? Since the CALL instruction that calls the

printf function has moved to a new place, the difference between the address of
the function being called and the address of the instruction next to cALL will
change. Therefore, control could be passed to any code different from printf.
It most likely will appear to be "garbage" and cause an exception, with the subsequent abnormal termination of the application.
In assembler programs, such a restriction can be bypassed easily with register
addressing. A relocatable call of the printf function may look simplistic (for example, like LEA EAX,

printf\NCALL

EAx). An absolute linear address, not a rela-

tive one, will be placed in the max register (or any other general-purpose register).
Irrespective of the position of the CALL instruction, control will be passed to the
printf function.

Counteracting Disassemblers

559

However, such an approach requires knowledge of support for inline assembler
inserts by the compiler, which is not very pleasant for application programmers
uninterested in instructions and the structure of the microprocessor.
To solve this using a high-level language exclusively, the stack function must
pass the pointers (as arguments) to the functions called by it. This is a little
inconvenient, but a shorter way does not seem to exist. A simple program that
shows how functions are copied to and executed in the stack is given in Listing 242.
Listing 242. How a Function Is Copied to and Executed in the Stack
void

Demo(int

Ce Spruntd))

«(Cons

techarer

an.

ony)

{

_printf("Hello,

World!\n");

return;

int

main(int

argc,

char*

argv[])

{
Char

purty 1000]:

ulinyset cianlintcn=)) a(efevalchinmelatne

IM

oe Mas)

Vea

(int,

(DEMO)

a(t

char

“Shem aoe

*~)

(* ies (CONSc

ChetaGr

o.))) 7

“prInel=printt ;
int

func

len

for

(int

a=0;

bufffa]=
_Demo

=

=

(unsigned

int)

a<func-len;

att)

((char
(void

*)

_Main-—

(unsigned

int)

Demo;

*,...)))

&buff[0];

Demo) [a];

(*)—(int

(*)

(const

char

_Demo(_printf);

return

0;

ae

The Pros and Cons of Optimizing Compilers
When using high-level languages to develop code that will be executed in the stack,
the distinctions between the implementations of the compilers being used must
be considered before a choice is made, and the documentation supplied
with compilers must be studied in depth. In most cases, the code of a function

560

Part Il: Ways of Making Software Analysis Difficult

copied to the stack will fail on the first attempt, especially if optimized compiling is
enabled.
This happens because in a pure high-level language such as C or Pascal,
it is impossible, in principle, to copy the code of a function to the stack (or elsewhere):
The language standards do not specify how compiling should be carried out. The
programmer may obtain the pointer to a function, but the standard does not specify how to interpret it. From the programmer's point of view, it represents a "magic
number," the purpose of which is known to only the compiler.
Fortunately, most compilers use almost identical logic to generate code,
allowing the application program to make some assumptions about the organization of the compiled code.
In particular, the program given in Listing 242 tacitly assumes that the pointer
to the function coincides with the beginning of this function, and that the whole
body of the function is located just behind the beginning. Such code (the most obvious to common sense) is generated by an overwhelming majority of compilers,

but not by all of them. Microsoft Visual C++, when working in the debug mode,
inserts "adapters" instead of functions, and allocates functions in a different place.
As a result, the contents of the "adapter," not the body of the function, are copied
to the stack. Microsoft Visual C++ can be forced to generate correct code if the
Link incrementally checkbox is cleared. The name of this option may differ considerably in different compilers or, at worst, may be absent. If so, either selfmodifying code or the compiler should be abandoned.
Another problem is how to determine reliably the length of the body of the
function. C does not provide any means of doing this; the sizeof operator returns
the size of the pointer to a function, not the size of the function itself. However, as a

rule, compilers allocate functions in memory according to the order in which they
are declared in the source code; hence, the length of the body of a function is equal
to the difference between the pointer to the given function and the pointer to the
function following it. Since Windows compilers use 32-bit integers to represent
pointers, they can be converted to unsigned int type without any serious consequences.

Then, various mathematical

operations can be carried out on them.

Unfortunately, optimizing compilers do not always allocate functions in such
a simple order. In some cases, they even "unwrap" them, substituting the contents
of a function for the call instruction. Therefore, the corresponding optimization
options (if any) must be disabled.
Yet another insidious feature of optimizing compilers is the deletion of all variables that are not used — from their point of view. For example, in the program
given in Listing 242, something is written to the buff buffer, but nothing is read

from that place. Most compilers are unable to recognize that control was passed

Counteracting Disassemblers

561

to the buffer (including Microsoft Visual C++); therefore, they omit the copying

code. That is why control is passed to the uninitialized buffer and undesired consequences follow. If similar problems arise, try to clear the Global optimization
checkbox, or disable the optimization totally (a bad, but necessary, step).
If the compiled program still does not work, the most likely reason is the compiler inserts the call of a routine that monitors the state of the stack into the end of
each function. Microsoft Visual C++ behaves this way, placing the call of the function __chkesp into the projects being debugged. (Do not search the documentation; __chkesp is not described.) This call is relative. Unfortunately, there is no
documented way of disabling it. However, in final projects, Microsoft Visual C++
does not inspect the state of the stack when exiting the function, and everything
works smoothly.

Using Self-Modifying Code
to Protect Applications
After successfully passing through this ordeal, the ill-starred example will be started
and will victoriously display "Hello, World!". A reasonable question arises: What
is the benefit of running a function in the stack? The answer is: The code of a function run in the stack can be changed "on the fly;" for example, it can be decrypted.
The encrypted code severely complicates disassembling and strengthens protection. Certainly, encrypting just the code is not a serious obstacle for a hacker
equipped with a debugger or an advanced disassembler like IDA Pro. However,
anti-debugging tricks (which are numerous) are a theme for a separate discussion
beyond the scope of this book.
The simplest encrypting algorithm sequentially processes each element of the
initial code using the exclusive or operation (xoR). Repeated processing of the encrypted code with xor gives the initial code again.
The following example reads the contents of the Demo function, encrypts it, and
writes the result into a file.
Listing 243. How to Encrypt the Demo Function
void _bild()
{
PiLm=*f£;

char buff[1000];
void (* Demo)
(int “(y-

tcomst

char",

«.3))¢

Part Il: Ways of Making Software Analysis Difficult

562

youutsl

(esTEEMED)

(0)

_Demo=Demo;

TBild>= brid;

int

func_len

=

(unsigned

f=fopen("Demo32.bin",

for

(int

foute,(

a=0;

(lint)

int)

_Bild

—

(unsigned

int)

_Demo;

"wb");

a<func_len;
battled)

at+)
sO 7. iy)

fclose(f);

After its encrypted contents are placed into a string variable (but not necessarily
just a string variable), the Demo function can be removed from the initial code. At
the appropriate moment, it may be decrypted, copied into a local buffer, and called
for execution. One of the variants of implementation is given in Listing 244.
Note how the printf function in Listing 242 displays a greeting. At first glance,
there is nothing unusual, but look at where the line "Hello,

World!"

is located.

It should not be in the code segment (although certain compilers from Borland
place it there). Therefore, it probably is in the data segment, where it ought to be.
But, if so, copying only the body of the function will be insufficient; the string constant must be copied as well — a tiresome task. However, a local buffer could be

created and initialized when the program is run (for example, like this: buf [666];
Dut BROi
UN oe bute eile =e Fee eet

Pi

lee

sae eS a=

eat fi a",

...). This is not the shortest option, but it is commonly used because of its
simplicity.
Listing 244. The Encrypted Program
int

main(int

argc,

char*

argv[])

{
char

buff£[1000];

imi

*printly > (consticher!

to. 2}5

void,

(* Demo) i (intigMonicénst-char

char

code[]="\x22\xFC\x9B\xF4\x9B\x67\xB1\x32\x87\

\x3F\xB1\x32\x86\x12\xB1\x32\x85\x1B\xB1\
\x32\x84\x1B\xB1\x32\x83\x18\xB1\x32\x82\
\x5B\xB1\x32\x81\x57\xB1\x32\x80\x20\xB1\
\x32\x8F\x18\xB1\x32\x8E\x05\xB1\x32\x8D\
\x1B\xB1\x32\x8C\x13\xB1\x32\x8B\x56\xB1\

paws )i7

Counteracting Disassemblers

563
>.

ail

\x32\x8A\x7D\xB1\x32\x89\x77\xFA\x32\x87\
\X27\x88\x22\x7F\XF4\xB3\x73\xXFC\x92\x2A\
\xB4"

_printf=printf;
int

code _size=strlen(&code[0]);

strcepy(&buff[0],

for

(int

a=U

butt lal

=

SVeno

(word

—

&code[0]);

a<code

burtfial

(2)

~*~

size;

at)

0x77:

(amt.

(a)

(Constuchar

esa)

cour
|Onre

_Demo(_ printf);
return

0;

Now (see Listing 244), even if the source code is available, the working algorithm of the Demo function will be a puzzle. This circumstance can be used to conceal crucial information, such as procedures for generating the key or for verifying
the serial number.
The verification of the serial number should be organized so that, even after the

code is decrypted, its algorithm will puzzle the hacker. An example of such an algorithm is in the next listing.
Essentially, the instruction responsible for transforming bits dynamically
changes as the program runs, and the result of computations changes accordingly.
When creating self-modifying code, the precise memory address at which byte
is located must be known;

therefore, an assembler

should be used, instead of

a high-level language.
One problem is connected with this. To modify a certain byte, the mov instruction needs to be passed the absolute linear address, which is unknown beforehand.
However, this can be learned in the course of running the program. The caLL
$+5\POP REG\MOV [regtrelative address], xx statement has gained the greatest popularity. Inserted as the following statement, it executes the CALL instruction,
and pops the return address from the stack (or the absolute address of this instruction). This is used as a base for addressing the code of the stack function.
(However, all these are probably intricacies.)

564

_— Part Il: Ways of Making Software Analysis Difficult

aa,

Listing 245. A Routine That Generates a Serial Number and Runs in the Stack
MyFunc:

push

esi

mov

esi,

push

ebx

push

ecx

push

edx

xor

eax,

eax

xor

edx,

edx

[espts8]

RepeatString:

; Saving

the

; ESI

&username[0]

lly peas=

WZ

short

so that

is provided

Sistine

stack

string-processing

loop

registers

registers

next

byte

into

AL
reached?

;

Exit

for the

,

are

result

; pe rceies oy the pa operation.
co.

the

register

; Has the end of the string been

all bits

GE beste

the

working

; must

be choosen

on

; Zeroing

that processes

(oddness)

stack

other

; Reading

test

on the

; Saving

; The value of the counter
;

esi

; Byte-by-byte

lodsb

Paar

=

intermixed,

:

but parity

-

of transformations

gy
opie

1 byte of the string
}

E

role
et
“

os

Phage

ey

.

et

+

:

7

,

Counteracting Disassemblers

pop

edx

pop

eCx

pop

ebx

pop

esi

retn

; Restoring

the

registers

; Returning

from

the

565

function

This algorithm is interesting: Repeatedly calling a function and passing it the
same arguments may return either the same or a completely different result. If the
length of the user name is odd, xor is replaced with apc when the function is exited, and obvious consequences follow. If the length of the name is even, nothing
similar happens.
Certainly, the resistance of this protection is insignificant. However, it may be
increased. There are numerous programming tips for this purpose, including dynamic asynchronous decoding, substituting the results of comparison for factors in
various expressions, and placing the crucial part of code directly in the key.
The purpose of this discussion is not to offer ready-to-use protection (which
hackers could study), but to prove and show that it is possible theoretically to create self-modifying code under control of Windows 95/NT/2000. How to make use
of this possibility is your task.

Summary
Many people consider the use of self-modifying code a "bad" programming style,
emphasizing the lack of portability, poor compatibility with various operating systems, the necessity of using the assembler, and so on. With the introduction of
Windows 95/NT, this list has been replenished with one more conclusion: "Selfmodifying code is suitable only for MS-DOS, and cannot be used under normal
operating systems, which serves it right."
As shown in this chapter, all these claims, to put it mildly, are incorrect. The
inefficiency of existing protection (programs usually are broken before they reach
legal consumers), and the huge number of people aspiring to make their livings
pressing keys, testifies to the necessity of strengthening protection by any accessible
means, including self-modifying code.

s

.
\
sore

a

*

Es @
;

‘

.

-

:

7

~

Selt

’

F

‘

:

)

mee

Hr%%

a
<

otk
F

gt

s

2
AD

ii

+

wv

BG

:
,

4
ioe

’

,

;

;

-

@

-

—

Sah se

ge

a

5

ti lieeeg

;
a

25)

~i

:

E

:

An Invitation to the Discussion,

or New Protection Tips

In concluding this book, I would like to share my experiences from creating protection that is, in theory, impossible to break. To be more precise, I believe breaking it
on the typical home computer would take thousands or even millions of years.
The analysis of code can be thwarted successfully only by encrypting the program. However, the processor cannot directly execute the encrypted code.
Therefore, it must be decrypted before control is passed to the program. If the key
is contained within the program, the reliability of the protection is close to zero. At

best, the developer can complicate the search for and acquisition of the key by
thwarting the debugging and disassembling of programs.
It is quite another matter if the key is outside the program. Then, the reliability
of protection is defined by the reliability of the crypt-algorithm used (provided that
the key cannot be intercepted). Many crack-proof ciphers reliably secure against
the attacks of ordinary hackers have been described in detail and published.
In general, protection consists of implementing a certain mathematical model
in a program that is used to generate the key. Different branches of the program are
encrypted using various keys. To work out the keys, it is necessary to know the state
of the model at the moment control is passed to the corresponding branch of the

Part Il: Ways of Making Software Analysis Difficult

568

program. The code is dynamically decrypted at run time. To decrypt it entirely, all
possible states of the model need to be tried sequentially. If there are lots of them,
which is easy to achieve, the reconstruction of all code will be practically impossi-

ble.

|

To implement this idea, I have created a special event-oriented programming
language. In this language, events represent the only means of calling a subroutine.
Each event has an ID and one or more arguments. An event may have any number
of handlers or none, in which case, an error is returned to the code being called.

Using the event name and the value of arguments, the event manager generates
three keys: The first is based on the event name only, the second on the arguments
only, and the third on the name and arguments. (See the "Explanation" section.)
Then, using the keys obtained, the manager tries to decipher sequentially all event
handlers. If decrypting is successful, the handler is ready to process the given event,
and control is passed to it.
The algorithm of encrypting should be chosen so that the reverse operation is
impossible. Thus, determining which event the given handler processes only is
possible by trying all the variants. To prevent this, a context dependence has been
added to the language that generates an additional series of keys, which take into
account several previous events. This allows handlers to be installed for any sequences of user actions, such as opening the file named "my file," writing the line
"my line" in it, and renaming it "not my file."
Obviously, trying the combinations of all events with all conceivable arguments
will take an infinite amount of time. Reconstructing the source code of the program thus protected will not be possible before each of its branches gains control at
least once. However, the frequency of calling different branches is not identical; it is
very low for some of them. For example, a special handler can be installed for the
word "pine" entered in the text editor. This handler may carry out some additional
checks for the integrity of the program code, or for the cleanliness of the license for
the software being used.
The hacker will not be able to figure out whether the program is cracked and
end quickly. Careful and laborious testing will be necessary, but even carrying out
this will not be helpful.
The trial periods of demo versions are limited in the same way. Engaging the
real-time clock is useless, as it easily can be set back, confusing the protection. It is
more reliable to base it on the creation dates of files being opened; even if the clock
is set back, the files created by other users mostly have the correct creation dates.

However, the hacker will be unable to figure out either the algorithm of determining the date or the expiration of the trial period of the product. In principle, the

a

An Invitation to the Discussion, or New Protection Tips

569

date can be found, but what does this achieve? Modification to this code can be easily prevented; it will be enough if the length of the crypted code is sensitive to any
changes to the source code. In this case, the hacker will be unable to correct the
"necessary" byte in the protection handler and encrypt it again. All other handlers
will need to be decrypted and modified (if they monitor the offset at which they
are located), but this is impossible; the keys corresponding to them are unknown
beforehand.
The essential drawbacks of the solution being offered are low performance and
high complexity of implementation. While the complexity of implementation can
be tolerated, the performance imposes serious restrictions on the field of application. However, the algorithm can be considerably optimized, all modules crucial to

performance can be left uncrypted, or each handler can be decrypted only once.
Does this technique, in principle, really allow the creation of applications that cannot be investigated, or there is some mistake in the above argumentation? The
opinions of colleagues specializing in information protection would be interesting.

Explanation
Three keys are necessary to avoid an explicit check for the values of arguments,
which can be easily revealed by the person analyzing the code. Suppose that the
event KEY (key code) is generated each time a key is pressed on the keyboard. The
handler that reads the input information should lock itself only to the code of the
event (KEY), and should receive the entered symbol as an argument.
If one key (or a combination of keys) is reserved for a special purpose (for example, for using some additional functions in the program), its handler may become locked to KEY and key code simultaneously without being disclosed. This is
possible because the correct key is produced by a unique combination of key and
key code only, and an explicit check for the conformity of the pressed character to
the secret code is not carried out.
Looking to arguments allows the sequences sought to be caught in data
streams, irrespective of how these sequences were obtained. For example, an authentication procedure expecting the password "MyGoodPassword" does not care
where it came from (the keyboard, a remote terminal, a
file, etc.).

and reduces the deSuch an approach considerably simplifies programming
pendence of one module on the other. The program represents a set of handlers
automatically switched by arising events. There is no determinism! This is
reminiscent of the interaction of a biological cell with the environment, and soon

may become a promising trend.

bein eetee)

rar
roth.
“ed
fasts
Bevel
.
ce ‘ sities
ee Oe
5
~ at

Cl
ee

WE Pky
vecetionet
tks
“res

be ory

—"
ad

-

oie

ur ut

Les

4sie x ertforo {
"

lize at ae Tk

iw

ao

aa

ae c

How to...

This index will help you find the solutions to specific problems. It is often difficult to locate the information you need in a certain situation, even if this information is contained in the book.

...Add the Constant to the Pointer Written into the Pointer-Type Variable

379

...Analyse the Code That Handles ASCIIZ Strings

ao2

...Analyse the Code That Manipulates Strings

396

...Break if ((a==b)

405

|| (a!=0)) into Elementary Statements

...Call a Function Using a Pointer

101

..-Call a Function Using a Pointer and a Complex Calculation
of the Target Address

102

...Call a Pure Virtual Function

126

...Call a Static Virtual Function

140

...Call a Virtual Function

119

...Change a Loop with an Increment for a Loop with a Decrement

468

...Compare a Conditional Jump and a Conditional Move

418

...Compile a Constructor/Destructor for a Global Object

159

...Compile a Constructor/Destructor for an Object on the Stack

157

...Compile Elementary Integer Relationships Using Visual C++

427

...Compile of a Loop with a Postcondition

466

572

How to...

...Compile the Disassembled Code Eliminating Structures at Compile Time

164

...Compile the Example with the 2 Conditional Operator

425

...Compile the if ((a==b)

&& (a!=0)) Expression

404

...Compile the if ((a==b)

|| (a==c)

406

&& a(!=0)) Statement

...Compile the Program Using Aggressive Optimization

422

...Convert a Constant into an Offset

87

...Convert a Sequence of Elementary Conditions

409

...Convert the IF-THEN-ELSE Statement

402

...Copy a Function to the Stack

559

...Create a Simple Protection Mechanism

541

...Create Self-Modifying Code

556

...Create the Simplest System of Authentication

13

... Debug Threads Separately

542

...Declare Objects Using the struct or the class Keyword

174

...Determine Types in Combined Expressions

376

... Disassemble the Copied Fragment

86

...Distinguish an Imitation from a True Virtual Table

150

...Distinguish Pascal from stdcall

Zio

... Distinguish Register Variables from Temporary Variables

350

...Distinguish the switch Statement from the case Statement

457

...Encrypt the Demo Function

561

...Execute a Function in the Stack

559

...Execute the Copying Script

85

How to...

...Execute the Puzzle-Like Code

443

..Execute the Seemingly Complex Code

444

...Execute the Tangled Code

442

|

.. Identify a break Statement

.

488

. Identify a for Loop with Several Counters

504

...Identify an Object and Its Structure

175

.. Identify C Strings

eal

... Identify Complex Operations

;

a

...Identify Derived Functions

|

_..Identify Diimain by the Failed InitializationCode
.. Identify for Loops

|

573

146

I

EE

eR

..-Identify Library Functions

ee!

ideneni pel varchles

tat
TEE

=

sS—=«iY

en

484

a

shoei

. ide S isteiid qh ehetou

prrehex= OE
pmerian

NT
mpiA

yet isuaboers

Register Variables"

tbe; Sie

433

eee
+;

te

| Lin>
:ri‘

: op pb

as
Nat'

ed Sere
aba
,

os | errs

eae! Ee

bias Mbebe
ae

eeeesd deal
ae 3 oe f >

187

51

574

How to...

... Identify the Memory-Allocation Mechanism

334

...Identify the new Operator

183

... Identify the WinMain Function by the Arguments Passed to It

115

...Identify while\do Loops

473

...Implement a Loop with the Condition in the Middle

469

...Pass a Structure Pointer to a Function

169

...Pass Arguments via Registers

236

...Pass Default Arguments

275

...Pass Floating-Point Arguments to a Function

259

...Pass Floating-Point Values Using Turbo Pascal

265

...Pass Global Variables Explicitly

364

...Pass the this Implicit Argument

a7#3

...Place Nonvirtual Functions in Virtual Tables

132

...Read a Tangled Code Produced by an Optimizing Compiler

441

..-Read Code That Looks Like a Puzzle

443

...Read Disassembled Code for Passing Floating-Point Arguments
Compiled Using Watcom

263

...Read the Contents of the Data Segment of the Compiled Example

382

...Read the Disassembled Code for a "Manual" Function Call Using ave

105

...Read the Disassembled Code for a Constructor and a Destructor

154

...Read the Disassembled Code for an Inline Function

110

...Read the Disassembled Code for Calling a Function Using a Pointer

101

...Read the Disassembled Code for Calling a Function Using a Pointer
and a Complex Calculation of the Target Address

102

a
e )e

How to...

575

...Read the Disassembled Code for Calling a Pure Virtual Function

127

...Read the Disassembled Code for Calling a Static Virtual Function

142

...Read the Disassembled Code for Calling a Virtual Function

121

...Read the Disassembled Code for Computing Complex Expressions

357

..-Read the Disassembled Code for Determining Types in Combined
Expressions Compiled Using. Visual C++

ma

eo70

...Read the Disassembled Code for Determining Types in Combined
Expressions Compiled Using Borland C++ 5.0

a79

...Read the Disassembled Code for Distinguishing pascat from stdcall

216

...Read the Disassembled Code for fastca11 Compiled Using Borland C++

249

...Read the Disassembled Code for fastcai1l Compiled Using Watcom C

252

...Read the Disassembled Code for Identifying an Object and Its Structure

176

...Read the Disassembled Code for Identifying Derived Functions

147

...Read the Disassembled Code for Identifying Local Variables
Compiled Using Visual C++ 6.0

336

...Read the Disassembled Code for Identifying Local Variables
Compiled Using Borland C++ 5.0

341

...Read the Disassembled Code for Identifying Register Variables

351

...Read the Disassembled Code for Passing Arguments Compiled
Using Microsoft Visual C++

2a,

...Read the Disassembled Code for Passing Arguments Compiled
Using Borland C++

240

_..Read the Disassembled Code for Passing Arguments Using Visual C++

196

...Read the Disassembled Code for Passing Arguments via Registers
Compiled Using WatcomC

242

_

255

_..Read the Disassembled Code for Passing Default Arguments

576

How to...

al
ae

...Read the Disassembled Code for Passing Floating-Point Arguments

260

...Read the Disassembled Code for Passing Floating-Point Values
Compiled to Use Coprocessor Instructions

269

...Read the Disassembled Code for Passing Floating-Point Values

266

...Read the Disassembled Code for Passing Global Variables Explicitly

364

...Read the Disassembled Code for Passing the this Implicit Argument

273

...Read the Disassembled Code for Placing Non-Virtual Functions
in Virtual Tables

...Read the Disassembled Code for Returning a Structure by Value

134

287

...Read the Disassembled Code for Returning a Value via Any
Valid Register

303

...Read the Disassembled Code for Returning a Value via the Heap

318

...Read the Disassembled Code for Returning Floating-Point Values
Compiled with Visual C++

299

..-Read the Disassembled Code for Returning the Main Value Types
Complied Using Visual C++

280

...Read the Disassembled Code for Returning Values by Inline
Assembler Functions

306

...Read the Disassembled Code for Returning Values via Global
and Static Variables

322

...Read the Disassembled Code for Returning Values via Variables Passed
by Reference

310

...Read the Disassembled Code for Sharing One Virtual Table
Among Several Instances of the Class

130

..-Read the Disassembled Code for the edeci Call

210

...Read the Disassembled Code for the Compiled Function
with Several Epilogs

108

How to...

577
al

...Read the Disassembled Code for the Direct Function Call

De)

...Read the Disassembled Code for the Pascal Call Compiled Using
Turbo Pascal for Windows

223

...Read the Disassembled Code for the pascat Call Using Borland C++

203

...Read the Disassembled Code for the Pass-Through Optimization
of an Inline Function

112

..-Read the Disassembled Code for the stdcal1 Call

207

...Read the Disassembled Code Illustrating How the Complier Stores
the Results of Computing Expressions and Values Returned by Functions

359

...Read the Disassembled Code of the Range-Test Translation
Using Free Pascal

457

...Read the Disassembled Code of a for Loop Compiled by Visual C++ 6.0

484

...Read the Disassembled Code of a for Loop with Several Counters
Compiled by Visual C++

504

...Read the Disassembled Code of a Function Receiving Arguments

203

...Read the Disassembled Code of a Loop with a Precondition Generated
by the GCC Compiler

482

...Read the Disassembled Code of a| while\do Loop Optimized Using
Borland C++

480

...Read the Disassembled Code of Elementary Floating-Point
Relationships Compiled by Visual C++

432

...Read the Disassembled Code of Elementary Floating-Point
Relationships Compiled by Borland C++ or Watcom C

433

...Read the Disassembled Code of Elementary Integer ee ONS:
Compiled by Microsoft C++ 7.0

431

...Read the Disassembled Code of Identifying a while\do Loop
Using Visual C++ 6.0

474

_..Read the Disassembled Code of Passing Arguments Using Borland C++

199

578

How to...

...Read the Disassembled Code of the break Statement Compiled by C++
with Aggressive Optimization

493

...Read the Disassembled Code of the break Statement Compiled
by Visual C++ 6.0

489

...Read the Disassembled Code of the continue Statement Compiled
by Visual C++ 6.0

497

...Read the Disassembled Code of the continue Statement Compiled
with Aggressive Optimization

502

...Read the Disassembled Code of the Difficult factca11 Example

245

...Read the Disassembled Code of the for Loop Optimized by Borland C++

487

...Read the Disassembled Code of the for Loop Using Optimization

486

...Read the Disassembled Code of the Modified and Compiled Version
for Returning a Structure by Value

27%

..-Read the Disassembled Code of the switch Statement Compiled
by Borland C++

451

..-Read the Disassembled Code of the switch Statement Compiled
by Visual C++

446

..-Read the Disassembled Code of the switch Statement Compiled
by Watcom C

454

...Read the Disassembled Code of the Test Example Compiled Using
Visual C++

420

...Read the Disassembled Code of the while\do Loop with Aggressive
Optimization

477

...Read the Disassembled Code Returning a Value via a Global Variable

325

...Read the Disassembled Code That Illustrates Constants and Pointers

370

...Read the Disassembled Code That Illustrates Indirect Procedure Calls

a42

...Read the Disassembled Code with Complex Operations

434

How to...

579

...Read the Disassembled Code with the - Operator

510

...Read the Disassembled Code with the - Operator Compiled Using
Aggressive Optimization

512

...Read the Disassembled Code with the 3 Operator

521

...Read the Disassembled Code with the * Operator Compiled
by Visual C++

529

...Read the Disassembled Code with the * Operator Compiled
by Visual C++ with Aggressive Optimization

525

...Read the Disassembled Code with the * Operator Compiled in Borland

526

...Read the Disassembled Code with the * Operator Compiled in Watcom

27

...Read the Disassembled Code with the / Operator Compiled
by Borland C++

oul)

...Read the Disassembled Code with the / Operator Compiled
by Visual C++ with Aggressive Optimization

516

...Read the Disassembled Code with the / Operator in Visual C++

514

...Read the Disassembled Code with the + Operator Compiled
Using Aggressive Optimization

509

...Read the Disassembled Code with the + Operator in Visual C++

507

...Read the Disassembled Code, Remodified and Recompiled,

for Returning a Structure by Value

aoe,

...Read the Nonoptimized Form of the Tangled Code

442

...Recognize the Condition

401

a

... Recognize the Unconditional Jump

402

...Reconstruct the Source Code of a Program

401

...Reproduce the Decrypting Mechanism in IDA-C

549

...Resolve Compound Conditions into Simple Ones

404

580

How to...

...Return a Structure by Value

287

..Return a Value via a Global Variable

325

...Return a Value via an Argument Passed by Reference

276

...Return a Value via Any Valid Register

302

...Return a Value via the Heap

317

...Return Floating-Point Values

299

...Return the Main Value Types

279

...Return Values by Inline Assembler Functions

:

305

...Return Values via Global and Static Variables

322

...Return Values via Processor Flags

328

4q

...Return Values via Variables Passed by Reference

309

|

...Search the Immediate Operand

383

...Share One Virtual Table Among Several ihetances of the Class
...Use a Direct Function Call

:in

eats

Mee res)baie Laat
sata ens wi

rears)

_

wt:

nal

8

;
vi

-

nD &

99

|
4

How to...

... Use Elementary Integer Relationships

... Use Eliminating Code after the Unconditional RET Operators
... Use fastcall

...Use first.cpp

..Use fixupdemo.c
..Use fixupload.c
..Use IDA Pro 4.01
... Use Loop with a Termination and a Continuation Condition

...Use Structural Exception Handling
...Use the ? Conditional Operator Directly in an Expression
...Use the edecl Call
...Use the Conversion of a Counter

... Use the FPC_SHORTSTR_CoPy Function
...Use the New and Old BASIC Dialects
...Use the Pascal Call

...Use the Pass-Through Optimization of an Inline Function
...Use the Deride-Codé Produced from the 1F-THEN Branch

...Use the Resemblance between Structures and Ordinary Variables
...Use the stdeall Call

...Use the Structure of an Object

...Use Translating Tests of Ranges in Pascal
...Use Two Variants of the Processor Instructions
... Use W32Dasm

581

427
108
244
63
42
43
69
465
544
424
210
468
388
400
212, 223
112
401
166
206
173
457
414
67

582

How to...

... Use WriteProcessMemory to Create Self-Modifying Code

556

...Write a "Manual" Function Call Using ave

105

...Write a Constructor and a Destructor

153

...Write a Constructor/Destructor for a Global Object

159

..-Write a Constructor/Destructor for a Global Object Using Borland C++

161

...Write a Constructor/Destructor for an Object on the Stack

157

...Write a Function with Several Epilogs

108

=

...Write a Good Comment

.

;

360

...Write a Routine That Generates a Serial Number and Runs in the Stack

564

...Write an Imitation of a Virtual Table

149

... Write Copying Script

toa

... Write Decryption Script

'

ting Structures at, Compile Timessc.
Po at

Gabe =

..Write the Compiler Script

‘

te
rs

ae

;

erie

it:

7

reonees

AE

SPD.

ein" ‘.

2

-

82, 83

163

revi sai satin

OL

Nrite the KeyProcedure of crackme01
2

85

xi-vracjeesce orfisa..
ONG

agrnigt

r

ys =2 a,

Index
1,3

D

16-bit mode, 203, 277-279, 301, 362, 425
32-bit mode, 23, 194, 232, 362, 363, 427

Data segment, 180

A

Description, 28

Default convention, 193
Delphi strings, 385
Destructor, 152

Abstract class, 125
Addressing the local variables, 332
Alignment in the stack, 335
Allocating arrays and structures, 334
Analyzing specific implementations, 410

Determining string types, 386
Direct Function Call, 99

DOS strings, 384
DUMPBIN, 97
DUMPBIN utility, 21
Dynamic memory, 180

Boolean comparisons, 419
Boolean set-on-condition instructions, 416
Breakpoints, 33

E
Epilog, 98, 107
F

Cc

Fastcall convention, 193, 229
FPO (Frame Pointer Omission), 345

C conventions, 22

C strings, 383

Function; 98

Cau, 27

Calling through a thunk, 132

G

Combined types, 385
Comments, 28
Compiler, 29

GCC compiler, 482

GUI "crackme" example, 56

Compilers, 20
Conditional instructions, 417
Connected list, 132
Contextual dependence, 348

H
~

Heap, 180

Copies of virtual tables, 131
cra386, 31

Crack subject, 28

lee;35

-CRC, 186

IDA Pro, 63, 186

CRC16, 187

Identifying a pure virtual function,

CRK format, 31
Cross references, 98

Identifying derived functions, 146

Vien

584

Index

Identifying objects, 173
Identifying constants and pointers,
380
Identifying the constructor/destructor,
158

Identifying the mechanism for allocating
memory, 333

Identifying virtual tables, 148
Implementation, 333

R

Relocatability, 38
Run time of a program, 118

S
Size, 29
SoftIce, 93
Standard convention, 193

Start-up code, 114

Indexes, 379
Indirect call, 118
Initializing the local variables, 334

Static memory, 180

Interpreters, 19

Static variables, 367

K,L

Key procedure, 52
Loops with conditions at the beginning, 464
Loops with several counters, 470

Static binding, 140

>
Target OS, 29
Temporal variables, 355
Time for hack, 30

Tracing, 33
Turbo-initialization of string variables,

MakeCrk, 27
Messages, 59

N
Naked functions, 110

Nested loops, 472
P
Pascal convention, 23, 192

Pascal strings, 384
Passing arguments through the stack, 22
Passing parameters through registers, 22
Patch Maker, 31
Pcracker, 31
PE file, 38
Pointers, 379
Price, 29
Prolog, 98
Protection, 29
Pure virtual function, 125

395

Type of hack, 29
U
Used packer, 28
Used tools, 29

Used unpacker, 28
V
Virtual constructor, 162
Virtual destructor, 162
Virtual table, 119

Virtual table pointer, 119
WwW
Watcom C, 301
Watcom compiler, 183
Window procedure, 59

Learn how to analyze program
\ using a debugger and a disassemble,

fh

i

COMPUTER
BOOKS DIRECT
This guide takes on the programming
problem of, having found holes ina

- program, how to go about disassembling it without its source code. Covered are the hacking methods used to
analyze programs with a debugger
and a disassembler, including virtual
functions, local and global variables,

branching, loops, objects and their
hierarchy, and mathematical operators.
Also covered are methods of fighting
disassemblers, the self-modifying code
in operating systems, the executing
code in the stack, the optimizing compilers, and the movable code.
Shelving: Programming
Level: Intermediate to Advanced
ISBN

1-931769-22-2

U.S. $39.95
EISBN

Canada $59.95
1-931769-2 a2

| |
7819311769228

\\|

holds

