< html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 4.0 Transitional//EN"
"http://www.w3.org/TR/REC-html40/loose.dtd">

Learning pandas

Second Edition

High-performance data manipulation and analysis in Python

Michael Heydt

BIRMINGHAM - MUMBAI

< html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 4.0 Transitional//EN"
"http://www.w3.org/TR/REC-html40/loose.dtd">

Learning pandas

Second Edition
Copyright © 2017 Packt Publishing

All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced, stored in a
retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, without
the prior written permission of the publisher, except in the case of brief
quotations embedded in critical articles or reviews.
Every effort has been made in the preparation of this book to ensure the
accuracy of the information presented. However, the information
contained in this book is sold without warranty, either express or
implied. Neither the author, nor Packt Publishing, and its dealers and
distributors will be held liable for any damages caused or alleged to be
caused directly or indirectly by this book.
Packt Publishing has endeavored to provide trademark information
about all of the companies and products mentioned in this book by the
appropriate use of capitals. However, Packt Publishing cannot
guarantee the accuracy of this information.

First published: April 2015
Second edition: June 2017

Production reference: 1300617

Published by Packt Publishing Ltd.
Livery Place
35 Livery Street
Birmingham
B3 2PB, UK.

ISBN 978-1-78712-313-7
www.packtpub.com

Credits

Authors

Copy Editors

Michael Heydt

Safis Editing

Reviewers
Project CoordinatorÂ
Sonali Dayal
Nidhi Joshi
Nicola Rainiero

Commissioning EditorÂ Â

ProofreaderÂ

Amey Varangaonkar

Safis Editing

Acquisition EditorÂ

IndexerÂ

Tushar GuptaÂ

Aishwarya GangawaneÂ

Content Development EditorÂ

GraphicsÂ

Aishwarya Pandere

Tania Dutta

Technical EditorÂ

Production CoordinatorÂ

Prasad Ramesh

Melwyn Dsa

Â â€ƒ

About the Author
Michael Heydt is a technologist, entrepreneur, and educator with
decades of professional software development and financial and
commodities trading experience. He has worked extensively on Wall
Street specializing in the development of distributed, actor-based, highperformance, and high-availability trading systems. He is currently
founder of Micro Trading Services, a company that focuses on creating
cloud and micro service-based software solutions for finance and
commodities trading. He holds a master's in science in mathematics
and computer science from Drexel University, and an executive
master's of technology management from the University of
Pennsylvania School of Applied Science and the Wharton School of
Business.

I would really like to thank the team at Packt for continuously pushing
me to create and revise this and my other books. I would also like to
greatly thank my family for putting up with me disappearing for months
on end during my sparse free time to indulge in creating this content.
They are my true inspiration.

About the Reviewers
Sonali Dayal is a freelance data scientist in the San Francisco Bay
Area. Her work on building analytical models and data pipelines
influences major product and financial decisions for clients. Previously,
she has worked as a freelance software and data science engineer for
early stage startups, where she built supervised and unsupervised
machine learning models, as well as interactive data analytics
dashboards. She received her BS in biochemistry from Virginia Tech in
2011.
I'd like to thank the team at Packt for the opportunity to review this
book and their support throughout the process.

Nicola Rainiero is a civil geotechnical engineer with a background in
the construction industry as a self-employed designer engineer. He is
also specialized in renewable energy and has collaborated with the
Sant Anna University of Pisa for two European projects,
REGEOCITIES and PRISCA, using qualitative and quantitative data
analysis techniques.
He has the ambition to simplifying his work with open software, using
and developing new ones. Sometimes obtaining good results, other
less good.
A special thanks to Packt Publishing for this opportunity to participate
in the review of this book. I thank my family, especially my parents, for
their physical and moral support.

www.PacktPub.com
For support files and downloads related to your book, please visitÂ www.
PacktPub.com. Did you know that Packt offers eBook versions of every
book published, with PDF and ePub files available? You can upgrade
to the eBook version atÂ www.PacktPub.comand as a print book customer,
you are entitled to a discount on the eBook copy. Get in touch with us
atÂ service@packtpub.com for more details. AtÂ www.PacktPub.com, you can
also read a collection of free technical articles, sign up for a range of
free newsletters and receive exclusive discounts and offers on Packt
books and eBooks.

ï»¿https://www.packtpub.com/mapt
ï»¿ Get the most in-demand software skills with Mapt. Mapt gives you

full access to all Packt books and video courses, as well as industryleading tools to help you plan your personal development and advance
your career.

Why subscribe?
Fully searchable across every book published by Packt
Copy and paste, print, and bookmark content
On demand and accessible via a web browser

Customer Feedback
Thanks for purchasing this Packt book. At Packt, quality is at the heart
of our editorial process. To help us improve, please leave us an honest
review on this book's Amazon page at https://www.amazon.com/dp/1787123138.
If you'd like to join our team of regular reviewers, you can e-mail us at
customerreviews@packtpub.com. We award our regular reviewers with free
eBooks and videos in exchange for their valuable feedback. Help us be
relentless in improving our products!

Table of Contents
Preface
What this book covers
What you need for this book
Who this book is for
Conventions
Reader feedback
Customer support
Downloading the example code
Errata
Piracy
Questions

1. pandas and Data Analysis
Introducing pandas
Data manipulation, analysis, science, and pandas
Data manipulation
Data analysis
Data science
Where does pandas fit?
The process of data analysis
The process
Ideation
Retrieval
Preparation
Exploration
Modeling
Presentation
Reproduction
A note on being iterative and agile
Relating the book to the process
Concepts of data and analysis in our tour of pandas
Types of data
Structured

Unstructured
Semi-structured
Variables
Categorical
Continuous
Discrete
Time series data
General concepts of analysis and statistics
Quantitative versus qualitative data/analysis
Single and multivariate analysis
Descriptive statistics
Inferential statistics
Stochastic models
Probability and Bayesian statistics
Correlation
Regression
Other Python libraries of value with pandas
Numeric and scientific computing - NumPy and SciPy
Statistical analysis – StatsModels
Machine learning – scikit-learn
PyMC - stochastic Bayesian modeling
Data visualization - matplotlib and seaborn
Matplotlib
Seaborn
Summary

2. Up and Running with pandas
Installation of Anaconda
IPython and Jupyter Notebook
IPython
Jupyter Notebook
Introducing the pandas Series and DataFrame
Importing pandas
The pandas Series
The pandas DataFrame
Loading data from files into a DataFrame
Visualization

Summary

3. Representing Univariate Data with the Series
Configuring pandas
Creating a Series
Creating a Series using Python lists and dictionaries
Creation using NumPy functions
Creation using a scalar value
The .index and .values properties
The size and shape of a Series
Specifying an index at creation
Heads, tails, and takes
Retrieving values in a Series by label or position
Lookup by label using the [] operator and the .ix[] property
Explicit lookup by position with .iloc[]
Explicit lookup by labels with .loc[]
Slicing a Series into subsets
Alignment via index labels
Performing Boolean selection
Re-indexing a Series
Modifying a Series in-place
Summary

4. Representing Tabular and Multivariate Data with the DataFrame
Configuring pandas
Creating DataFrame objects
Creating a DataFrame using NumPy function results
Creating a DataFrame using a Python dictionary and pandas Series objects
Creating a DataFrame from a CSV file
Accessing data within a DataFrame
Selecting the columns of a DataFrame
Selecting rows of a DataFrame
Scalar lookup by label or location using .at[] and .iat[]
Slicing using the [ ] operator
Selecting rows using Boolean selection
Selecting across both rows and columns
Summary

5. Manipulating DataFrame Structure

Configuring pandas
Renaming columns
Adding new columns with [] and .insert()
Adding columns through enlargement
Adding columns using concatenation
Reordering columns
Replacing the contents of a column
Deleting columns
Appending new rows
Concatenating rows
Adding and replacing rows via enlargement
Removing rows using .drop()
Removing rows using Boolean selection
Removing rows using a slice
Summary

6. Indexing Data
Configuring pandas
The importance of indexes
The pandas index types
The fundamental type - Index
Integer index labels using Int64Index and RangeIndex
Floating-point labels using Float64Index
Representing discrete intervals using IntervalIndex
Categorical values as an index - CategoricalIndex
Indexing by date and time using DatetimeIndex
Indexing periods of time using PeriodIndex
Working with Indexes
Creating and using an index with a Series or DataFrame
Selecting values using an index
Moving data to and from the index
Reindexing a pandas object
Hierarchical indexing
Summary

7. Categorical Data
Configuring pandas
Creating Categoricals

Renaming categories
Appending new categories
Removing categories
Removing unused categories
Setting categories
Descriptive information of a Categorical
Munging school grades
Summary

8. Numerical and Statistical Methods
Configuring pandas
Performing numerical methods on pandas objects
Performing arithmetic on a DataFrame or Series
Getting the counts of values
Determining unique values (and their counts)
Finding minimum and maximum values
Locating the n-smallest and n-largest values
Calculating accumulated values
Performing statistical processes on pandas objects
Retrieving summary descriptive statistics
Measuring central tendency: mean, median, and mode
Calculating the mean
Finding the median
Determining the mode
Calculating variance and standard deviation
Measuring variance
Finding the standard deviation
Determining covariance and correlation
Calculating covariance
Determining correlation
Performing discretization and quantiling of data
Calculating the rank of values
Calculating the percent change at each sample of a series
Performing moving-window operations
Executing random sampling of data
Summary

9. Accessing Data

Configuring pandas
Working with CSV and text/tabular format data
Examining the sample CSV data set
Reading a CSV file into a DataFrame
Specifying the index column when reading a CSV file
Data type inference and specification
Specifying column names
Specifying specific columns to load
Saving DataFrame to a CSV file
Working with general field-delimited data
Handling variants of formats in field-delimited data
Reading and writing data in Excel format
Reading and writing JSON files
Reading HTML data from the web
Reading and writing HDF5 format files
Accessing CSV data on the web
Reading and writing from/to SQL databases
Reading data from remote data services
Reading stock data from Yahoo! and Google Finance
Retrieving options data from Google Finance
Reading economic data from the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis
Accessing Kenneth French's data
Reading from the World Bank
Summary

10. Tidying Up Your Data
Configuring pandas
What is tidying your data?
How to work with missing data
Determining NaN values in pandas objects
Selecting out or dropping missing data
Handling of NaN values in mathematical operations
Filling in missing data
Forward and backward filling of missing values
Filling using index labels
Performing interpolation of missing values
Handling duplicate data

Transforming data
Mapping data into different values
Replacing values
Applying functions to transform data
Summary

11. Combining, Relating, and Reshaping Data
Configuring pandas
Concatenating data in multiple objects
Understanding the default semantics of concatenation
Switching axes of alignment
Specifying join type
Appending versus concatenation
Ignoring the index labels
Merging and joining data
Merging data from multiple pandas objects
Specifying the join semantics of a merge operation
Pivoting data to and from value and indexes
Stacking and unstacking
Stacking using non-hierarchical indexes
Unstacking using hierarchical indexes
Melting data to and from long and wide format
Performance benefits of stacked data
Summary

12. Data Aggregation
Configuring pandas
The split, apply, and combine (SAC) pattern
Data for the examples
Splitting data
Grouping by a single column's values
Accessing the results of a grouping
Grouping using multiple columns
Grouping using index levels
Applying aggregate functions, transforms, and filters
Applying aggregation functions to groups
Transforming groups of data
The general process of transformation

Filling missing values with the mean of the group
Calculating normalized z-scores with a transformation
Filtering groups from aggregation
Summary

13. Time-Series Modelling
Setting up the IPython notebook
Representation of dates, time, and intervals
The datetime, day, and time objects
Representing a point in time with a Timestamp
Using a Timedelta to represent a time interval
Introducing time-series data
Indexing using DatetimeIndex
Creating time-series with specific frequencies
Calculating new dates using offsets
Representing data intervals with date offsets
Anchored offsets
Representing durations of time using Period
Modelling an interval of time with a Period
Indexing using the PeriodIndex
Handling holidays using calendars
Normalizing timestamps using time zones
Manipulating time-series data
Shifting and lagging
Performing frequency conversion on a time-series
Up and down resampling of a time-series
Time-series moving-window operations
Summary

14. Visualization
Configuring pandas
Plotting basics with pandas
Creating time-series charts
Adorning and styling your time-series plot
Adding a title and changing axes labels
Specifying the legend content and position
Specifying line colors, styles, thickness, and markers
Specifying tick mark locations and tick labels

Formatting axes' tick date labels using formatters
Common plots used in statistical analyses
Showing relative differences with bar plots
Picturing distributions of data with histograms
Depicting distributions of categorical data with box and whisker charts
Demonstrating cumulative totals with area plots
Relationships between two variables with scatter plots
Estimates of distribution with the kernel density plot
Correlations between multiple variables with the scatter plot matrix
Strengths of relationships in multiple variables with heatmaps
Manually rendering multiple plots in a single chart
Summary

15. Historical Stock Price Analysis
Setting up the IPython notebook
Obtaining and organizing stock data from Google
Plotting time-series prices
Plotting volume-series data
Calculating the simple daily percentage change in closing price
Calculating simple daily cumulative returns of a stock
Resampling data from daily to monthly returns
Analyzing distribution of returns
Performing a moving-average calculation
Comparison of average daily returns across stocks
Correlation of stocks based on the daily percentage change of the closing price
Calculating the volatility of stocks
Determining risk relative to expected returns
Summary

Preface
Pandas is a popular Python package used for practical, real-world data
analysis. It provides efficient, fast, and high-performance data
structures that make data exploration and analysis very easy. This
learner's guide will help you through a comprehensive set of features
provided by the pandas library to perform efficient data manipulation
and analysis.

What this book covers
Chapter 1 , pandas and Data Analysis, is a hands-on introduction to the

key features of pandas. The idea of this chapter is to provide some
context for using pandas in the context of statistics and data science.
The chapter will get into several concepts in data science and show
how they are supported by pandas. This will set a context for each of
the subsequent chapters, mentioning each chapter relates to both data
science and data science processes.
Chapter 2, Up and Running with pandas, instructs the reader on obtain

and install pandas, and to get introduce a few of the basic concepts in
pandas. We will also look at how the examples are presented using
iPython and Juypter notebook.
Chapter 3, Representing Univariate Data with the Series, walks the

reader through the use of the pandas Series, which provides 1dimensional, indexed data representations. The reader will learn about
how to create Series objects and how to manipulate data held within.
They will also learn about indexes and alignment of data, and about
how the Series can be used to slice data.
Chapter 4, Representing Tabular and Multivariate Data with the

DataFrame, walks the reader through the basic use of the pandas
DataFrame, which provides and indexes multivariate data
representations. This chapter will instruct the reader to be able to
create DataFrame objects using various sets of static data, and how to
perform selection of specific columns and rows within. Complex
queries, manipulation, and indexing will be now handled in the following
chapter.
Chapter 5, Manipulation and Indexing of DataFrame objects, expands on

the previous chapter and instructs you on how to perform more
complex manipulations of a DataFrame. We start by learning how to

add, remove, and delete columns and rows; modify data within a
DataFrame (or created a modified copy); perform calculations on data
within; create hierarchical indexes; and also calculate common
statistical results upon DataFrame contents.
Chapter 6, Indexing Data, shows how data can be loaded and saved from

external sources into both Series and DataFrame objects. The chapter
also covers data access from multiple sources such as files, http
servers, database systems, and web services. Also covered is the
processing of data in CSV, HTML, and JSON formats.
Chapter 7, Categorical Data, instructs the reader on how to use the

various tools provided by pandas for managing dirty and missing data.
Chapter 8, Numerical and Statistical Methods, covers various techniques

for combining, splitting, joining, and merging of data located in multiple
pandas objects, and then demonstrates on how to reshape data using
concepts such as pivots, stacking, and melting.
Chapter 9, Accessing Data, talks about grouping and performing

aggregate data analysis. In pandas, this is often referred to as the splitapply-combine pattern. The reader will learn about using this pattern to
group data in various different configurations and also apply aggregate
functions to calculate results upon each group of data.
Chapter 10, Tidying Up Your Data, explains how to organize data in a tidy

form, that is usable for data analysis.
Chapter 11, Combining, Relating and Reshaping Data, tells the readers

how they can take data in multiple pandas objects and combine them,
through concepts such as joins, merges and concatenation.
Chapter 12, Data Aggregation, dives into the integration of pandas with

matplotlib to visualize pandas data. The chapter will demonstrate how
to present many common statistical and financial data visualizations
including bar charts, histograms, scatter plots, area plots, density plots,
and heat maps.

Chapter 13, Time-Series Modeling, covers representing time series data

in pandas. This chapter will cover the extensive capabilities provided by
pandas for facilitating analysis of time series data.
Chapter 14, Visualization, teaches you how to create data visualizations

based upon data stored in pandas data structures. We start with the
basics learning, how to create a simple chart from data and control
several of the attributes of the chart (such as legends, labels, and
colors). We examine the creation of several common types of plot used
to represent different types of data that are use those plot types to
convey meaning in the underlying data. We also learn how to integrate
pandas with D3.js so that we can create rich web-based visualizations.
Chapter 15, Historical Stock Price Analysis, shows you how to apply

pandas to basic financial problems. It will focus on data obtained from
Yahoo! Finance, and will demonstrate a number of financial concepts in
financial data such as calculating returns, moving averages, volatility,
and several other concepts. The student will also learns how to apply
data visualization to these financial concepts.

What you need for this book
This book assumes some familiarity with programming concepts, but
those without programming experience, or specifically Python
programming experience, will be comfortable with the examples as they
focus on pandas constructs more than Python or programming. The
examples are based on Anaconda Python 2.7 and pandas 0.15.1. If
you do not have either installed, guidance will be given in Chapter 2, Up
and Running with pandas, regarding installing pandas on installing
both on Windows, OSX, and Ubuntu systems. For those not interested
in installing any software, instruction is also given on using the
Warkari.io online Python data analysis service.

Who this book is for
This book is ideal for data scientists, data analysts, and Python
programmers who want to plunge into data analysis using pandas, and
anyone curious about analyzing data. Some knowledge of statistics and
programming will help you to get the most out of this book but that's not
strictly required. Prior exposure to pandas is also not required.

Conventions
In this book, you will find a number of styles of text that distinguish
between different kinds of information. Here are some examples of
these styles, and an explanation of their meaning.
Code words in text are shown as follows: "This information can be
easily imported into DataFrame using the pd.read_csv() function as
follows."
A block of code entered in a Python interpreter is set as follows:
import pandas as pd
df = pd.DataFrame.from_items([('column1', [1, 2, 3])])
print (df)

Any command-line input or output is written as follows:
mh@ubuntu:~/Downloads$ chmod +x Anaconda-2.1.0-Linux-x86_64.sh
mh@ubuntu:~/Downloads$ ./Anaconda-2.1.0-Linux-x86_64.sh

New terms and important words are shown in bold. Words that you
see on the screen, for example, in menus or dialog boxes, appear in the
text like this: "The shortcuts in this book are based on the Mac OS X 10.5+
scheme."
Warnings or important notes appear in a box like this.

Tips and tricks appear like this.

Reader feedback
Feedback from our readers is always welcome. Let us know what you
think about this book-what you liked or disliked. Reader feedback is
important for us as it helps us develop titles that you will really get the
most out of. To send us general feedback, simply email feedback@packtpub.com, and mention the book's title in the subject of
your message. If there is a topic that you have expertise in and you are
interested in either writing or contributing to a book, see our author
guide at www.packtpub.com/authors.

Customer support
Now that you are the proud owner of a Packt book, we have a number
of things to help you to get the most from your purchase.

Downloading the example code
You can download the example code files for this book from your
account at http://www.packtpub.com. If you purchased this book elsewhere,
you can visit http://www.packtpub.com/support and register to have the files emailed directly to you. You can download the code files by following
these steps:
1. Log in or register to our website using your e-mail address and
password.
2. Hover the mouse pointer on the SUPPORT tab at the top.
3. Click on Code Downloads & Errata.
4. Enter the name of the book in the Search box.
5. Select the book for which you're looking to download the code files.
6. Choose from the drop-down menu where you purchased this book
from.
7. Click on Code Download.
Once the file is downloaded, please make sure that you unzip or extract
the folder using the latest version of:
WinRAR / 7-Zip for Windows
Zipeg / iZip / UnRarX for Mac
7-Zip / PeaZip for Linux
The code bundle for the book is also hosted on GitHub at https://github.co
m/PacktPublishing/Learning-Pandas-Second-Edition. We also have other code
bundles from our rich catalog of books and videos available at https://githu
b.com/PacktPublishing/. Check them out!

Errata
Although we have taken every care to ensure the accuracy of our
content, mistakes do
happen. If you find a mistake in one of our books-maybe a mistake in
the text or the codewe would be grateful if you could report this to us.
By doing so, you can save other readers
from frustration and help us improve subsequent versions of this book.
If you find any
errata, please report them by visiting http://www. packtpub. com/submit-errata,
selecting
your book, clicking on the Errata Submission Form link, and entering
the details of your
errata. Once your errata are verified, your submission will be accepted
and the errata will
be uploaded to our website or added to any list of existing errata under
the Errata section of
that title. To view the previously submitted errata, go to https://www. packtpu
b. com/books/content/support and enter the name of the book in the search
field. The required
information will appear under the Errata section

Piracy
Piracy of copyrighted material on the Internet is an ongoing problem
across all media. At Packt, we take the protection of our copyright and
licenses very seriously. If you come across any illegal copies of our
works in any form on the Internet, please provide us with the location
address or website name immediately so that we can pursue a remedy.
Please contact us at copyright@packtpub.com with a link to the suspected
pirated material. We appreciate your help in protecting our authors and
our ability to bring you valuable content.

Questions
If you have a problem with any aspect of this book, you can contact us
at questions@packtpub.com, and we will do our best to address the problem.

pandas and Data Analysis
Welcome to Learning pandas! In this book, we will go on a journey that
will see us learning pandas, an open source data analysis library for the
Python programming language. The pandas library provides highperformance and easy-to-use data structures and analysis tools built
with Python. pandas brings to Python many good things from the
statistical programming language R, specifically data frame objects
and R packages such as plyr and reshape2, and places them in a single
library that you can use from within Python.
In this first chapter, we will take the time to understand pandas and how
it fits into the bigger picture of data analysis. This will give the reader
who is interested in pandas a feeling for its place in the bigger picture
of data analysis instead of having a complete focus on the details of
using pandas. The goal is that while learning pandas you also learn
why those features exist in support of performing data analysis tasks.
So, let's jump in. In this chapter, we will cover:
What pandas is, why it was created, and what it gives you
How pandas relates to data analysis and data science
The processes involved in data analysis and how it is supported by
pandas
General concepts of data and analytics
Basic concepts of data analysis and statistical analysis
Types of data and their applicability to pandas
Other libraries in the Python ecosystem that you will likely use with
pandas

Introducing pandas
pandas is a Python library containing high-level data structures and
tools that have been created to help Python programmers to perform
powerful data analysis. The ultimate purpose of pandas is to help you
quickly discover information in data, with information being defined as
an underlying meaning.
The development of pandas was begun in 2008 by Wes McKinney; it
was open sourced in 2009. pandas is currently supported and actively
developed by various organizations and contributors.
pandas was initially designed with finance in mind specifically with its
ability around time series data manipulation and processing historical
stock information. The processing of financial information has many
challenges, the following being a few:
Representing security data, such as a stock's price, as it changes
over time
Matching the measurement of multiple streams of data at identical
times
Determining the relationship (correlation) of two or more streams of
data
Representing times and dates as first-class entities
Converting the period of samples of data, either up or down
To do this processing, a tool was needed that allows us to retrieve,
index, clean and tidy, reshape, combine, slice, and perform various
analyses on both single- and multidimensional data, including
heterogeneous-typed data that is automatically aligned along a set of
common index labels. This is where pandas comes in, having been
created with many useful and powerful features such as the following:

Fast and efficient Series and DataFrame objects for data manipulation
with integrated indexing
Intelligent data alignment using indexes and labels
Integrated handling of missing data
Facilities for converting messy data into orderly data (tidying)
Built-in tools for reading and writing data between in-memory data
structures and files, databases, and web services
The ability to process data stored in many common formats such
as CSV, Excel, HDF5, and JSON
Flexible reshaping and pivoting of sets of data
Smart label-based slicing, fancy indexing, and subsetting of large
datasets
Columns can be inserted and deleted from data structures for size
mutability
Aggregating or transforming data with a powerful data grouping
facility to perform split-apply-combine on datasets
High-performance merging and joining of datasets
Hierarchical indexing facilitating working with high-dimensional
data in a lower-dimensional data structure
Extensive features for time series data, including date range
generation and frequency conversion, moving window statistics,
moving window linear regressions, date shifting, and lagging
Highly optimized for performance, with critical code paths written
in Cython or C
The robust feature set, combined with its seamless integration with
Python and other tools within the Python ecosystem, has given pandas
wide adoption in many domains. It is in use in a wide variety of
academic and commercial domains, including finance, neurosciences,
economics, statistics, advertising, and web analytic. It has become one
of the most preferred tools for data scientists to represent data for
manipulation and analysis.
Python has long been exceptional for data munging and preparation,
but less so for data analysis and modeling. pandas helps fill this gap,
enabling you to carry out your entire data analysis workflow in Python

without having to switch to a more domain -specific language such as
R. This is very important, as those familiar with Python, a more
generalized programming language than R (more a statistical
package), gain many data representation and manipulation features of
R while remaining entirely within an incredibly rich Python ecosystem.
Combined with IPython, Jupyter notebooks, and a wide range of other
libraries, the environment for performing data analysis in Python excels
in performance, productivity, and the ability to collaborate, compared to
many other tools. This has led to the widespread adoption of pandas by
many users in many industries.

Data manipulation, analysis,
science, and pandas
We live in a world in which massive amounts of data are produced and
stored every day. This data comes from a plethora of information
systems, devices, and sensors. Almost everything you do, and items
you use to do it, produces data which can be, or is, captured.
This has been greatly enabled by the ubiquitous nature of services that
are connected to networks, and by the great increases in data storage
facilities; this, combined with the ever-decreasing cost of storage, has
made capturing and storing even the most trivial of data effective.
This has led to massive amounts of data being piled up and ready for
access. But this data is spread out all over cyber-space, and is cannot
actually be referred to as information. It tends to be a collected
collection of the recording of events, whether financial, of your
interactions with social networks, or of your personal health monitor
tracking your heartbeat throughout the day. This data is stored in all
kinds of formats, is located in scattered places, and beyond its raw
nature does give much insight.
Logically, the overall process can be broken into three major areas of
discipline:
Data manipulation
Data analysis
Data science
These three disciplines can and do have a lot of overlap. Where each
ends and the others begin is open to interpretation. For the purposes of
this book we will define each as in the following sections.

Data manipulation
Data is distributed all over the planet. It is stored in different formats. It
has widely varied levels of quality. Because of this there is a need for
tools and processes for pulling data together and into a form that can
be used for decision making. This requires many different tasks and
capabilities from a tool that manipulates data in preparation for
analysis. The features needed from such a tool include:
Programmability for reuse and sharing
Access to data from external sources
Storing data locally
Indexing data for efficient retrieval
Alignment of data in different sets based upon attributes
Combining data in different sets
Transformation of data into other representations
Cleaning data from cruft
Effective handling of bad data
Grouping data into common baskets
Aggregation of data of like characteristics
Application of functions to calculate meaning or perform
transformations
Query and slicing to explore pieces of the whole
Restructuring into other forms
Modeling distinct categories of data such as categorical,
continuous, discrete, and time series
Resampling data to different frequencies
There are many data manipulation tools in existence. Each differs in
support for the items on this list, how they are deployed, and how they
are utilized by their users. These tools include relational databases
(SQL Server, Oracle), spreadsheets (Excel), event processing systems
(such as Spark), and more generic tools such as R and pandas.

Data analysis
Data analysis is the process of creating meaning from data. Data with
quantified meaning is often called information. Data analysis is the
process of creating information from data through the creation of data
models and mathematics to find patterns. It often overlaps data
manipulation and the distinction between the two is not always clear.
Many data manipulation tools also contain analyses functions, and data
analysis tools often provide data manipulation capabilities.

Data science
Data science is the process of using statistics and data analysis
processes to create an understanding of phenomena within data. Data
science usually starts with information and applies a more complex
domain-based analysis to the information. These domains span many
fields such as mathematics, statistics, information science, computer
science, machine learning, classification, cluster analysis, data mining,
databases, and visualization. Data science is multidisciplinary. Its
methods of domain analysis are often very different and specific to a
specific domain.

Where does pandas fit?
pandas first and foremost excels in data manipulation. All of the needs
itemized earlier will be covered in this book using pandas. This is the
core of pandas and is most of what we will focus on in this book.
It is worth noting that that pandas has a specific design goal:
emphasizing data
But pandas does provide several features for performing data analysis.
These capabilities typically revolve around descriptive statistics and
functions required for finance such as correlations.
Therefore, pandas itself is not a data science toolkit. It is more of a
manipulation tool with some analysis capabilities. pandas explicitly
leaves complex statistical, financial, and other types of analyses to
other Python libraries, such as SciPy, NumPy, scikit-learn, and leans
upon graphics libraries such as matplotlib and ggvis for data
visualization.
This focus is actually a strength of pandas over other languages such
as R as pandas applications are able to leverage an extensive network
of robust Python frameworks already built and tested elsewhere by the
Python community.

The process of data analysis
The primary goal of this book is to thoroughly teach you how to use
pandas to manipulate data. But there is a secondary, and perhaps no
less important, goal of showing how pandas fits into the processes that
a data analyst/scientist performs in everyday life.
One description of the steps involved in the process of data analysis is
given on the pandas web site:
Munging and cleaning data
Analyzing/modeling
Organization into a form suitable for communication
This small list is a good initial definition, but it fails to cover the overall
scope of the process and why many features implemented in pandas
were created. The following expands upon this process and sets the
framework for what is to come throughout this journey.

The process
The proposed process is one that will be referred to as The Data
Process and is represented in the following diagram:

This process sets up a framework for defining logical steps that are
taken in working with data. For now, let's take a quick look at each of
these steps in the process and some of the tasks that you as a data
analyst using pandas will perform.
It is important to understand that this is not purely a linear
process. It is best done in a highly interactive and
agile/iterative manner.

Ideation
The first step in any data problem is to identify what it is you want to
figure out. This is referred to as ideation, of coming up with an idea of
what we want to do and prove. Ideation generally relates to
hypothesizing about patterns in data that can be used to make
intelligent decisions.
These decisions are often within the context of a business, but also
within other disciplines such as the sciences and research. The invogue thing right now is understanding the operations of businesses,
as there are often copious amounts of money to be made in
understanding data.
But what kinds of decision are we typically looking to make? The
following are several questions for which answers are commonly asked:
Why did something happen?
Can we predict the future using historical data?
How can I optimize operations in the future?
This list is by no means exhaustive, but it does cover a sizable
percentage of the reasons why anyone undertakes these endeavors.
To get answers to these questions, one must be involved with collecting
and understanding data relative to the problem. This involves defining
what data is going to be researched, what the benefit is of the research,
how the data is going to be obtained, what the success criteria are, and
how the information is going to be eventually communicated.
pandas itself does not provide tools to assist in ideation. But once you
have gained understanding and skill in using pandas, you will naturally
realize how pandas will help you in being able to formulate ideas. This
is because you will be armed with a powerful tool you can used to
frame many complicated hypotheses.

Retrieval
Once you have an idea you must then find data to try and support your
hypothesis. This data can come from within your organization or from
external data providers. This data normally is provided as archived data
or can be provided in real-time (although pandas is not well known for
being a real-time data processing tool).
Data is often very raw, even if obtained from data sources that you
have created or from within your organization. Being raw means that
the data can be disorganized, may be in various formats, and
erroneous; relative to supporting your analysis, it may be incomplete
and need manual augmentation.
There is a lot of free data in the world. Much data is not free and
actually costs significant amounts of money to obtain. Some is freely
available with public APIs, and the others by subscription. Data you pay
for is often cleaner, but this is not always the case.
In either case, pandas provides a robust and easy-to-use set of tools
for retrieving data from various sources and that may be in many
different formats. pandas also gives us the ability to not only retrieve
data, but to also provide an initial structuring of the data via pandas
data structures without needing to manually create complex coding,
which may be required in other tools or programming languages.

Preparation
During preparation, raw data is made ready for exploration. This
preparation is often a very interesting process. It is very frequently the
case that data from is fraught with all kinds of issues related to quality.
You will likely spend a lot of time dealing with these quality issues, and
often this is a very non-trivial amount of time.
Why? Well there are a number of reasons:
The data is simply incorrect
Parts of the dataset are missing
Data is not represented using measurements appropriate for your
analysis
The data is in formats not convenient for your analysis
Data is at a level of detail not appropriate for your analysis
Not all the fields you need are available from a single source
The representation of data differs depending upon the provider
The preparation process focuses on solving these issues. pandas
provides many great facilities for preparing data, often referred to as
tidying up data. These facilities include intelligent means of handling
missing data, converting data types, using format conversion, changing
frequencies of measurements, joining data from multiple sets of data,
mapping/converting symbols into shared representations, and grouping
data, among many others. We will cover all of these in depth.

Exploration
Exploration involves being able to interactively slice and dice your data
to try and make quick discoveries. Exploration can include various
tasks such as:
Examining how variables relate to each other
Determining how the data is distributed
Finding and excluding outliers
Creating quick visualizations
Quickly creating new data representations or models to feed into
more permanent and detailed modeling processes
Exploration is one of the great strengths of pandas. While exploration
can be performed in most programming languages, each has its own
level of ceremony—how much non-exploratory effort must be
performed—before actually getting to discoveries.
When used with the read-eval-print-loop (REPL) nature of IPython
and/or Jupyter notebooks, pandas creates an exploratory environment
that is almost free of ceremony. The expressiveness of the syntax of
pandas lets you describe complex data manipulation constructs
succinctly, and the result of every action you take upon your data is
immediately presented for your inspection. This allows you to quickly
determine the validity of the action you just took without having to
recompile and completely rerun your programs.

Modeling
In the modeling stage you formalize your discoveries found during
exploration into an explicit explanation of the steps and data structures
required to get to the desired meaning contained within your data. This
is the model, a combination of both data structures as well as steps in
code to get from the raw data to your information and conclusions.
The modeling process is iterative where, through an exploration of the
data, you select the variables required to support your analysis,
organize the variables for input to analytical processes, execute the
model, and determine how well the model supports your original
assumptions. It can include a formal modeling of the structure of the
data, but can also combine techniques from various analytic domains
such as (and not limited to) statistics, machine learning, and operations
research.
To facilitate this, pandas provides extensive data modeling facilities. It
is in this step that you will move more from exploring your data, to
formalizing the data model in DataFrame objects, and ensuring the
processes to create these models are succinct. Additionally, by being
based in Python, you get to use its full power to create programs to
automate the process from beginning to end. The models you create
are executable.
From an analytic perspective, pandas provides several capabilities,
most notably integrated support for descriptive statistics, which can get
you to your goal for many types of problems. And because pandas is
Python-based, if you need more advanced analytic capabilities, it is
very easy to integrate with other parts of the extensive Python scientific
environment.

Presentation
The penultimate step of the process is presenting your findings to
others, typically in the form of a report or presentation. You will want to
create a persuasive and thorough explanation of your solution. This can
often be done using various plotting tools in Python and manually
creating a presentation.
Jupyter notebooks are a powerful tool in creating presentations for
your analyses with pandas. These notebooks provide a means of both
executing code and providing rich markdown capabilities to annotate
and describe the execution at multiple points in the application. These
can be used to create very effective, executable presentations that are
visually rich with pieces of code, stylized text, and graphics.
We will explore Jupyter notebooks briefly in Chapter 2, Up
and Running with pandas.

Reproduction
An important piece of research is sharing and making your research
reproducible. It is often said that if other researchers cannot reproduce
your experiment and results, then you didn't prove a thing.
Fortunately, for you, by having used pandas and Python, you will be
able to easily make your analysis reproducible. This can be done by
sharing the Python code that drives your pandas code, as well as the
data.
Jupyter notebooks also provide a convenient means of packaging both
the code and application in a means that can be easily shared with
anyone else with a Jupyter Notebook installation. And there are many
free, and secure, sharing sites on the internet that allow you to either
create or deploy your Jupyter notebooks for sharing.

A note on being iterative and
agile
Something very important to understand about data manipulation,
analysis, and science is that it is an iterative process. Although there is
a natural forward flow along the stages previously discussed, you will
end up going forwards and backwards in the process. For instance,
while in the exploration phase you may identify anomalies in the data
that relate to data purity issues from the preparation stage, and need to
go back and rectify those issues.
This is part of the fun of the process. You are on an adventure to solve
your initial problem, all the while gaining incremental insights about the
data you are working with. These insights may lead you to ask new
questions, to more exact questions, or to a realization that your initial
questions were not the actual questions that needed to be asked. The
process is truly a journey and not necessarily the destination.

Relating the book to the
process
The following gives a quick mapping of the steps in the process to
where you will learn about them in this book. Do not fret if the steps that
are earlier in the process are in later chapters. The book will walk you
through this in a logical progression for learning pandas, and you can
refer back from the chapters to the relevant stage in the process.

Step in
process

Place

Ideation

Ideation is the creative process in data science. You
need to have the idea. The fact that you are reading
this qualifies you as you must be looking to analyze
some data, and want to in the future.

Retrieval

Retrieval of data is primarily covered in Chapter
9, Accessing Data.

Preparation

Preparation of data is primarily covered in Chapter 10,
Tidying Up your Data, but it is also a common
thread running through most of the chapters.

Exploration

Exploration spans Chapter 3, Representing Univariate
Data with the Series, through Chapter 15, Historical
Stock Price Analysis, so most of the chapters of the

book. But the most focused chapters for exploration
are Chapter 14, Visualization and Chapter 15, Historical
Stock Price Analysis, in both of which we begin to
see the results of data analysis.

Modeling

Modeling has its focus in Chapter 3, Representing
Univariate Data with the pandas Series, and Chapter
4, Representing Tabular and Multivariate Data with
the DataFrame with the pandas DataFrame, and also Ch
apter 11, Combining, Relating, and Reshaping
Data through Chapter 13, Time-Series Modelling, and
with a specific focus towards finance in Chapter 15,
Historical Stock Price Analysis.

Presentation

Presentation is the primary purpose of Chapter 1
4, Visualization.

Reproduction

Reproduction flows throughout the book, as the
examples are provided as Jupyter notebooks. By
working in notebooks, you are by default using a tool
for reproduction and have the ability to share
notebooks in various ways.

Concepts of data and analysis
in our tour of pandas
When learning pandas and data analysis you will come across many
concepts in data, modeling and analysis. Let's examine several of
these concepts and how they relate to pandas.

Types of data
Working with data in the wild you will come across several broad
categories of data that will need to be coerced into pandas data
structures. They are important to understand as the tools required to
work with each type vary.
pandas is inherently used for manipulating structured data but provides
several tools for facilitating the conversion of non-structured data into a
means we can manipulate.

Structured
Structured data is any type of data that is organized as fixed fields
within a record or file, such as data in relational databases and
spreadsheets. Structured data depends upon a data model, which is
the defined organization and meaning of the data and often how the
data should be processed. This includes specifying the type of the data
(integer, float, string, and so on), and any restrictions on the data, such
as the number of characters, maximum and minimum values, or a
restriction to a certain set of values.
Structured data is the type of data that pandas is designed to utilize. As
we will see first with the Series and then with the DataFrame, pandas
organizes structured data into one or more columns of data, each of a
single and specific data type, and then a series of zero or more rows of
data.

Unstructured
Unstructured data is data that is without any defined organization and
which specifically does not break down into stringently defined columns
of specific types. This can consist of many types of information such as
photos and graphic images, videos, streaming sensor data, web pages,
PDF files, PowerPoint presentations, emails, blog entries, wikis, and
word processing documents.
While pandas does not manipulate unstructured data directly, it
provides a number of facilities to extract structured data from
unstructured sources. As a specific example that we will examine,
pandas has tools to retrieve web pages and extract specific pieces of
content into a DataFrame.

Semi-structured
Semi-structured data fits in between unstructured. It can be considered
a type of structured data, but lacks the strict data model structure.
JSON is a form of semi-structured data. While good JSON will have a
defined format, there is no specific schema for data that is always
strictly enforced. Much of the time, the data will be in a repeatable
pattern that can be easily converted into structured data types like the
pandas DataFrame, but the process may need some guidance from you to
specify or coerce data types.

Variables
When modeling data in pandas, we will be modeling one or more
variables and looking to find statistical meaning amongst the values or
across multiple variables. This definition of a variable is not in the sense
of a variable in a programming language but one of statistical variables.
A variable is any characteristic, number, or quantity that can be
measured or counted. A variable is so named because the value may
vary between data units in a population and may change in value over
time. Stock value, age, sex, business income and expenses, country of
birth, capital expenditure, class grades, eye color, and vehicle type are
examples of variables.
There are several broad types of statistical variables that we will come
across when using pandas:
Categorical
Continuous
Discrete

Categorical
A categorical variable is a variable that can take on one of a limited,
and usually fixed, number of possible values. Each of the possible
values is often referred to as a level. Categorical variables in pandas
are represented by Categoricals, a pandas data type which corresponds
to categorical variables in statistics. Examples of categorical variables
are gender, social class, blood types, country affiliations, observation
time, or ratings such as Likert scales.

Continuous
A continuous variable is a variable that can take on infinitely many (an
uncountable number of) values. Observations can take any value
between a certain set of real numbers. Examples of continuous
variables include height, time, and temperature. Continuous variables
in pandas are represented by either float or integer types (native to
Python), typically in collections that represent multiple samplings of the
specific variable.

Discrete
A discrete variable is a variable where the values are based on a
count from a set of distinct whole values. A discrete variable cannot be
a fractional value between any two variables. Examples of discrete
variables include the number of registered cars, number of business
locations, and number of children in a family, all of which measure
whole units (for example 1, 2, or 3 children). Discrete variables are
normally represented in pandas by integers (or occasionally floats),
again normally in collections of two or more samplings of a variable.

Time series data
Time series data is a first-class entity within pandas. Time adds an
important, extra dimension to samples of variables within pandas.
Often variables are independent of the time they were sampled at; that
is, the time at which they are sampled is not important. But in many
cases they are. A time series forms a sample of a discrete variable at
specific time intervals, where the observations have a natural temporal
ordering.
A stochastic model for a time series will generally reflect the fact that
observations close together in time will be more closely related than
observations that are further apart. Time series models will often make
use of the natural one-way ordering of time so that values for a given
period will be expressed as deriving in some way from past values
rather than from future values.
A common scenario with pandas is financial data where a variable
represents the value of a stock as it changes at regular intervals
throughout the day. We often want to determine changes in the rate of
change of the price at specific intervals. We may also want to correlate
the price of multiple stocks across specific intervals of time.
This is such an important and robust capability in pandas that we will
spend an entire chapter examining the concept.

General concepts of analysis
and statistics
In this text, we will only approach the periphery of statistics and the
technical processes of data analysis. But several analytical concepts of
are worth noting, some of which have implementations directly created
within pandas. Others will need to rely on other libraries such as SciPy,
but you may also come across them while working with pandas so an
initial shout-out is valuable.

Quantitative versus qualitative
data/analysis
Qualitative analysis is the scientific study of data that can be observed
but cannot be measured. It focuses on cataloging the qualities of data.
Examples of qualitative data can be:
The softness of your skin
How elegantly someone runs
Quantitative analysis is the study of actual values within data, with real
measurements of items presented as data. Normally, these are values
such as:
Quantity
Price
Height
pandas deals primarily with quantitative data, providing you with
extensive tools for representing observations of variables. Pandas does
not provide for qualitative analysis, but does let you represent
qualitative information.

Single and multivariate analysis
Statistics, from a certain perspective, is the practice of studying
variables, and specifically the observation of those variables. Much of
statistics is based upon doing this analysis for a single variable, which
is referred to as univariate analysis. Univariate analysis is the simplest
form of analyzing data. It does not deal with causes or relationships and
is normally used to describe or summarize data, and to find patterns in
it.
Multivariate analysis is a modeling technique where there exist two or
more output variables that affect the outcome of an experiment.
Multivariate analysis is often related to concepts such as correlation
and regression, which help us understand the relationships between
multiple variables, as well as how those relationships affect the
outcome.
pandas primarily provides fundamental univariate analysis capabilities.
And these capabilities are generally descriptive statistics, although
there is inherent support for concepts such as correlations (as they are
very common in finance and other domains).
Other more complex statistics can be performed with StatsModels.
Again, this is not per se a weakness of pandas, but a specific design
decision to let those concepts be handled by other dedicated Python
libraries.

Descriptive statistics
Descriptive statistics are functions that summarize a given dataset,
typically where the dataset represents a population or sample of a
single variable (univariate data). They describe the dataset and form
measures of a central tendency and measures of variability and
dispersion.
For example, the following are descriptive statistics:
The distribution (for example, normal, Poisson)
The central tendency (for example, mean, median, and mode)
The dispersion (for example, variance, standard deviation)
As we will see, the pandas Series and DataFrame objects have integrated
support for a large number of descriptive statistics.

Inferential statistics
Inferential statistics differs from descriptive statistics in that inferential
statistics attempts to infer conclusions from data instead of simply
summarizing it. Examples of inferential statistics include:
t-test
chi square
ANOVA
Bootstrapping
These inferential techniques are generally deferred from pandas to
other tools such as SciPy and StatsModels.

Stochastic models
Stochastic models are a form of statistical modeling that includes one
or more random variables, and typically includes use of time series
data. The purpose of a stochastic model is to estimate the chance that
an outcome is within a specific forecast to predict conditions for
different situations.
An example of stochastic modeling is the Monte Carlo simulation. The
Monte Carlo simulation is often used for financial portfolio evaluation by
simulating the performance of a portfolio based upon repeated
simulation of the portfolio in markets that are influenced by various
factors and the inherent probability distributions of the constituent stock
returns.
pandas gives us the fundamental data structure for stochastic models
in the DataFrame, often using time series data, to get up and running for
stochastic models. While it is possible to code your own stochastic
models and analyses using pandas and Python, in many cases there
are domain-specific libraries such as PyMC to facilitate this type of
modeling.

Probability and Bayesian
statistics
Bayesian statistics is an approach to statistical inference, derived from
Bayes' theorem, a mathematical equation built off simple probability
axioms. It allows an analyst to calculate any conditional probability of
interest. A conditional probability is simply the probability of event A
given that event B has occurred.
Therefore, in probability terms, the data events have already occurred
and have been collected (since we know the probability). By using
Bayes' theorem, we can then calculate the probability of various things
of interest, given or conditional upon, this already observed data.
Bayesian modeling is beyond the scope of this book, but again the
underlying data models are well handled using pandas and then
actually analyzed using libraries such as PyMC.

Correlation
Correlation is one of the most common statistics and is directly built into
the pandas DataFrame. A correlation is a single number that describes the
degree of relationship between two variables, and specifically between
two sequences of observations of those variables.
A common example of using a correlation is to determine how closely
the prices of two stocks follows each other as time progresses. If the
changes move closely, the two stocks have a high correlation, and if
there is no discernible pattern they are uncorrelated. This is valuable
information that can be used in a number of investment strategies.
The level of correlation of two stocks can also vary slightly with the time
frame of the entire dataset, as well as the interval. Fortunately, pandas
has powerful capabilities for us to easily change these parameters and
rerun correlations. We will look at correlations in several places later in
the book.

Regression
Regression is a statistical measure that estimates the strength of
relationship between a dependent variable and a series of other
variables. It can be used to understand the relationships between
variables. An example in finance would be understanding the
relationship between commodity prices and the stocks of businesses
dealing in those commodities.
There was originally a regression model built directly into
pandas, but it has been moved out into the StatsModels
library. This shows a pattern common in pandas. Often
pandas has concepts built into it, but as they mature they
are deemed to fit most effectively into other Python
libraries. This is both good and bad. It is initially great to
have it directly in pandas, but as you upgrade to new
versions of pandas it can break your code!

Other Python libraries of value
with pandas
pandas forms one small, but important, part of the data analysis and
data science ecosystem within Python. As a reference, here are a few
other important Python libraries worth noting. The list is not exhaustive,
but outlines several you will likely come across..

Numeric and scientific
computing - NumPy and SciPy
NumPy (http://www.numpy.org/) is the cornerstone toolbox for scientific
computing with Python, and is included in most distributions of modern
Python. It is actually a foundational toolbox from which pandas was
built, and when using pandas you will almost certainly use it frequently.
NumPy provides, among other things, support for multidimensional
arrays with basic operations on them and useful linear algebra
functions.
The use of the array features of NumPy goes hand in hand with
pandas, specifically the pandas Series object. Most of our examples will
reference NumPy, but the pandas Series functionality is such a tight
superset of the NumPy array that we will, except for a few brief
situations, not delve into details of NumPy.
SciPy (https://www.scipy.org/) provides a collection of numerical algorithms
and domain-specific toolboxes, including signal processing,
optimization, statistics, and much more.

Statistical analysis –
StatsModels
StatsModels (http://statsmodels.sourceforge.net/) is a Python module that
allows users to explore data, estimate statistical models, and perform
statistical tests. An extensive list of descriptive statistics, statistical
tests, plotting functions, and result statistics are available for different
types of data and each estimator. Researchers across fields may find
that Stats Models fully meets their needs for statistical computing and
data analysis in Python.
Features include:
Linear regression models
Generalized linear models
Discrete choice models
Robust linear models
Many models and functions for time series analysis
Nonparametric estimators
A collection of datasets as examples
A wide range of statistical tests
Input-output tools for producing tables in a number of formats
(text, LaTex, HTML) and for reading Stata files into NumPy and
pandas
Plotting functions
Extensive unit tests to ensure correctness of results

Machine learning – scikit-learn
scikit-learn (http://scikit-learn.org/) is a machine learning library built from
NumPy, SciPy, and matplotlib. It offers simple and efficient tools for
common tasks in data analysis such as classification, regression,
clustering, dimensionality reduction, model selection, and
preprocessing.

PyMC - stochastic Bayesian
modeling
PyMC (https://github.com/pymc-devs/pymc) is a Python module that
implements Bayesian statistical models and fitting algorithms, including
Markov chain Monte Carlo. Its flexibility and extensibility make it
applicable to a large number of problems. Along with core sampling
functionality, PyMC includes methods for summarizing output, plotting,
goodness of fit, and convergence diagnostics.

Data visualization - matplotlib
and seaborn
Python has a rich set of frameworks for data visualization. Two of the
most popular are matplotlib and the newer seaborn.

Matplotlib
Matplotlib is a Python 2D plotting library that produces publicationquality figures in a variety of hardcopy formats and interactive
environments across platforms. Matplotlib can be used in Python
scripts, the Python and IPython shell, the Jupyter Notebook, web
application servers, and four graphical user interface toolkits.
pandas contains very tight integration with matplotlib, including
functions as part of Series and DataFrame objects that automatically call
matplotlib. This does not mean that pandas is limited to just matplotlib.
As we will see, this can be easily changed to others such as ggplot2
and seaborn.

Seaborn
Seaborn (http://seaborn.pydata.org/introduction.html) is a library for making
attractive and informative statistical graphics in Python. It is built on top
of matplotlib and tightly integrated with the PyData stack, including
support for NumPy and pandas data structures and statistical routines
from SciPy and StatsModels. It provides additional functionality beyond
matplotlib, and also by default demonstrates a richer and more modern
visual style than matplotlib.

Summary
In this chapter, we went on a tour of the how and why of pandas, data
manipulation/analysis, and science. This started with an overview of
why pandas exists, what functionality it contains, and how it relates to
concepts of data manipulation, analysis, and data science.
Then we covered a process for data analysis to set a framework for
why certain functions exist in pandas. These include retrieving data,
organizing and cleaning it up, doing exploration, and then building a
formal model, presenting your findings, and being able to share and
reproduce the analysis.
Next, we covered several concepts involved in data and statistical
modeling. This included covering many common analysis techniques
and concepts, so as to introduce you to these and make you more
familiar when they are explored in more detail in subsequent chapters.
pandas is also a part of a larger Python ecosystem of libraries that are
useful for data analysis and science. While this book will focus only on
pandas, there are other libraries that you will come across and that
were introduced so you are familiar with them when they crop up.
We are ready to begin using pandas. In the next chapter, we will begin
to ease ourselves into pandas, starting with obtaining a Python and
pandas environment, an overview of Jupyter notebooks, and then
getting a quick introduction to pandas Series and DataFrame objects before
delving into them im more depth in subsequent elements of pandas.

Up and Running with pandas
In this chapter, we will cover how to install pandas and start using its
basic functionality. The content of the book is provided as IPython and
Jupyter notebooks, and hence we will also take a quick look at using
both of those tools.
This book will utilize the Anaconda scientific Python distribution from
Continuum. Anaconda is a popular Python distribution with both free
and paid components. Anaconda provides cross-platform support,
including Windows, Mac, and Linux. The base distribution of Anaconda
installs pandas, IPython and Jupyter Notebook, thereby making it
almost trivial to get started.
In this chapter will cover the following topics:
Installation of Anaconda, pandas, and IPython/Jupyter Notebook
Using IPython and Jupyter Notebook
Jupyter and its notebooks
Setting up your pandas environments
A quick introduction to the pandas Series and DataFrame
Loading data from a CSV file
Generating a visualization of pandas data

Installation of Anaconda
This book will utilize Anaconda Python version 3, specifically 3.6.1. At
the time of writing, pandas is at version 0.20.2. The Anaconda installer
by default will install Python, IPython, Jupyter Notebook, and pandas.
Anaconda Python can be downloaded from the Continuum Analytics
website at http://continuum.io/downloads. The web server will identify your
browser's operating system and present you with an appropriate
software download file for that platform.
When opening this URL in your browser you will see a page similar to
the following:

Click on the link for the installer for your platform. This will present you
with a download page similar to the following:

Download the 3.x installer. The current version of Anaconda and which
will be used in this book is 4.3.1, with Python 3.6.1:

This changes frequently and by the time you read this it
has probably changed.
Execute the installer for your platform, and when it's complete, open a
command line or Terminal and execute the python command. You should
see something similar to the following (this is on a Mac):

You can exit from the Python interpreter by issuing the exit() statement:

From the Terminal or command line you can verify the installed version
of pandas with the pip show pandas command:

The current version that is installed is verified as 0.20.2. Please ensure
you are using 0.20.2 or higher, as there are changes to pandas specific
to this version that will be utilized.

Now that we have everything we need installed, let's move on to looking
at using IPython and Jupyter Notebook.

IPython and Jupyter Notebook
So far we have executed Python from the command line or Terminal.
This is the default Read-Eval-Print-Loop (REPL) that comes with
Python. This can be used to run all the examples in this book, but the
book will use IPython for statements in the text and the code package
Jupyter Notebook. Let's take a brief look at both.

IPython
IPython is an alternate shell for interactively working with Python. It
provides several enhancements to the default REPL provided by
Python.
If you want to learn about IPython in more detail, check
out the documentation at https://ipython.org/ipython-doc/3/interactiv
e/tutorial.html

To start IPython, simply execute the ipython command from the
command line/Terminal. When started you will see something like the
following:

The input prompt shows In [1]:. Each time you enter a
statement in the IPython REPL, the number in the prompt
will increase.
Likewise, output from any particular entry you make will be prefaced
with Out [x]:, where x matches the number of the corresponding In [x]:.
The following screenshot demonstrates this:

This numbering of in and out statements will be important to the
examples as all examples will be prefaced with In [x]: and Out [x]: so
that you can follow along.
Note that these numbers are purely sequential. If you are following
through the code in the text and errors occur in the input or you enter
additional statements, the numbering may get out of sequence (they
can be reset by exiting and restarting IPython). Please use them purely
as reference.

Jupyter Notebook
Jupyter Notebook is the evolution of IPython Notebook. It is an open
source web application that allows you to create and share documents
that contain live code, equations, visualizations, and markdown.
The original IPython Notebook was constrained to Python as the only
language. Jupyter Notebook has evolved to allow many programming
languages to be used including Python, R, Julia, Scala, and F#.
If you want to take a deeper look at Jupyter Notebook, head to http://jupyte
r.org/, where you will be presented with a page similar to the following:

Jupyter Notebook can be downloaded and used independently of
Python. Anaconda installs it by default. To start a Jupyter Notebook,
issue the following command at the command line or Terminal:

$ jupyter notebook

To demonstrate, let's look at how to run the example code that comes
with the text. Download the code from the Packt website and and unzip
the file to a directory of your choosing. In the directory, you will see the
following contents similar to the following:

Now issue the jupyter notebook command. You should see something
similar to the following:

A browser page will open displaying the Jupyter Notebook homepage,
which is http://localhost:8888/tree. This will open a web browser window

showing this page, which will be a directory listing similar to the
following:

Clicking on a .ipynb link opens a notebook page. If you open the
notebook for this chapter you will see content similar to the following:

The notebook that is displayed is HTML that was generated by Jupyter
and IPython. It consists of a number of cells that can be one of
four types: code, markdown, raw nbconvert, or heading. All of the
examples in this book use either code or markdown cells.
Jupyter runs an IPython kernel for each notebook. Cells that contain
Python code are executed within that kernel and the results added to the
notebook as HTML.
Double-clicking on any of the cells will make the cell editable. When
you're done editing the contents of a cell, press Shift+Enter, at which
point Jupyter/IPython will evaluate the contents and display the results.
If you wan to learn more about the notebook format that
underlies the pages, see https://ipython.org/ipython-doc/3/notebook/n
bformat.html.
The toolbar at the top of a notebook gives you a number of abilities to
manipulate the notebook. These include adding, removing, and moving
cells up and down in the notebook. Also available are commands to run
cells, rerun cells, and restart the underlying IPython kernel.
To create a new notebook, go to File | New Notebook | Python 3:

A new notebook page will be created in a new browser tab. Its name will
be Untitled:

The notebook consists of a single code cell that is ready to have Python
entered. Enter 1+1 in the cell and press Shift + Enter to execute.

The cell has been executed and the result shown as Out [1]:. Jupyter also
opened a new cell for you to enter more code or markdown.
Jupyter Notebook automatically saves your changes every
minute, but it's still a good thing to save manually every

once and a while.

Introducing the pandas Series
and DataFrame
Let's jump into using some pandas with a brief introduction to pandas
two main data structures, the Series and the DataFrame. We will examine
the following:
Importing pandas into your application
Creating and manipulating a pandas Series
Creating and manipulating a pandas DataFrame
Loading data from a file into a DataFrame

Importing pandas
Every notebook we will use starts by importing pandas and several
other useful Python libraries first. It will also set up several options to
control how pandas renders output in a Jupyter Notebook. This code
consists of the following:

The first statement imports NumPy and refers to items in the library as
np.. We won't go into much detail on NumPy in this book, but it is
occasionally needed.
The second import makes pandas available to the notebook. We will
refer to items in the library with the pd. prefix. The from pandas import Series,
DataFrame statement explicitly imports the Series and DataFrame objects into
the global namespace. This allows us to refer to Series and DataFrame
without the pd. prefix. This is convenient as we will use them so
frequently that this saves quite a bit of typing.
The import datetime statement brings in the datetime library, which is
commonly used in pandas for time series data. It will be included in the
imports for every notebook.
The pd.set_option() function calls set up options that inform the notebook
how to display output from pandas. The first tells states to render Series

and DataFrame output as text and not HTML. The next two lines specify
the maximum number of columns and rows to be output. The final
option sets the maximum number of characters of output in each rows.
You can examine more options at the following URL: http://
pandas.pydata.org/pandas-docs/stable/options.html.
A sharp eye might notice that this cell has no Out [x]:. Not all cells (or
IPython statements) will generate output.
If you desire to use IPython instead of Jupyter Notebook to follow
along, you can also execute this code in an IPython shell. For example,
you can simply cut and paste the code from the notebook cell. Doing so
might look like the following:

The IPython shell is smart enough to know you are inserting multiple
lines and will indent appropriately. And notice that there is also no Out
[x]: in the IPython shell. pd.set_option does not return any content and
hence there is no annotation.

The pandas Series
The pandas Series is the base data structure of pandas. A series is
similar to a NumPy array, but it differs by having an index, which allows
for much richer lookup of items instead of just a zero-based array index
value.
The following creates a series from a Python list.:

The output consists of two columns of information. The first is the index
and the second is the data in the Series. Each row of the output
represents the index label (in the first column) and then the value
associated with that label.
Because this Series was created without specifying an index (something
we will do next), pandas automatically creates an integer index with
labels starting at 0 and increasing by one for each data item.
The values of a Series object can then be accessed by using the []
operator, passing the label for the value you require. The following gets
the value for the label 1:

This looks very much like normal array access in many programming
languages. But as we will see, the index does not have to start at 0, nor

increment by one, and can be many other data types than just an
integer. This ability to associate flexible indexes in this manner is one of
the great superpowers of pandas.
Multiple items can be retrieved by specifying their labels in a Python list.
The following retrieves the values at labels 1 and 3:

A Series object can be created with a user-defined index by using the
index parameter and specifying the index labels. The following creates a
Series with the same values but with an index consisting of string values:

Data in the Series object can now be accessed by those alphanumeric
index labels. The following retrieves the values at index labels 'a' and
'd':

It is still possible to refer to the elements of this Series object by their
numerical 0-based position. :

We can examine the index of a Series using the .index property:

The index is itself actually a pandas object, and this output shows us the
values of the index and the data type used for the index. In this case,
note that the type of the data in the index (referred to as the dtype) is
object and not string. We will examine how to change this later in the
book.
A common usage of a Series in pandas is to represent a time series that
associates date/time index labels with values. The following
demonstrates this by creating a date range using the
pd.date_range() pandas function:

This has created a special index in pandas called DatetimeIndex, which is a
specialized type of pandas index that is optimized to index data with
dates and times.
Now let's create a Series using this index. The data values represent high
temperatures on specific days:

This type of series with a DateTimeIndex is referred to as a time series.
We can look up a temperature on a specific data by using the date as a
string:

Two Series objects can be applied to each other with an arithmetic
operation. The following code creates a second Series and calculates the
difference in temperature between the two:

The result of an arithmetic operation (+, -, /, *, ...) on two
Series objects that are non-scalar values returns another
Series object.
Since the index is not integer, we can also look up values by 0-based
value:

Finally, pandas provides many descriptive statistical methods. As an
example, the following returns the mean of the temperature differences:

The pandas DataFrame
A pandas Series can only have a single value associated with each
index label. To have multiple values per index label we can use a
data frame. A data frame represents one or more Series objects aligned
by index label. Each series will be a column in the data frame, and each
column can have an associated name.
In a way, a data frame is analogous to a relational
database table in that it contains one or more columns of
data of heterogeneous types (but a single type for all
items in each respective column).
The following creates a DataFrame object with two columns and uses the
temperature Series objects:

The resulting data frame has two columns named Missoula and
Philadelphia. These columns are new Series objects contained within the
data frame with the values copied from the original Series objects.
Columns in a DataFrame object can be accessed using an array indexer []
with the name of the column or a list of column names. The following
code retrieves the Missoula column:

And the following code retrieves the Philadelphia column:

A Python list of column names can also be used to return multiple
columns:

There is a subtle difference in a DataFrame object as
compared to a Series object. Passing a list to the []
operator of DataFrame retrieves the specified columns
whereas a Series would return rows.
If the name of a column does not have spaces, it can be accessed
using property-style:

Arithmetic operations between columns within a data frame are
identical in operation to those on multiple Series. To demonstrate, the
following code calculates the difference between temperatures using
property notation:

A new column can be added to DataFrame simply by assigning another
Series to a column using the array indexer [] notation. The following
adds a new column in the DataFrame with the temperature differences:

The names of the columns in a DataFrame are accessible via the .columns
property:

The DataFrame and Series objects can be sliced to retrieve specific rows.
The following slices the second through fourth rows of temperature
difference values:

Entire rows from a data frame can be retrieved using the .loc and .iloc
properties. .loc ensures that the lookup is by index label, where .iloc
uses the 0-based position. The following retrieves the second row of the data frame:

Notice that this result has converted the row into a Series with the
column names of the data frame pivoted into the index labels of the
resulting Series. The following shows the resulting index of the result:

Rows can be explicitly accessed via index label using the .loc property.
The following code retrieves a row by the index label:

Specific rows in a DataFrame object can be selected using a list of integer
positions. The following selects the values from the Difference column in
rows at integer locations 1, 3, and 5:

Rows of a data frame can be selected based upon a logical expression
that is applied to the data in each row. The following shows values in
the Missoula column that are greater than 82 degrees:

The results from an expression can then be applied to the [] operator of
a data frame (and a series) which results in only the rows where the
expression evaluated to True being returned:

This technique is referred to as Boolean Selection in pandas
terminology and will form the basis of selecting rows based upon values
in specific columns (like a query in SQL using a WHERE clause - but as we
will see it is much more powerful).

Loading data from files into a
DataFrame
The pandas library provides facilities for easy retrieval of data from a
variety of data sources as pandas objects. As a quick example, let's
examine the ability of pandas to load data in CSV format.
This example will use a file provided with the code from this book,
data/goog.csv, and the contents of the file represent time series financial
information for the Google stock.
The following statement uses the operating system (from within Jupyter
Notebook or IPython) to display the content of this file. Which command
you will need to use depends on your operating system:

This information can be easily imported into a DataFrame using the
pd.read_csv() function:

pandas has no idea that the first column in the file is a date and has
treated the contents of the date field as a string. This can be verified
using the following pandas statement, which shows the type of the Date
column as a string:

The parse_dates parameter of the pd.read_csv() function to guide pandas on
how to convert data directly into a pandas date object. The following
informs pandas to convert the content of the Date column into actual
TimeStamp objects:

If we check whether it worked, we see that the date is a Timestamp:

Unfortunately, this has not used the date field as the index for the
data frame. Instead, it uses the default zero-based integer index labels:

Note that this is now a RangeIndex, where in previous
versions of pandas it would have been an integer index.
We'll examine this difference later in the book.
This can be fixed using the index_col parameter of the pd.read_csv()
function to specify which column in the file should be used as the index:

And the index now is a DateTimeIndex, which lets us look up rows using
dates.

Visualization
We will dive into visualization in quite some depth in Chapter 14,
Visualization, but prior to then we will occasionally perform a quick
visualization of data in pandas. Creating a visualization of data is quite
simple with pandas. All that needs to be done is to call the .plot()
method. The following demonstrates by plotting the Close value of the
stock data:

Summary
In this chapter, we installed the Anaconda Scientific version of Python.
This also installs pandas and Jupyter Notebook, setting you right up
with an environment for performing data manipulation and analysis,
along with creating notebooks to visualize, present, and share your
analyses.
We also took an introductory look at the pandas Series and DataFrame
objects, demonstrating some of the fundamental capabilities. This
exposition showed you how to perform a few basic operations that you
can use to get up and running with pandas prior to diving in and
learning all the details.
In the next several chapters, we will dive deep into the operations of the
Series and DataFrame, with the next chapter focusing specifically on the
Series.

Representing Univariate Data
with the Series
The Series is the primary building block of pandas. It represents a onedimensional array-like set of values of a single data type. It is often
used to model zero or more measurements of a single variable. While it
can appear like an array, a Series has an associated index that can be
used to perform very efficient retrievals of values based upon labels.
A Series also performs automatic alignment of data between itself and
other pandas objects. Alignment is a core feature of pandas where data
is multiple pandas objects that are matched by label value before any
operation is performed. This allows the simple application of operations
without needing to explicitly code joins.
In this chapter, we will examine how to model measurements of a
variable using a Series, including using an index to retrieve samples.
This examination will include overviews of several patterns involved in
index labeling, slicing and querying data, alignment, and re-indexing
data.
Specifically, in this chapter we will cover the following topics:
Creating a series using Python lists, dictionaries, NumPy
functions, and scalar values
Accessing the index and values properties of the Series
Determining the size and shape of a Series object
Specifying an index at the time of Series creation
Using heads, tails, and takes to access values
Value lookup by index label and position
Slicing and common slicing patterns
Alignment via index labels
Performing Boolean selection

Re-indexing a Series
In-place modification of values

Configuring pandas
We start the examples in the chapter using the following imports and
configuration statements:

Creating a Series
A Series can be created using several techniques. We will examine the
following three:
Using a Python list or dictionary
From NumPy arrays
Using a scalar value

Creating a Series using Python
lists and dictionaries
A Series can be created from a Python list:

The first column of numbers represents the label in the index of the
Series. The second column contains the values. dtype: int64 denotes that
the data type of the values in the Series is int64.
By default, pandas will create an index consisting of consecutive
integers starting at 0. This makes the series look like an array in many
other programming languages. As an example, we can look up the
value at label 3:

This lookup was by label value, not 0-based position. We
will examine this in detail later in the chapter.
Data types other than integers can be used. The following creates a
series of string values:

To create a series consisting of a sequence of n identical values v, use
the Python shorthand for list creation, [v]*n. The following creates five
values of 2:

A similar type of shorthand is the following, which uses the Python
shorthand to use each character as a list item:

A Series can be directly initialized from a Python dictionary. When using
a dictionary, the keys of the dictionary are used as the index labels:

Creation using NumPy
functions
It is a common practice to initialize the Series object's various NumPy
functions. As an example, the following uses the NumPy np.arange
function to create a sequence of integer values between 4 and 8:

The np.linspace() method is similar in functionality but allows us to
specify the number of values to be created between (and including) the
two specified values, and with a specified number of steps:

It is also common to generate a set of random numbers using
np.random.normal(). The following generates five random numbers from a
normal distribution:

Creation using a scalar value
A Series can also be created using a scalar value:

This seems like a degenerate case with the Series only having a single
value. There are, however, scenarios where this is important, such as
when a series is multiplied by a scalar value, like so:

Underneath the covers, pandas took the value 2 and created a Series
from that scalar value with a matching index to that in s, and then
performed the multiplication through alignment of the two Series. We will
look at this example again in more detail later in the chapter.

The .index and .values
properties
Each Series object consists of a series of values and an index. The
values can be accessed through the .values property:

The result from is a NumPy array object, as the following verifies:

This is called out for informational purposes. We will not
examine NumPy arrays in this book. Historically, pandas
did use NumPy arrays under the covers, so NumPy
arrays were more important in the past, but this
dependency has been removed in recent versions. But as
a convenience, .values returns a NumPy array even if the
underlying representation is not a NumPy array.
In addition, the index for the series can be retrieved using .index:

The type of index created by pandas is RangeIndex. This is a change in
pandas from the previous version of this book, when this type of index
did not exist. The RangeIndex object represents a range of values from the

to the stop value with the specified step. This is efficient for pandas,
compared to the previously utilized Int64Index.
start

The RangeIndex is simply one type of the indexes that we will
explore (much of the detail in is Chapter 6, Indexing Data).

The size and shape of a Series
The number of items in a Series object can be determined by several
techniques, the first of which is by using the Python len() function:

The same result can be obtained by using the .size property:

An alternate form for getting the size of a Series is to use the .shape
property. This returns a two-value tuple, but with only the first value
specified and representing the size:

Specifying an index at creation
The labels in an index can be specified at the creation of the Series by
using the index parameter of the constructor. The following creates a
Series and assigns strings to each label of the index:

Examining the .index property, we find the following index was created:

Using this index, we can ask a question such as who is the Dad?:

Heads, tails, and takes
pandas provides the .head() and .tail() methods to examine the first
(head) or last (tail) few rows in a Series. By default, these return the first
or last five rows, but this can be changed using the n parameter.
Let's examine the usage given the following Series:

The following retrieves the first five rows:

The number of items can be changed using the n parameter (or just by
specifying the number):

.tail()

returns the last five rows:

It works similarly when specifying a number other than 5:

The .take() method returns the rows in a series at the specified integer
position:

Retrieving values in a Series by
label or position
Values in a Series can be retrieved in two general ways: by index label or
by 0-based position. Pandas provides you with a number of ways to
perform either of these lookups. Let's examine a few of the common
techniques.

Lookup by label using the []
operator and the .ix[] property
An implicit label lookup is performed using the [] operator. This
operator normally looks up values based upon the given index labels.
Let's start by using the following Series:

A single value can be looked up using just the index label of the desired
item:

Multiple items can be retrieved at once using a list of index labels:

We can also look up values using integers that represent positions:

This works purely because the index is not using integer labels. If
integers are passed to [], and the index has integer values, then the
lookup is performed by matching the values passed in to the values of
the integer labels.
This can be demonstrated using the following Series:

The following looks up values at labels 13 and 10, not positions 13 and 10:

Lookup using the [] operator is identical to using the .ix[] property.
However, .ix[] has been deprecated since pandas version 0.20.1. The
reason for the deprecation is the confusion caused by integers being
passed to the operators and the difference in operation depending on
the type of the label in the index.
The ramifications of this is that neither [] or .ix[] should be used for
lookup. Instead, use the .loc[] and .iloc[] properties, which explicitly
look up by label or position only.

Explicit lookup by position with
.iloc[]
Value lookup by position can be performed using .iloc[]. The following
demonstrates using integers as parameters:

The following looks up by position, even though the index has integer
labels:

Note that if you specify a location that does not exist (below zero, or
greater than the number of items—one), then an exception will be
thrown.

Explicit lookup by labels with
.loc[]
Lookup by label can also be achieved by using the .loc[] property:

There are no problems using integer labels:

Note that .loc[] has a different behavior than .iloc[] when passing an
index label that is not in the index. In that case, pandas will return a NaN
value instead of throwing an exception:

What is NaN? We will see this in more detail later in the
chapter, but pandas uses it for the representation of
missing data or numbers that can't be found through
index lookups. It also has ramifications in various
statistical methods that we will also examine later in this
chapter.

Slicing a Series into subsets
pandas Series support a feature called slicing. Slicing is a powerful way
to retrieve subsets of data from a pandas object. Through slicing, we
can select data based upon position or index labels and have greater
control over the sequencing of the items that result (forwards or
reverse) and the interval (every item, every other).
Slicing overloads the normal array [] operator (and also .loc[], .iloc[],
and .ix[]) to accept a slice object. A slice object is created using a
syntax of start:end:step, the components representing the first item, last
item, and the increment between each item that you would like as the
step.
Each component of the slice is optional and provides a convenient
means to select entire rows by omitting a component of the slice
specifier.
To start demonstrating slicing, we will use the following Series:

We can select consecutive items using start:end for the slice. The
following selects the five items in positions 1 through 5 in the Series.
Since we did not specify a step component, it defaults to 1. Also note
that the end label is not included in the result:

This result is roughly equivalent to the following:

It is roughly equivalent as this use of .iloc[] returns a copy of the data
in the source. A slice is a reference to the data in the source.
Modification of contents of the resulting slice will affect the source Series.
We will examine this process further in a later section on modifying
Series data in place.
A slice can return every other item by specifying a step of 2:

As stated earlier, each component of the slice is optional. If the start
component is omitted, the results will start at the first item. As an
example, the following is a shorthand for .head():

All items at and after a specific position can be selected by specifying
the start component and omitting the end. The following selects all items,
starting with the 4th:

A step can also be used in both of the two previous scenarios to skip
over items:

Use of a negative step value will reverse the result. The following
demonstrates how to reverse the Series:

A value of -2 will return every other item from the start position, working
towards the beginning of the Series in reverse order. The following

example returns every other item before and including the row at
position 4:

Negative values for the start and end of a slice have special meaning. A
negative start value of -n means the last n rows:

A negative end value of -n will return all but the last n rows:

Negative start and end components can be combined. The following first
retrieves the last four rows, and then, from those, all but the last one (so
the first three):

It is also possible to slice a series with a non-integer index. To
demonstrate, let's use the following Series:

Using this Series, slicing with integer values will extract items based on
position (as before):

But, when using non-integer values as components for the slice,
pandas will attempt to understand the data type and pick the
appropriate items from the series. As an example, the following slices
from 'b' through 'd':

Alignment via index labels
Alignment of Series data by index labels is a fundamental concept in
pandas, as well as being one of its most powerful concepts. Alignment
provides automatic correlation of related values in multiple Series
objects based upon index labels. This saves a lot of error-prone effort
matching data in multiple sets using standard procedural techniques.
To demonstrate alignment, let's perform an example of adding values in
two Series objects. Let's start with the following two Series objects
representing two different samples of a set of variables (a and b):

Now suppose we would like to total the values for each variable. We
can express this simply as s1 + s2:

pandas has matched the measurement for each variable in each
series, added those values, and returned us the sum for each in one
succinct statement.

It is also possible to apply a scalar value to a Series. The result will be
that the scalar will be applied to each value in the Series using the
specified operation:

Remember earlier when it was stated that we would come back to
creating a Series with a scalar value? When performing this type of
operation, pandas actually performs the following actions:

The first step is the creation of a Series from the scalar value, but with
the index of the target Series. The multiplication is then applied to the
aligned values of the two Series objects, which perfectly align because
the index is identical.
The labels in the indexes are not required to align. Where alignment
does not occur, pandas will return NaN as the result:

The NaN value is, by default, the result of any pandas alignment where
an index label does not align with the other Series. This is an important
characteristic of pandas, when compared to NumPy. If labels do not
align, there should not be an exception thrown. This helps when some
data is missing but it is acceptable for this to happen. Processing
continues, but pandas lets you know there's an issue (but not
necessarily a problem) by returning NaN.
Labels in a pandas index do not need to be unique. The alignment
operation actually forms a Cartesian product of the labels in the two
Series. If there are n 'a' labels in series 1, and m labels in series 2, then
the result will have n*m total rows in the result.
To demonstrate this let's use the following two Series objects:

This will result in 6 'a' index labels and NaN for 'b' and 'c':

Performing Boolean selection
Indexes give us a very powerful and efficient means of looking up
values in a Series based upon their labels. But what if you want to look
up entries in a Series based upon the values?
To handle this scenario pandas provides us with Boolean selection. A
Boolean selection applies a logical expression to the values of the Series
and returns a new series of Boolean values representing the result of
that expression upon each value. This result can then be used to
extract only values where True was a result.
To demonstrate Boolean selection, let's start with the following Series
and apply the greater than operator to determine values greater than or
equal to 3:

This results in a Series with matching index labels and the result of the
expression as applied to the value of each label. The dtype of the values
is bool.
This series can then be used to select values from the original series.
This selection is performed by passing the Boolean results to the []
operator of the source.

The syntax can be simplified by performing the logical operation within
the [] operator:

Unfortunately, multiple logical operators cannot be used in a normal
Python syntax. As an example, the following causes an exception to be
thrown:

There are technical reasons for why the preceding code does not work.
The solution is to express the equation differently, putting parentheses
around each of the logical conditions and using different operators for
and/or (| and &):

It is possible to determine whether all the values in a Series match a
given expression using the .all() method. The following asks if all
elements in the series are greater than or equal to 0:

The .any() method returns True if any value satisfies the expressions. The
following asks if any element is less than 2:

You can determine how many items satisfied the expression using the
.sum() method on the resulting selection. This is because the .sum()
method of a series when given a series of Boolean values will treat True
as 1 and False as 0:

Re-indexing a Series
Re-indexing in pandas is a process that makes the data in a Series
conform to a set of labels. It is used by pandas to perform much of the
alignment process and is hence a fundamental operation.
Re-indexing achieves several things:
Re-ordering existing data to match a set of labels
Inserting NaN markers where no data exists for a label
Possibly filling missing data for a label using some type of logic
(defaulting to adding NaN values)
Re-indexing can be as simple as simply assigning a new index to the
.index property of a Series. The following demonstrates changing the
index of a Series in this manner:

The number of elements in the list being assigned to the
.index property must match the number of rows or an
exception will be thrown. Re-indexing also modified the
Series in-place.

Flexibility in creating a new index is provided through use of the
.reindex() method. One case is in assigning a new index where the
number of labels does not match the number of values:

The following re-indexes the Series using a set of labels that has new,
missing, and overlapping values:

There are several things here that are important to point out about
.reindex(). The first is that the result of a .reindex() method is a new Series
and not an in-place modification. The new Series has an index with
labels, as specified in the passing to the function. The data is copied for
each label that exists in the original Series. If a label is not found in the
original Series, then NaN will be assigned as the value. Finally, rows in the
Series with labels that are not in the new index are dropped.
Re-indexing is also useful when you want to align two Series to perform
an operation on values in two Series but the Series objects do not have
labels that align for some reason. A common scenario is that one Series
has labels of integer type and the other is strings, but the underlying
meaning of the values is the same (this is common when getting data
from remote sources). Take the following Series objects as an example:

Although the meaning of the labels in the two Series is the same, they
will align due to their data types being different. This is easily fixed once
the problem is identified:

The .reindex() method has the default action of inserting NaN as a missing
value when labels are not found in the source Series. This value can be
changed by using the fill_value parameter. The following example
demonstrates using 0 instead of NaN:

When performing a re-index on ordered data such as a time series, it is
possible to perform interpolation, or filling of values. There will be a
more elaborate discussion on interpolation and filling in Chapter 10,
Time Series Data, but the following examples introduce the concept.
Let's start with the following Series:

The following example demonstrates the concept of forward filling,
often referred to as last known value. The Series is re-indexed to
create a contiguous integer index, and by using the method='ffill'
parameter, any new index labels are assigned the previously known
non-NaN value:

Index labels 1 and 2 are matched to red at label 0, 4 and 5 to green from
label 3, and 6 to blue from label 5.
The following example fills backward using method='bfill':

Label 6 did not have a previous value, so it is set to NaN; 4 is set to the
value of 5 (blue); and 2 and 1 to the value of label 3 (green).

Modifying a Series in-place
In-place modification of a Series is a slightly controversial topic. When
possible, it is preferred to perform operations that return a new Series
with the modifications represented in the new Series. But, if needed, it is
possible to change values and add/remove rows in-place.
An additional row can be added in place to a series by assigning a
value to an index label that does not already exist. The following code
creates a Series object and adds an additional item to the series:

The value at a specific index label can be changed in place by
assignment:

Rows can be removed from a Series by passing their index labels to the
del() function. The following demonstrates removal of the row with the
index label 'a':

To add and remove items out of place, you use pd.concat()
to add and remove using a Boolean selection.
An important thing to keep in mind when using slicing is that the result
of the slice is a view into the original Series. Modification of values
through the result of the slice operation will modify the original Series.
Consider the following example, which selects the first two elements in
the Series and stores them in a new variable:

The following assignment of a value to an element of a slice will change
the value in the original Series:

Summary
In this chapter, you learned about the pandas Series object and how it
can be used to represent an indexed representation of variable
measurements. We started with how to create and initialize a Series and
its associated index, and then examined how to manipulate the data in
one or more Series objects. We examined how to align Series objects by
index label and apply mathematical operations across the aligned
values. We then examined how to look up data by index, as well as how
to perform queries based upon the data (Boolean expressions). We
then closed with an examination of how to use re-indexing to change
indexes and align data.
In the next chapter, you will learn how the DataFrame is used to represent
multiple Series of data in a uniform tabular structure.

Representing Tabular and
Multivariate Data with the
DataFrame
The pandas DataFrame object extends the capabilities of the Series object
into two-dimensions. Instead of a single series of values, each row of a
data frame can have multiple values, each of which is represented as a
column. Each row of a data frame can then model multiple related
properties of a subject under observation, and with each column being
able to represent different types of data.
Each column of a data frame is a pandas Series, and a data frame can
be considered a form of data like a spreadsheet or a database table.
But these comparisons do not do the DataFrame justice, as a data frame
has very distinct qualities specific to pandas, such as automatic data
alignment of the Series objects that represent the columns.
This automatic alignment makes a data frame much more capable of
exploratory data analysis than spreadsheets or databases. Combined
with the ability to slice data simultaneously across both rows and
columns, this ability to interact with and explore data in a data frame is
incredibly effective for finding the required information.
In this chapter, we will dive into the pandas DataFrame. Many of the
concepts will be familiar to the Series, but with the addition of data and
tools to support its manipulation. Specifically, in this chapter we will
cover the following topics:
Creating a DataFrame from Python objects, NumPy functions, Python
dictionaries, pandas Series objects, and CSV files
Determining the size of the dimensions of a data frame

Specifying and manipulating the names of the columns in a data
frame
Alignment of rows during the creation of a data frame
Selecting specific columns and rows of a data frame
Applying slicing to a data frame
Selecting rows and columns of a data frame by location and label
Scalar value lookup
Boolean selection as applied to a data frame

Configuring pandas
We start the examples in the chapter using the following imports and
configuration statements:

Creating DataFrame objects
There are a number of ways to create a data frame. A data frame can
be created from either a single or multi-dimensional set of data. The
techniques that we will examine are as follows:
Using the results of NumPy functions
Using data from a Python dictionary consisting of lists or pandas
Series objects
Using data from a CSV file
While examining each of these we will also examine how to specify
column names, demonstrate how alignment is performed during
initialization, and see how to determine the dimensions of a data frame.

Creating a DataFrame using
NumPy function results
A data frame can be created from a one-dimensional NumPy array of
integers ranging from 1 to 5:

The first column of the output shows the labels of the index that was
created. Since an index was not specified at the time of creation,
pandas created a based RangeIndex with labels starting at 0.
The data is in the second column and consists of the values 1 through 5.
The 0 above the column of data is the name of the column. When the
column names are not specified at the time of the creation of the data
frame, pandas names the columns with incremental integers starting at
0.
A multi-dimensional NumPy array can also be used and results in the
creation of multiple columns:

The columns of a DataFrame can be accessed using the .columns property:

This shows that, when column names are not specified, pandas will
create a RangeIndex to represent the columns.
Column names can be specified using the columns parameter. The
following creates a two-column DataFrame that represents two samples of
temperatures for two cities:

The number of rows in a DataFrame can be found using the len() function:

The dimensions of the DataFrame can be found using the .shape property:

Creating a DataFrame using a
Python dictionary and pandas
Series objects
A Python dictionary can be used to initialize a DataFrame. When using a
Python dictionary, pandas will use the keys as the column names and
the values for each key as the data in the column:

A common technique of creating a DataFrame is by using a list of pandas
Series objects that will be used as the rows:

In this scenario, each Series represents a single measurement for each
city at a specific measurement interval.
To name the columns, we could attempt to use the columns parameter:

This result is different from what we perhaps expected, as the values
have been filled with NaN. This can be rectified in two ways. The first is to
assign the column names to the .columns property:

Another technique is to use a Python dictionary where the keys are the
column names and the value for each key is a Series representing the
measurements in that specific column:

Be aware that during construction of a DataFrame, the Series that are
supplied will be aligned. The following demonstrates this by adding a
third city whose index values are different:

Creating a DataFrame from a
CSV file
A data frame can be created by reading data from a CSV file using the
pd.read_csv() function.
will be more extensively examined in Chapter 9,
Accessing Data.
pd.read_csv()

To demonstrate this process, we will load data from a file that contains
a snapshot of the S&P 500. This file is named sp500.csv and is located in
the code bundle's data directory.
The first line of the file has the names of each variable/column, and the
remaining 500 lines represent the values for the 500 different stocks.
The following code loads the data, while specifying which column in the
file to use for the index and also that we only want four specific columns
(0, 2, 3, and 7):

Examining the first five rows using .head() shows us the following
structure and contents of the resulting data frame:

Let's examine a few properties of this data frame. It should have 500
rows of data. This can be checked by examining the length of the data
frame:

We expect that it has a shape of 500 rows and three columns:

The size of the data frame can be found using the .size property. This
property returns the number of data values in the data frame. We would
expect 500*3 = 1,500:

The index of the data frame consists of the symbols for the 500 stocks:

The columns consist of the following three names:

Note that, although we specified four columns when loading, the result
only contains three columns because one of the four columns in the

source file was used for the index.

Accessing data within a
DataFrame
A data frame consists of both rows and columns, and has constructs to
select data from specific rows and columns. These selections use the
same operators as a Series, including [], .loc[], and .iloc[].
Because of the multiple dimensions, the process by which these are
applied differs slightly. We will examine these by first learning to select
columns, then rows, a combination of rows and columns in a single
statement, and also by using Boolean selections.
Additionally, pandas provides a construct for selecting a single scalar
value at a specific row and column that we will investigate. This
technique is important and exists because it is a very high-performance
means of accessing these values.

Selecting the columns of a
DataFrame
Selecting the data in specific columns of a DataFrame is performed by
using the [] operator. This differs from a Series, where [] specified rows.
The [] operator can be passed either a single object or a list of objects
representing the columns to retrieve.
The following retrieves the column with the name 'Sector':

When a single column is retrieved from a DataFrame, the result is a Series:

Multiple columns can be retrieved by specifying a list of column names:

Since this has multiple columns, the result is a DataFrame instead of a
Series:

Columns can also be retrieved by attribute access. A DataFrame will have
properties added that represent the names of each column, as long as
the name does not contain spaces. The following retrieves the Price
column in this manner:

Note that this will not work for the Book Value column, as the name has a
space.

Selecting rows of a DataFrame
Rows can be retrieved via an index label value using .loc[]:

Furthermore, multiple rows can be retrieved using a list of labels:

Rows can be retrieved by location using .iloc[]:

It is possible to look up the location in the index of a specific label value
and then use that value to retrieve the row by position:

As a final note in this section, these operations are also possible using
.ix[]. However, this has been deprecated. For more details, see http://pan
das.pydata.org/pandas-docs/stable/indexing.html#different-choices-for-indexing.

Scalar lookup by label or
location using .at[] and .iat[]
Individual scalar values can be looked up by label using .at[], passing it
both the row label and the column name:

Scalar values can also be looked up by location using .iat[], passing
both the row location and then the column location. This is the preferred
method of accessing single values and gives the highest performance:

Slicing using the [ ] operator
Slicing a DataFrame across its index is syntactically identical to performing
the same operation with a Series. Because of this, we will not go into the
details of the various permutations of slices in this section and only look
at a few representative examples applied to a DataFrame.
When slicing using the [] operator, the slice is performed across the
index and not the columns. The following retrieves the first five rows:

And the following returns rows starting with the ABT label through the ACN
labels:

Slicing a DataFrame also applies to the .iloc[] and .loc[] properties. Using
these properties is considered best practice.

Selecting rows using Boolean
selection
Rows can be selected by using Boolean selection. When applied to a
data frame, a Boolean selection can utilize data from multiple columns.
Consider the following query, which identifies all stocks with a price less
than 100:

This result can then be applied to the DataFrame using the [] operator to
return only the rows where the result was True:

Multiple conditions can be put together using parentheses. The
following retrieves the symbols and price for all stocks with a price

between 6 and 10:

It is common to perform selection using multiple variables. The
following demonstrates this by finding all rows where the Sector is Health
Care and the Price is greater than or equal to 100.00:

Selecting across both rows and
columns
It is a common practice to select a subset of data that consists of a set
of rows and columns. The following demonstrates this by first selecting
a slice of rows and then the desired columns:

Summary
In this chapter, you learned how to create pandas DataFrame objects and
various means of selecting data based upon the indexes and values in
various columns. These examples paralleled those of the Series, but
demonstrated that, because the DataFrame has columns and an
associated columns index, the syntax has variations from the Series.
In the next chapter, we will dive further into data manipulation, using the
DataFrame and focusing on making modifications to DataFrame structure and
contents.

Manipulating DataFrame
Structure
pandas provides a powerful manipulation engine for you to use to
explore your data. This exploration often involves making modifications
to the structure of DataFrame objects to remove unnecessary data, change
the format of existing data, or to create derived data from data in other
rows or columns. These chapter will demonstrate how to perform these
powerful and important operations.
Specifically, in this chapter we will cover:
Renaming columns
Adding new columns with [] and .insert()
Adding columns through enlargement
Adding columns using concatenation
Reordering columns
Replacing the contents of a column
Deleting columns
Adding new rows
Concatenating rows
Adding and replacing rows via enlargement
Removing rows using .drop()
Removing rows using Boolean selection
Removing rows using a slice

Configuring pandas
The following code will configure the pandas environment for the
examples that follow. This also loads the S&P 500 data set so that it can
be used in the examples:

Renaming columns
Columns can be renamed using the appropriately named .rename()
method. This method can be passed a dictionary object where the keys
represent the labels of the columns that are to be renamed, and the
value for each key is the new name.
The following will change the name of the 'Book Value' column to
'BookValue', removing the space and allowing access to that column's data
using property notation.

Using .rename() in this manner returns a new data frame with the columns
renamed and the data copied from the original. The following verifies
that the original was not modified.

To modify the data frame in-place without making a copy you can use
the inplace=True parameter.

It is now possible to use the .BookValue property to access the data.

Adding new columns with [] and
.insert()
New columns can be added to a data frame using the [] operator. Let's
add a new column named RoundedPrice which will represent the rounding of
values in the Price column.

The way that pandas performs this is by first selecting the Price column's
data from sp500 and then all of the values in that Series are rounded. Then
pandas aligns this new Series with the copy DataFrame and adds it as a new
column named RoundedPrice. The new column is added to the end of the
columns index.
The .insert() method can be used to add a new column at a specific
location. The following inserts the RoundedPrice column between Sector and
Price:

Adding columns through
enlargement
A column can be added using the .loc[] property and a slice. The
following demonstrates this by adding a new column to a subset of sp500
named PER with all values initialized to 0.

A Series with existing data can also be added in this manner. The
following adds the PER column with random data from a series. Since this
uses alignment, it is necessary to use the same index as the target data
frame.

Adding columns using
concatenation
Both the [] operator and .insert() method modify the target data frame inplace. If a new data frame with the additional columns is desired (leaving
the original unchanged) then we can use the pd.concat() function. This
function creates a new data frame with all of the specified DataFrame
objects concatenated in the order of specification.
This following creates a new DataFrame with a single column containing the
rounded price. It then uses pd.concat() with axis=1 to signify that the given
DataFrame objects should be concatenated along the columns axis (as
compared to rows which would use axis=0) .

Concatenation will be covered in more detail in Chapter 11,
Combining, Relating, and Reshaping Data.

It is possible to have duplicate column names as a result of a
concatenation. To demonstrate this happening, let's recreate rounded_price
but name the column Price.

The concatenation will now result in duplicate columns.

Interestingly, you can retrieve both columns with the .Price property.

If you want to get a specific Price column in the scenario, you will need to
retrieve it by position and not name.

Reordering columns
Columns can be reordered out-of-place by selecting the columns in the
desired order. The following demonstrates by reversing the columns.

There is not really a way of changing the order of the
columns in-place. See: http://stackoverflow.com/questions/2587819
8/change-pandas-dataframe-column-order-in-place.

Replacing the contents of a
column
The contents of a DataFrame can be replaced by assigning a new Series to
an existing column using the [] operator. The following demonstrates
replacing the Price column with the Price column from rounded_price.

Data for a column can also be replaced (in-place) using a slice.

Deleting columns
Columns can be deleted from a DataFrame by using the del keyword or the
.pop() or .drop() method of the data frame. The behavior of each of these
differs slightly:
will simply delete the Series from the DataFrame (in-place)
pop() will both delete the Series and return the Series as a result (also
in-place)
drop(labels, axis=1) will return a new data frame with the column(s)
removed (the original DataFrame object is not modified)
del

The following demonstrates using del to delete the BookValue column from
a copy of the sp500 data:

The following uses the .pop() method to remove the Sector column:

The .pop() method has the benefit that it gives us the popped columns.

The .drop() method can be used to remove both rows and columns. To
use it to remove columns, specify axis=1:

Appending new rows
Appending of rows is performed using the .append() method of the
DataFrame. The process of appending returns a new DataFrame with the data
from the original DataFrame added first and then rows from the second.
Appending does not perform alignment and can result in duplicate index
labels.
The following code demonstrates appending two DataFrame objects
extracted from the sp500 data. The first DataFrame consists of rows (by
position) 0, 1 and 2, and the second consists of rows (also by position) 10,
11 and 2. The row at position 2 (with label ABBV) is included in both to
demonstrate the creation of duplicate index labels.

The set of columns of the DataFrame objects used in an append do not
need to be the same. The resulting data frame will consist of the union of
the columns in both, with missing column data filled with NaN. The
following demonstrates this by creating a third data frame using the
same index as df1 but having a single column with a name not in df1.

Now let's append df3 and df1.

The ignore_index=True parameter can be used to append without forcing the
index to be retained from either DataFrame. This is useful when the index
values are not of significant meaning and you just want concatenated
data with sequentially increasing integers as indexes:

Notice that the resulting DataFrame has a default RangeIndex and that the data
from the index (Symbol) is completely excluded from the result.

Concatenating rows
The rows from multiple DataFrame objects can be concatenated to each
other using the pd.concat() function and by specifying axis=0. The default
operation of pd.concat() on two DataFrame objects along the row axis
operates in the same way as the .append() method.
This is demonstrated by reconstructing the two datasets from the earlier
append example and concatenating them instead.

If the set of columns in all DataFrame objects is not identical, pandas will fill
those values with NaN.

Duplicate index labels can result as the rows are copied verbatim from
the source objects. The keys parameter can be used to help differentiate
which data frame a set of rows originated from. The following
demonstrates by using keys to add a level to the index representing the
source object:

We will examine hierarchical indexes in more detail in
Chapter 6, Working with Indexes.

Adding and replacing rows via
enlargement
Rows can also be added to a DataFrame using the .loc property. The
parameter for .loc specifies the index label where the row is to be placed.
If the label does not exist, the values are appended to the data frame
using the given index label. If the label does exist, the values in the
specified row are replaced.
The following example takes a subset of sp500 and adds a row with the
label FOO:

Note that this change is made in place whether is adds or replaces a
row.

Removing rows using .drop()
The .drop() method of the DataFrame can be used to remove rows. The
.drop() method takes a list of index labels to drop and returns a copy of
the DataFrame with the specified rows removed.

Removing rows using Boolean
selection
Boolean selection can also be used to remove rows from a DataFrame. The
result of a Boolean selection will return a copy of rows where the
expression is True. To drop rows, simply construct an expression that
returns False for the rows that are to be dropped and then apply the
expression to the data frame.
The following demonstrates dropping rows where Price is greater than
300. First, construct the expression.

From this result, we now know that there are 10 rows where the price is
greater than 300. To get a data frame with those rows removed, select
the complement of the selection.

Removing rows using a slice
Slicing can be used to remove records from a data frame. It is a process
similar to Boolean selection where we select out all of the rows except
for the ones you want removed.
Suppose we want to remove all but the first three records from sp500. The
slice to perform this task is [:3] which returns the first three rows.

Remember, that since this is a slice, the result is a view into the original
data frame. The rows have not been removed from the sp500 data, and
changes to these three rows will change the data in sp500. The proper
action to prevent this is to make a copy of the slice which results in a
new data frame with the data for the specified rows copied.

Summary
In this chapter, you learned how to do several common data
manipulations using the pandas DataFrame object, specifically ones that
change the structure of the DataFrame by adding or removing rows and
columns. Additionally, we saw how to replace the data in specific rows
and columns.
In the next chapter, we will examine in more detail the use of indexes to
be able to efficiently retrieve data from within pandas objects.

Indexing Data
An index is a tool for optimized look up of values from a series or
DataFrame. They are a lot like a key in a relational database, but more
powerful. They provide the means of alignment for multiple sets of data
and also carry semantics for how to handle various tasks with data
such as resampling to different frequencies.
Much of the modeling that you will perform with pandas depends
critically on how you set up your indexes. A properly implemented index
will optimize performance and be an invaluable tool in driving your
analysis.
We have previously used indexes briefly, and in this chapter, we will
dive quite a bit deeper. During this deep dive, we will learn more about:
The importance of indexes
The types of pandas indexes, including RangeIndex, Int64Index,
CategoricalIndex, Float64Index, Datetimeindex, and PeriodIndex
Setting and resetting an index
Creating hierarchical indexes
Selection of data using hierarchical indexes

Configuring pandas
We start with the standard configuration for pandas but we also load
the S&P 500 data for use in several examples.

The importance of indexes
Pandas indexes allow efficient lookup of values. If indexes did not exist,
a linear search across all of our data would be required. Indexes create
optimized shortcuts to specific data items using a direct lookup instead
of a search process.
To begin examining the value of indexes we will use the following
DataFrame of 10000 random numbers:

Suppose we want to look up the value of the random number where
key==10099 (I explicitly picked this value as it is the last row in the DataFrame).
We can do this using a Boolean selection.

Conceptually, this is simple. But what if we want to do this repeatedly?
This can be simulated in Python using the %timeit statement. The
following code performs the lookup repeatedly and reports on the
performance.

This result states that there are 1,000 executions performed three times,
and the fastest of those three took lookup 0.00535 seconds per loop on
average (a total of 5.35 seconds for that one set of 1,000 loops).
Now let's try this using an index to help us look up the values. The
following code sets the index of this DataFrame to match the values of the
keys column.

And now it is possible to look up this value using .loc[].

That was just one lookup. Let's time it with %timeit.

The lookup using the index is roughly five times faster. Because of this
greater performance, it is normally a best practice to perform lookup by
index whenever possible. The downside of using an index is that it can
take time to construct and also consumes more memory.
Many times, you will inherently know what your indexes should be and
you can just create them upfront and get going with exploration. Other

times, it will take some exploration first to determine the best index. And
often it is possible that you do not have enough data or the proper fields
to create a proper index. In these cases, you may need to use a partial
index that returns multiple semi-ambiguous results and still perform
Boolean selection on that set to get to the desired result.
It is a best practice when performing exploratory data
analysis to first load the data and explore it using queries /
Boolean selection. Then create an index if your data
naturally supports one, or if you do require the increased
speed.

The pandas index types
The pandas provides many built-in indexes. Each of the index types is
designed for optimized lookups based upon a specific data type or
pattern of data. Let's look at several of them that are common used.

The fundamental type - Index
This type of index is the most generic and represents an ordered and
sliceable set of values. The values that it contains must be hashable
Python objects. This is because the index will use this hash to form an
efficient lookup of values associated with the value of that object. While
hash lookup is preferred over linear lookup, there are other types of
indexes that can be further optimized.
It is common that the columns index will be of this generic type. The
following code demonstrates the use of this index type as the columns
of the DataFrame.

While this type of index generally works well for alphanumeric column
names, it is possible to use other types of indexes as the column index if
desired.

Integer index labels using
Int64Index and RangeIndex
The Int64Index represents an immutable array of 64-bit integers that map
to values. Until more recent versions of pandas, this was the default
index type when an index was not specified or integers are used as
seen in the following code snippet:

Using this index, lookups of rows in the DataFrame are highly efficient as
they are performed using a contiguous in-memory array.
Recent versions of pandas added the RangeIndex as an optimization of
Int64Index. It has the ability to represent an integer-based index that
starts at a specific integer value, has an end integer value, and can also
have a step specified.
This use of start, stop, and step was such a common pattern that it
warranted adding its own subclass to pandas. By using these three
values, memory can be conserved and the execution time is in the
same order as in an Int64Index.

has become the default index for pandas objects. This is
demonstrated by the following, which creates a range of integer values
defaulting to a RangeIndex.
RangeIndex

Floating-point labels using
Float64Index
Floating-point numbers can be used as index labels by using a
Float64Index.

Note that this slice returned 11 rows, instead of the first
five. This is because of the Float64Index, and pandas taking
our statement to mean from the beginning to all values up
to 5.0.

Representing discrete intervals
using IntervalIndex
Distinct buckets of labels can be represented using an IntervalIndex. The
interval is closed at one end, either the left or right, meaning that the
value at that end of the interval is included in that interval. The following
code shows the creation of a DataFrame using intervals as an index.

Categorical values as an index CategoricalIndex
A CategoricalIndex is used to represent a sparsely populated index for an
underlying Categorical. The following creates a DataFrame with one
column being a Categorical.

Shifting categorical column (B) into the index of the DataFrame shows that
there is now a CategoricalIndex.

And lookups can then be performed using existing values in the
underlying categorical.

Categoricals will be examined in detail in Chapter 7,
Categorical Data.

Indexing by date and time using
DatetimeIndex
A DatetimeIndex is used to represent a set of dates and times. These are
extensively used in time series data where samples are taken at specific
intervals of time. To briefly demonstrate this, the following code creates
a range of 5-hourly time periods and uses them as the index for this
series.

The type of the index can be seen to be a DatetimeIndex.

The underlying representation of the date/time is a 64-bit integer,
making lookups by date and time very efficient.

Indexing periods of time using
PeriodIndex
It is also important to be able to represent periods such as a day,
month, or year. This is much like an interval but for a period of time.
These scenarios can be modeled by using the PeriodIndex and specifying
a specific frequency for the periods in the index.
The following demonstrates by modeling three 1-month periods starting
from 2017-01.

And this index can then be used within a Series or DataFrame.

Working with Indexes
Having covered creating various types of pandas indexes, let's now
examine several common patterns of use for these indexes.
Specifically, we will examine:
Creating and using an index with a Series or DataFrame
Means of selecting values with an index
Moving data to and from the index
Reindexing a pandas object

Creating and using an index
with a Series or DataFrame
Indexes can either be created explicitly or you can let pandas create
them implicitly. Explicit creation takes place when you assign the index
using the index parameter of a constructor.
The following code demonstrates by first creating a DatetimeIndex
independently.

You can use this index on its own or associate it with a Series or DataFrame.
This code creates a DataFrame utilizing the index.

An index can also be directly assigned to an existing DataFrame or Series
by setting the .index property.

Selecting values using an index
Values can be looked up using an index using the [] operator or by
using the following property indexers of a Series or DataFrame:

.loc[]

Looks up by the label, not the location. But be careful; if the
labels are integers, then integers will be treated as labels!

.at[]

Like .loc[], but this can only retrieve a single value.

.iloc[]

Lookup is based on the 0-based position and not the index
label.

.ix[]

Hybrid, which when given an integer will attempt 0-based
lookup; other types are label-based. This is going to be
deprecated, so stick with the other three properties.

Values can be looked up in a Series by using the [] operator as in the
following DataFrame, which has its b value retrieved.

Lookup using [] on a Series is equivalent to using the .loc[] property.

The [] operator retrieves columns instead of the rows when applied to
DataFrame.

To look up via the row index with a DataFrame, one of the property
indexers must be utilized.

The property indexer forms are also able to use slicing.

And it is also possible to pass a list of values.

Moving data to and from the
index
A DataFrame object can have its index reset by using the .reset_index(). A
common use of this is for moving the contents of a DataFrame object's
index into one or more columns.
The following code moves the symbols in the index of sp500 into a
column and replaces the index with a default integer index.

A column of data can be moved to the index of a DataFrame object using
the .set_index() method and by specifying the column to be moved. The
following code moves the Sector column to the index.

It is possible to move multiple columns to the index, forming a
hierarchical/multi-index. Hierarchical indexes will be covered later in the
chapter.

Reindexing a pandas object
A DataFrame can be reindexed using the .reindex() method. Reindexing
makes the DataFrame conform to the new index, aligning data from the old
index with the new and filling in NaN where alignment fails.
This code demonstrates re-indexing the sp500 to the three specified
index labels.

This process creates a new DataFrame with specified rows. If a row is not
found for a specific value, then NaN values are inserted as is seen with
the 'FOO' label. This method is actually a good technique of filtering out
data based on the index labels.
Reindexing can also be done upon columns, as demonstrated by the
following code for the specified three column names:

values are inserted for NewCol as it was not present in the original
data.
NaN

Hierarchical indexing
Hierarchical indexing is a feature of pandas that allows the combined
use of two or more indexes per row. Each of the indexes in a
hierarchical index is referred to as a level. The specification of multiple
levels in an index allows for efficient selection of different subsets of
data using different combinations of the values at each level.
Technically, a pandas index that has multiple levels of hierarchy is
referred to as a MultiIndex.
The following code demonstrates creating and accessing data via a
MultiIndex using the sp500 data. Suppose we want to organize this data by
both the values of Sector and Symbol so that we can efficiently look up data
based on a combination of values from both variables. We can
accomplish this with the following code, which moves the Sector and
Symbol values into a MultiIndex:

The .index property now shows that the index is a MultiIndex object:

As stated, a MultiIndex object contains two or more levels, two in this
case:

Each level is a distinct Index object:

The values of the index itself, at a specific level for every row, can be
retrieved by the .get_level_values() method:

Access to values in the DataFrame object via a hierarchical index is
performed using the .xs() method. This method works similar to the .ix
attribute but provides parameters to specify the multidimensionality of
the index.
The following code selects all items with a level 0 (Sector) index label of
Industrials:

The index of the resulting DataFrame consists of the levels that were not
specified, in this case, Symbol. The levels for which values were specified
are dropped from the resulting index.
The level parameter can be used to select the rows with a specific value
of the index at the specified level. The following code selects rows
where the Symbol component of the index is ALLE.

To prevent levels from being dropped (if you don't specify each level),
you can use the drop_levels=False option.

To select from a hierarchy of indexes, you can chain .xs() calls with
different levels together. The following selects the row with Industrials at
level 0 and UPS at level 1.

An alternate syntax is to pass the values of each level of the
hierarchical index as a tuple.

Note that .xs() can only be used for getting and not for setting values.

Summary
In this chapter, we took a deeper dive into using indexes in pandas to
organize and retrieve data. We examined many of the useful types of
indexes and how they can be used with different types of data to
efficiently access values without needing to query data in the rows. And
we concluded with an examination of using hierarchical indexes to be
able to efficiently retrieve data that match to labels in multiple indexes,
giving us a powerful means of being able to select subsets of data.
At this point, we have covered much of the basic modeling portion of
pandas. In the next chapter, we will examine to to represent categorical
variable with pandas.

Categorical Data
A categorical variable is a type of variable in statistics that represents a
limited and often fixed set of values. This is in contrast to continuous
variables, which can represent an infinite number of values. Common
types of categorical variables include gender (where there are two
values, male and female) or blood types (which can be one of the small
sets of types of blood, such as A, B, and O).
pandas has the ability to represent Categorical variables using a type of
pandas object known as Categorical. These pandas objects are designed
to efficiently represent data that is grouped into a set of buckets, each
represented by an integer code that represents one of the categories.
The use of these underlying codes gives pandas the ability to efficiently
represent sets of categories and to perform ordering and comparisons
of data across multiple categorical variables.
During this chapter, we will learn the following about Categoricals:
Creating Categoricals
Renaming categories
Appending new categories
Removing categories
Removing unused categories
Setting categories
Descriptive statistics
Value counts
Minimum, maximum, and mode
How to use a Categorical to assign letter grades to students based
on their numeric grade

Configuring pandas
We start the examples in this chapter using the following imports and
configuration statements:

Creating Categoricals
A pandas Categorical is used to represent a categorical variable. A
categorical variable consists of a finite set of values and is often used to
map values into a set of categories and track how many values are
present in each category. Another purpose is to map sections of
continuous values into a discrete set of named labels, an example of
which is mapping a numeric grade to a letter grade. We will examine
how to perform this mapping at the end of the chapter.
There are several ways to create a pandas Categorical. The following
screenshot demonstrates creating a Categorical directly from a list:

This Categorical is created from a list consisting of five strings and three
distinct values: low, medium, and high. When creating the Categorical,
pandas determines each unique value in the list and uses those as the
categories.
These categories can be examined using the .categories property:

The Categorical has created an index consisting of the three distinct
values in the provided list.
The values of the Categorical can be retrieved using .get_values():

Each category of the Categorical is assigned an integer value. This
value is referred to as a code. These assigned codes can be accessed
with the .codes property.

These codes effectively represent the position in the categoricals index
for each value. In this case, the mapping is low = 1, high = 0, and
medium = 2. This ordering perhaps does not make logical sense and
was determined by pandas by serially processing strings in the lmh_values
array.
This ordering can be better controlled by specifying the categories using
the categories parameter.

Note the new order of the categories, as specified in the constructor.
Because of this ordering, the codes are now:

This now represents a mapping of low = 0, medium = 1, and high = 2.
This is more useful, as it can be used to sort values in an order that
matches the meaning of each category and their relation to the other
categories. When sorting a Categorical, the sorting will be performed
using the codes and not the actual value. The following demonstrates
sorting of lmh_cat:

A categorical variable can also be represented as a series whose dtype is
specified as "category". The following screenshot demonstrates taking an
array of categories and creating a Series with a dtype category:

Another way of creating a Series with a Categorical is to first create the
Series and then convert one column into a Categorical using the
.astype('category') method. The following screenshot demonstrates this by
creating a data frame with the values in one column, and then a second
column with the values converted to a Categorical:

A series that is created as a Categorical contains a .cat property that
allows access to the Categorical used by the Series:

The variable is a CategoricalAccessor object that allows access to various
properties of the underlying Categorical. As an example, the following

code gets the categories:

Several pandas functions also return Categoricals. One is pd.cut(), which
creates bins of objects within specific ranges of values. The following
screenshot demonstrates cutting a series of values that represent 5
random numbers between 0 and 100 into 10 Categorical bins, each 10
integers wide:

The Group column represents a categorical variable, as created by the cut
function, and the value at each index level represents the specific
category the value has been associated with.

An explicit ordering of the categories can be specified using ordered = True.
This information means that the ordering of the categories is significant
and allows for the comparison of values in multiple series of categorical
variables. To demonstrate this, the following code create an ordered
Categorical representing three metals (and four values from those three
categories):

The Categorical that is created has a strict ordering of bronze as less
valuable than silver and silver as less valuable than gold.
This ordering can be used to sort or compare one Categorical to
another. To demonstrate this, let's create the following Categorical,
which reverses the values:

These two categorical variables can be compared with each other. The
following code shows whether each metal is less valuable than the
corresponding metal at the same index label in the other Categorical:

This comparison is performed by pandas by matching the underlying
code for each value. The metals variable has these codes:

And metals_reveresed_values has the following codes.

Application of the logical operator results in the previously shown result.
As a final example of creating a Categorical, the following screenshot
demonstrates creating a Categorical that specifies a value (copper) that is
not one of the specified categories. In this case, pandas will substitute
NaN for that value.

This technique can be used to filter out values that don't fit within the
Categorical at the time of creation.

Renaming categories
A Categorical can have values renamed by assigning new values to the
.categories property or using the .rename_categories() method.

Note that this was an in-place modification. To prevent an in-place
modification, we can use the .rename_categories() method.

We can verify that this was not done in-place.

Appending new categories
Categories can be appended by using the .add_categories() method. The
following code adds a copper category to our metals. This is not done inplace unless pandas is explicitly told to do so:

Removing categories
Categories can be removed by using the .remove_categories() method.
Values that are removed are replaced by np.NaN. The following
screenshot demonstrates this by removing the bronze category:

Removing unused categories
Unused categories can be removed by using .remove_unused_categories(), as
follows:

Setting categories
It is also possible to add and remove categories in one step using the
.set_categories() method. Given the following Series:

The following code sets the categories to "one" and "four":

The result has NaN replacing for the categories that now do not exist.

Descriptive information of a
Categorical
The .describe() method on a Categorical will produce descriptive statistics
in a manner similar to Series or DataFrame.

The result gives us the number of instances of each category and the
frequency distribution of each.
The count of values for each category can be obtained using
.value_counts().

And the min, max, and mode values are found using the respective
methods.

Munging school grades
Now let's look at applying Categoricals to help us organize information
based on categories instead of numbers. The problem we will examine
is assigning a letter grade to a student based on their numeric grade.

This data frame represents the raw score for each of the students. Next,
we break down numeric grades into letter codes. The following code
defines the bins for each grade and the associated letter grade for each
bin:

Using these values, we can perform a cut that assigns the letter grade.

Examining the underlying Categorical shows how the following code was
created and how the letter grades are related in value:

To determine how many students received each grade, we can use
.cat.value_counts():

Since the letter grade Categorical has a logical ordering for the letter
grades, we can use it to order the students from highest to lowest letter
grade by sorting on the Categorical column.

Summary
In this chapter, we examined how to model categorical variables using
pandas Categoricals. We started with a review of the ways to create
Categoricals and also looked at several examples of how to utilize
underlying integer codes to classify each category. We then examined
several means of modifying a categorical once it has been created. The
chapter closed with an example of using a categorical to break data
into a set of named bins.
In the next chapter, we examine performing numerical and statistical
analysis on pandas data.

Numerical and Statistical
Methods
pandas is extremely powerful for modeling and manipulating data, but it
also provides many powerful tools for numerical and statistical analysis.
These capabilities are tightly integrated with pandas data structures
and thereby make complex calculations very simple once the data is
modeled.
This chapter will examine many of these capabilities. It starts with
common numerical methods such as arithmetic with alignment across
multiple objects, as well as finding specific values such as minimums
and maximums. We then will look at many of the statistical capabilities
of pandas, such as working with quantiles, ranking of values, variance,
correlation, and many others.
Last but not least, we will examine a very powerful capability provided
in pandas known as the rolling window. Rolling windows provide a
means of applying various methods such mean calculation across
regular subsets of data. These types of operations are essential in
various analyses such as determining several characteristics of stock
data as it changes across time. The concept will be introduced in this
chapter, and we will cover it in much more detail in later chapters.
There's a lot to cover in this chapter, including:
Performing arithmetical operations on pandas objects
Getting the counts of values
Determining unique values (and their counts)
Finding the minimum and maximum values
Locating the n-smallest and n-largest values
Calculating accumulated values
Retrieving summary descriptive statistics

Measuring central tendency (the mean, median, and mode)
Calculating variance, standard deviation, covariance, and
correlation
Performing discretization and quantiling of data
Calculating the rank of values
Calculating the percentage change at each sample in a series
Performing moving window operations
Executing random sampling of data

Configuring pandas
We will start with the following configuration of the environment, using
our standard import and configuration of pandas. In addition to the
normal imports and formatting, we will also import the S&P 500 data
and the monthly stock data:

Performing numerical methods
on pandas objects
pandas provides a rich set of functions and operations that facilitate the
ability to perform arithmetic operations and to calculate various
numerical characteristics of data. In this section, we will examine many
of these, including:
Performing arithmetic on a DataFrame or Series
Getting the counts of values
Determining unique values (and their counts)
Finding minimum and maximum values
Locating the n-smallest and n-largest values
Calculating accumulated values

Performing arithmetic on a
DataFrame or Series
Arithmetic operations can be performed on a DataFrame (and Series)
using the +, -, /, and * operators. While these may seem trivial in nature,
pandas adds a powerful twist by performing alignment of the values on
the left and right sides of the equations. Hence indexes play a big part
in arithmetic, and how this affects the results needs to be understood by
the user of pandas.
Additionally, pandas not only provides the standard operators for
arithmetic but also provides several methods, .add(), .sub(), .mul(), and
.div() , that provide higher performance and greater flexibility in
specifying the axes on which to apply the function.
Arithmetic operations using a scalar value will be applied to every
element of a DataFrame. To demonstrate, we begin with the following
DataFrame of four columns of random numbers:

By default, any arithmetic operation will be applied across all rows and
columns of a DataFrame. This will result in a new DataFrame object
containing the results (leaving the original unchanged):

When performing an operation between a DataFrame and a Series, pandas
will align the Series index along the DataFrame columns, performing what is
referred to as a row-wise broadcast. This is perhaps a little bit counterintuitive, but it is quite powerful in applying different values in each
column on a row-by-row basis.
To demonstrate, the following example retrieves the first row of the
DataFrame and then subtracts this from each row, essentially resulting in
the difference in value of each row from the first:

This process also works when reversing the order by subtracting the
DataFrame from the Series object as pandas is smart enough to figure out
the proper application:

The set of columns resulting from an arithmetic operation will be the
union of the labels in the index of both the series and the columns index
of the DataFrame object (as per alignment rules). If a label representing the
result column is not found in either the Series or the DataFrame object, then
the values will be filled with NaN. The following code demonstrates this by
creating a Series with an index that represents a subset of the columns
in the DataFrame, but with an additional label:

pandas aligns the index labels of df with those of s2. Since s2 does not
have an A or D label in the columns, the result contains NaN in those
columns. And since df does not have an E label, it is also filled with NaN
(even though E existed in the Series).
An arithmetic operation between two DataFrame objects will align by both
the column and index labels. The following code extracts a small
portion of df and subtracts it from the full DataFrame. The result
demonstrates that the aligned values subtract to 0 while the others are
set to NaN:

Additional control of an arithmetic operation can be gained using the
arithmetic methods provided by the DataFrame object. These methods
provide the specification of a specific axis. The following code
demonstrates subtraction of the A column values from those in every
column:

Getting the counts of values
The .count() method gives us the count of the non-NaN items in a Series.

Determining unique values (and
their counts)
A list of unique values in a Series can be obtained using .unique():

The number of unique values (excluding NaN) can be obtained using
.nunique():

To include NaN in the result, use dropna=False as a parameter.

The count of each unique value can be determined using .value_counts()
(a process also known as Histogramming):

Finding minimum and maximum
values
The minimum and maximum values can be determined using .min() and
.max().

Some pandas statistical methods are referred to as indirect statistics as
they don't return actual values but an indirect, related value. For
example, .idxmin() and .idxmax() return the index position where the
minimum and maximum value exist.

Locating the n-smallest and nlargest values
Sometime we need to know the n-smallest and n-largest values in a
dataset. These can be found using .nsmallest() and .nlargest(). The
following code demonstrates this by returning the 4-smallest values for
MSFT.

And likewise, the 4-largest values.

The form for a series is slightly different since there are no columns to
specify.

Calculating accumulated values
Accumulations are statistical methods that determine a value by
continuously applying the next value in a Series to the running result.
Good examples are the cumulative product and cumulative sum of a
Series. The following code demonstrates the calculation of a cumulative
product.

The result is another Series that represents the accumulated value at
each position. Here is the calculation of the cumulative sum of the same
Series.

Performing statistical
processes on pandas objects
Descriptive statistics gives us the ability to understand numerous
measures of data that describe a specific characteristic of the
underlying data. Built into pandas are several classes of these
descriptive statistical operations that can be applied to a Series or
DataFrame.
Let's examine several facets of statistical analysis / techniques
provided by pandas:
Summary descriptive statistics
Measuring central tendency: mean, median, and mode
Variance and standard deviation

Retrieving summary descriptive
statistics
pandas objects provide the .describe() method, which returns a set of
summary statistics of the object's data. When applied to a DataFrame,
.describe() will calculate the summary statistics for each column. The
following code calculates these statistics for both stocks in omh.

With one quick method call, we have calculated the count, mean,
standard deviation, minimum, and maximum values, and even the 25,
50, and 75 percentiles for both series of stock data.
can also be applied to a Series. The following code calculates
summary statistics for just MSFT.
.describe()

And only the mean can be obtained as follows.

Non-numerical data will result in a slightly different set of summary
statistics, returning the total number of items (count), the count of unique
values (unique), most frequently occurring value (top), and the number of
times it appears (freq):

Measuring central tendency:
mean, median, and mode
Mean and median give us several useful measurements of data that
help us begin to understand the distribution of values and also the
shape of that distribution. The relationship of these three values gives
us a quick summary concept of the shape, as shown in the following
diagram:

Now let's examine how to find each of these values using pandas.

Calculating the mean
The mean, commonly referred to as the average, gives us a
measurement of the central tendency of data. It is determined by
summing up all the measurements and then dividing by the number of
measurements.
The mean can calculated using .mean(). The following code calculates
the average of the prices for AAPL and MSFT:

Pandas has taken each column and independently calculated the mean
for each. It returned the results as values in a Series that is indexed
with the column names. The default is to apply the method on axis=0,
applying the function to each column. This code switches the axis and
returns the average price for all stocks on each day:

Finding the median
The median gives us the central position in a series of values. By
definition, the median is the value in the data where there are an equal
number of other values that are both less and greater than it. The
median is important as it is less influenced by outlying values and
asymmetric data than the mean.
The median of the values is determined using the .median():

Determining the mode
The mode is the most common value of a Series and is found with
.mode(). The following code determines the mode of the given Series:

Note that this has not returned a scalar value representing the mode,
but a Series. This is because there can be more than one value for the
mode of a Series. This is demonstrated with the following example:

Calculating variance and
standard deviation
In probability theory and statistics, standard deviation and variance give
us a feel of how far some numbers are spread out from their mean.
Let's briefly examine each.

Measuring variance
Variance gives us a feel for the overall amount of spread of the values
from the mean. It is defined as follows:

Essentially, this is stating that for each measurement, we calculate the
value of the difference between the value and the mean. This can be a
positive or negative value, so we square the result to make sure that
negative values have cumulative effects on the result. These values are
then summed up and divided by the number of measurements minus 1,
giving an approximation of the average value of the differences.
In pandas, the variance is calculated using the .var() method. The
following code calculates the variance of the price for both stocks:

Finding the standard deviation
Standard deviation is a similar measurement to variance. It is
determined by calculating the square root of the variance and is defined
as follows:

Remember that the variance squares the difference between all
measurements and the mean. Because of this, the variance is not in the
same units and the actual values. By using the square root of the
variance, the standard deviation is in the same units as the values in
the original dataset.
The standard deviation is calculated using the .std() method as is
demonstrated here:

Determining covariance and
correlation
Covariance and correlation describe how two variables are related.
This relation can be one of the following:
Variables are positively related if they move in the same direction.
Variables are inversely related if they move in opposite directions.
Both covariance and correlation indicate whether variables are
positively or inversely related. Correlation also tells you the degree to
which the variables tend to move together.

Calculating covariance
Covariance indicates how two variables are related. A positive
covariance means the variables are positively related, while a negative
covariance means they are inversely related:

Covariance can be calculated using the .cov() method. The following
code calculates the covariance between MSFT and AAPL:

Determining correlation
Covariance can help determine whether values are related, but it does
not give a sense of the degree to which the variables move together. To
measure the degree to which variables move together, we need to
calculate the correlation. Correlation is calculated by dividing the
covariance by the product of the standard deviations of both sets of
data:

Correlation standardizes the measure of interdependence between two
variables and consequently tells you how closely the two variables
move. The correlation measurement, called correlation coefficient, will
always take a value between 1 and -1 and the interpretation of this
value is as follows:
If the correlation coefficient is 1.0, the variables have a perfect
positive correlation. This means that if one variable moves by a
given amount, the second moves proportionally in the same
direction. A positive correlation coefficient of less than 1.0 but
greater than 0.0 indicates a less-than-perfect positive correlation,
with the strength of the correlation growing as the number
approaches 1.0.
If the correlation coefficient is 0.0, no relationship exists between
the variables. If one variable moves, you can make no predictions
about the movement of the other variable.
If the correlation coefficient is -1.0, the variables are perfectly
negatively correlated (or inversely correlated) and move opposite
to each other. If one variable increases, the other variable
decreases proportionally. A negative correlation coefficient greater
than -1.0 but less than 0.0 indicates a less-than-perfect negative

correlation, with the strength of the correlation growing as the
number approaches -1.
Correlations in pandas are calculated using the .corr() method. The
following code calculates the correlation of MSFT to AAPL.

This shows that the prices for MSFT and APPL during this period
demonstrate a high level of correlation. This does not mean that they
are causal, with one affecting the other, but that there are likely shared
influences on the values, such as being in similar markets.

Performing discretization and
quantiling of data
Discretization is a means of slicing up continuous data into a set of
"bins." Each value is then associated with a representative bin. The
resulting distribution of the count of values in each bin can then be used
to get an understanding of relative distribution of data across the
different bins.
Discretization in pandas is performed using the pd.cut() and pd.qcut()
functions. To demonstrate, let's start with the following set of 10000
random numbers created with a normal random number generator:

This code shows us the mean and standard deviation of this dataset,
which we expect to approach 0 and 1 as the sample size of the dataset
increases (because it is normal):

We can split the numbers into equally sized bins using pd.cut(). The
following code creates five evenly sized bins and determines the
mapping of values:

The resulting bins object is a pandas Categorical variable. It consists of
a set of labels and an index that describes how the data has been split.
The .categories property will return the index and specify the intervals
that pandas decided upon, given the range of values and the number of
bins that was specified:

The .codes property is an array that specifies which of the bins (intervals)
each item has been assigned:

The notation for the intervals follows standard mathematical intervals,
where a parenthesis represents that the end is open, while square
brackets represent closed. Closed ends include values at that exact
number. By default, pandas closes the right-hand side of the interval.
The closed end can be moved to the left-hand side of the interval using
the right=False parameter of pd.cut():

Instead of passing an integer number of bins to cut data into, you can
pass an array of values that represent the extent of the bins. A common
example of this involves mapping ages into age range buckets. To
demonstrate this, the following code generates 50 ages between 6 and
45:

We can specify ranges for the bins by passing them in an array where
adjacent values represent the extent of each bin. This code cuts the
data into the specified bins and reports the distribution of the ages
found in each bin.

To specify a name for each bin that is different from the standard
mathematical notation, use the labels parameter:

This assignment of labels is convenient not only for
textual output but also when plotting the bins as pandas
will pass the bin names to be plotted on a chart.
Data can also be sliced according to specified quantiles using pd.qcut().
This function will cut the values into bins such that each bin has the
same number of items. From this result, we can determine the extent of
the bins where the counts of values are evenly distributed.
The following code splits the random values from before into 5 quantile
bins:

Instead of specifying an integer number of bins, it is also possible to
specify the quantile ranges. The following code allocates bins based on
plus and minus 3, 2, and 1 standard deviations. As this is normally
distributed data, we would expect 0.1 percent, 2.1 percent, 13.6
percent, and 34.1 percent of the values on each side of the mean.

These are exactly the results we expect from this distribution.

Calculating the rank of values
Ranking helps us determine whether one of two items is ranked higher
or ranked lower than another. Ranking reduces measures into a
sequence of ordinal numbers that can be used to evaluate complex
criteria bask on the resulting order.
To demonstrate ranking, we will use the following series of data:

These values can then be ranked using .rank(), which by default tells us
the ordering of the labels from lowest value to highest value:

The result represents the order of the values numerically from smallest
to largest (essentially, a sort). The lowest is d at 1.0 (which had the
lowest value at -0.555730) and moving upwards in rank to e at 5.0 (a
value of 1.965781).
There are a number of options that you can use to
change this default behavior, such as specifying a custom

ranking function and how to decide a ranking when there
is a tie.

Calculating the percent change
at each sample of a series
The percentage change over a given number of periods can be
calculated using the .pct_change() method. A sample use for percentage
change is in calculating the rate of change of price of a stock. The
following code shows this for MSFT:

Performing moving-window
operations
Pandas provides a number of functions to compute moving (also known
as rolling) statistics. A rolling window computes the specified statistic on
a specified interval of data. The window is then moved along the data by
a specific interval and recalculated. The process continues until the
window has been rolled across the entire dataset.
To demonstrate this, we will start with a series of 1000 random numbers
that are cumulatively summed to form a random walk:

Zooming in on the first 100 values, we can see the movement of the data
with the following plot:

To start creating a rolling window, we create a Rolling object using the
.rolling() method with a specified window. In this case, we want to create

a rolling window of 3:

This rolling object specifies how wide we want the window to be but it
has not performed the actual calculations. To do so, we can select one
of the many methods of the rolling object representing the statistical
operation to apply (a few of which are shown the in following image):

This code demonstrates calculating the rolling mean across the data:

Since our window size is N=3, the first mean in the result is at index
label 2. We can verify that this value is the mean of the first three
numbers:

The window then rolls by one interval along the data. The next value
calculated is at label 3 and represents the mean of values at labels 1, 2
and 3:

Plotting the result of a rolling mean on the first 100 values gives us this:

It can be seen by comparing this plot to the previous one that the rolling
mean smoothens data across intervals.

Executing random sampling of
data
Random sampling is a process of selecting values from a data sample at
random positions. From pandas 0.19.2 on, this functionality has been
added to the pandas Series and DataFrame objects, whereas in previous
versions, you had to code this process on your own.
To demonstrate random sampling, let's start with the following DataFrame,
representing four columns of 50 rows of random numbers:

We can take a sample of the data using the .sample() method while
specifying the number of samples to retrieve. The following code
samples three random rows:

An alternative form is to specify a percentage of the data to randomly
select. This code selects 10 percent of the rows.

Sampling in pandas can be performed with or without replacement, with
the default being without replacement. To specify that we would like to
use replacement, we simply use the replace=True parameter:

Summary
In this chapter, you learned how to perform numerical and statistical
analyses on pandas objects. This included examination of many
commonly used methods that will be used in calculating values and
performing various analyses. We started with basic arithmetical
operations and how data alignment factors into the operation and
results. Then we covered many of the statistical operations provided in
pandas, ranging from descriptive statistics to discretization through to
rolling windows and random sampling. These lessons will set you up
well for performing many real-world data analyses.
In the next chapter, we will change gears and look into how to load data
from various data sources such as local files, databases, and remote
web services.

Accessing Data
In almost any real-world data analysis, you need to load data from
outside your program. Since pandas is built on Python, you can use any
means available in Python to retrieve data. This makes it possible to
access data from an almost unlimited set of sources, including but not
limited to files, Excel spreadsheets, websites and services, databases,
and cloud services.
However, when using standard Python functions to load data, you need
to convert Python objects into pandas Series or DataFrame objects. This
increases the complexity of your code. To help with managing this
complexity, pandas offers a number of facilities to load data from
various sources directly into pandas objects. We will examine many of
these in this chapter.
Specifically, in this chapter, we will cover:
Reading a CSV file into a DataFrame
Specifying the index column when reading a CSV file
Data type inference and specification
Specifying column names
Specifying specific columns to load
Saving data to a CSV file
Working with general field-delimited data
Handling variants of formats in field-delimited data
Reading and writing data in Excel format
Reading and writing JSON files
Reading HTML data from the web
Reading and writing HDF5 format files
Reading and writing from/to SQL databases
Reading stock data from Yahoo! and Google Finance
Reading options data from Google Finance
Reading economic data from the FRED of St. Louis

Accessing Kenneth French's data
Accessing World Bank data

Configuring pandas
We start with the standard imports and options for pandas to facilitate
the examples.

Working with CSV and
text/tabular format data
CSV formatted data is likely to be one of the most common forms of
data you may use in pandas. Many web-based services provide data in
a CSV format, as well as many information systems within an
enterprise. It is an easy format to use and is commonly used as an
export format for spreadsheet applications such as Excel.
A CSV is a file consisting of multiple lines of text-based data, with
values separated by commas. It can be thought of as a table of data
similar to a single sheet in a spreadsheet program. Each row of the
data is in its own line in the file, and each column for each row is stored
in text format, with a comma separating the data in each column.
For more details on the specifics of CSV files, feel free to
visit http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Comma-separated_values.
As CSV is so common and easily understood, we will spend most of the
time describing how to read and write pandas data in this format.
Lessons learned from CSV methods will apply to the other formats as
well, and allow a little more expediency when covering these other
formats.

Examining the sample CSV data
set
We will start by reading a simple CSV file, data/msft.csv (in the book's
source data folder). This file is a snapshot of stock values for the MSFT
ticker. The first several lines of this file can be examined using the !head
command (on a Windows system, use the type command):

The first row of the file contains the names of all the columns
represented in the data, each separated with a comma. Each row then
represents a sampling of the values on the specific date.

Reading a CSV file into a
DataFrame
The data in data/MSFT.CSV is perfect to read into DataFrame. All its data is
complete and has column names in the first row. All that we need to do
to read this data into DataFrame is to use the pandas pd.read_csv() function:

Wow, that was easy! Pandas has realized that the first line of the file
contains the names of the columns and bulk read in the data to
DataFrame.

Specifying the index column
when reading a CSV file
In the previous example, the index is numerical, starting from 0, instead
of by date. This is because pandas does not assume that any specific
column in the file should be used as the index. To help this situation,
you can specify which column(s) should be the index in the call to
read_csv() using the index_col parameter by assigning it the zero-based
position of the column to be used as the index.
The following reads the data and tells pandas to use the column at
position 0 in the file as the index (the Date column):

Data type inference and
specification
An examination of the types of each column shows that pandas has
attempted to infer the types of the columns from their content:

To force the types of columns, use the dtypes parameter of pd.read_csv().
The following forces the Volume column to also be float64:

Specifying column names
It is also possible to specify the column names at the time of reading the
data, by using the names parameter:

Since we specified the names of the columns, we need to skip over the
'column names' row in the file, which was performed with header=0. If not
done, pandas will assume that the first row is part of the data, which will
cause some issues later in processing.

Specifying specific columns to
load
It is also possible to specify which columns to load when reading the
file. This can be useful if you have a lot of columns in the file and some
are of no interest to your analysis, and you want to save the time and
memory required to read and store them. Specifying which columns to
read is accomplished with the usecols parameter, which can be passed a
list of column names or column offsets.
To demonstrate, the following reads only the Date and Close columns, and
uses Date as the index:

Saving DataFrame to a CSV file
CSV files can be saved from DataFrame using the .to_csv() method. To
demonstrate saving data to a CSV file, we will save the df2 object with
the revised column names to a new file named data/msft_modified.csv:

It is necessary to tell the method that the index label should be saved
with the column name of date using index_label='date'. Otherwise, the
index does not have a name added to the first row of the file, which will
make it difficult to read back properly.
To examine that this worked properly, we can explore the new file to
view some of its content using the !head command (and if on a Windows
system, use the !type command):

Working with general fielddelimited data
CSV is actually a specific implementation of what is referred to as fielddelimited data. In field-delimited data, items in each row are separated
by a specific symbol. In the case of CSV, it happens to be a comma.
However, other symbols are common, such as the | (pipe) symbol. When
using a | character, the data is often called pipe-delimited data.
Pandas provides the pd.read_table() function to facilitate reading fielddelimited data. The following example uses this function to read the
data/MSFT.CSV file b y specifying a comma as the value to the sep parameter:

Pandas does not provide a .to_table() method as an analogous write
method to .to_csv(). However, the .to_csv() method can be used to write
field-delimited data using a different delimiter than a comma. As an
example, the following writes a pipe-delimited version of the data:

Handling variants of formats in
field-delimited data
Data in a field-delimited file may contain extraneous headers and
footers. Examples include company information at the top, such as an
invoice number, addresses, and summary footers. There are also cases
where data is stored on every other line. These situations will cause
errors when loading data like this. To handle these scenarios, the
pandas pd.read_csv() and pd.read_table() methods have some useful
parameters to help us out.
To demonstrate, take the following variation on the MSFT stock data, which
has extra rows of what can be referred to as noise information:

This situation can be handled using the skiprows parameter, which informs
pandas to skip rows 0, 2, and 3:

Another common situation is where a file has content at the end of the
file, which should be ignored to prevent an error. Take the following data
as an example:

This file will cause an exception during reading, but it can be handled
using the skip_footer parameter, which specifies how many lines at the
end of the file to ignore:

Note that we had to specify engine = 'python'. At least with
Anaconda, without this option a warning is given, as this
option is not implemented by the default underlying C
implementation. This forces it to use a Python
implementation.
Suppose the file is large and you only want to read the first few rows, as
you only want the data at the start of the file and do not want to read it all
into the memory. This can be handled with the nrows parameter:

You can also skip a specific number of rows at the start of a file and read
to the end, or you can read just a few lines once you get to that point in
the file. To do this, use the skiprows parameter. The following example
skips 100 rows and then reads in the next 5:

The preceding example also skipped reading the header
line, so it was necessary to inform the process to not look
for a header and to use the specified names.

Reading and writing data in
Excel format
Pandas supports reading data in Excel 2003 and newer formats, using
the pd.read_excel() function or via the ExcelFile class. Internally, both
techniques use either the XLRD or OpenPyXL packages, so you will need to
ensure that one of them is installed in your Python environment.
For demonstration, a data/stocks.xlsx file is provided with the sample data.
If you open it in Excel, you will see something similar to what is shown in
the following screenshot:

The workbook contains two sheets, msft and aapl, which hold the stock
data for each respective stock.
The following then reads the data/stocks.xlsx file into a DataFrame:

This has read only content from the first worksheet in the Excel file (the
msft worksheet), and has used the contents of the first row as column
names. To read the other worksheet, you can pass the name of the
worksheet using the sheetname parameter:

Like with pd.read_csv(), many assumptions are made about column
names, data types, and indexes. All the options we covered for
pd.read_csv() to specify this information, also apply to the pd.read_excel()
function.
Excel files can be written using the .to_excel() method of DataFrame. Writing
to the XLS format requires the inclusion of the XLWT package, so make
sure it is loaded in your Python environment before trying.
The following writes the data we just acquired to stocks2.xls. The default
is to store DataFrame in the Sheet1 worksheet:

Opening this in Excel shows you the following:

You can specify the name of the worksheet using the sheet_name
parameter:

In Excel, we can see that the sheet has been named MSFT:

To write more than one DataFrame to a single Excel file using each DataFrame
object on a separate worksheet, use the ExcelWriter object along with the
with keyword. ExcelWriter is part of pandas, but you will need to make sure
it is imported, as it is not in the top-level namespace of pandas. The

following writes two DataFrame objects to two different worksheets in one
Excel file:

We can see that there are two worksheets in the Excel file:

Writing to XLSX files uses the same function, but specifies .XLSX as the
file extension:

Reading and writing JSON files
Pandas can read and write data stored in the JavaScript Object
Notation (JSON) format. This is one of my favorites, due to its ability to
be used across platforms and with many programming languages.
To demonstrate saving as JSON, we will first save the Excel data we
just read into a JSON file and examine the contents:

JSON-based data can be read with the pd.read_json() function:

Note the two slight differences here, caused by the reading/writing of
data from JSON. First, the columns have been reordered alphabetically.
Second, the index for DataFrame, although containing content, is sorted as
a string. These issues can be fixed easily, but they will not be covered
here for brevity.

Reading HTML data from the
web
Pandas has support for reading data from HTML files (or HTML from
URLs). Underneath the covers, pandas makes use of the LXML, Html5Lib,
and BeautifulSoup4 packages. These packages provide some impressive
capabilities for reading and writing HTML tables.
Your default installation of Anaconda may not include these packages. If
you get errors using this function, install the appropriate library based on
the error, using the Anaconda Navigator:

Else, you can use pip:

The pd.read_html() function will read HTML from a file (or URL) and parse
all HTML tables found in the content into one or more pandas DataFrame
objects. The function always returns a list of DataFrame objects (actually,
zero or more, depending on the number of tables found in the HTML).
To demonstrate, we will read table data from the FDIC failed bank list,
located at https://www.fdic.gov/bank/individual/failed/banklist.html. Viewing the page,
you can see there is a list of quite a few failed banks.
This data is actually very simple to read with pandas and its pd.read_html()
function:

Again, that was almost too easy!
A DataFrame can be written to an HTML file with the .to_html() method. This
method creates a file containing only the <table> tag for the data (not the

entire HTML document). The following writes the stock data we read
earlier to an HTML file:

Viewing this in the browser looks like what is shown in the following
screenshot:

This is useful, as you can use pandas to write HTML fragments to be
included in websites, update them when needed, and thereby have the
new data available to the site statically instead of through a more
complicated data query or service call.

Reading and writing HDF5
format files
HDF5 is a data model, library, and file format to store and manage data.
It is commonly used in scientific computing environments. It supports an
unlimited variety of data types, and is designed for flexible and efficient
I/O, and for high volume and complex data.
HDF5 is portable and extensible, allowing applications to evolve in their
use of HDF5. The HDF5 Technology Suite includes tools and
applications to manage, manipulate, view, and analyze data in the HDF5
format. HDF5 is:
A versatile data model that can represent very complex data
objects and a wide variety of metadata
A completely portable file format with no limit on the number or size
of data objects in the collection
A software library that runs on a range of computational platforms,
from laptops to massively parallel systems, and implements a highlevel API with C, C++, Fortran 90, and Java interfaces
A rich set of integrated performance features that allow for access
time and storage space optimizations
Tools and applications to manage, manipulate, view, and analyze
the data in the collection
is a hierarchical, dictionary-like object that reads and writes
pandas objects to the HDF5 format. Under the covers, HDFStore uses the
PyTables library, so make sure that it is installed if you want to use this
format.
HDFStore

The following demonstrates writing DataFrame into an HDF5 format. The
output shows that the HDF5 store has a root level object named df,
which is a DataFrame and whose shape is eight rows of three columns:

The following reads the HDF5 store and retrieves a DataFrame:

A DataFrame is written to the HDF5 file at the point it is assigned to the store
object. Changes to DataFrame made after that point are not persisted, at
least not until the object is assigned to the data store object again. The
following demonstrates this by making a change to DataFrame and then
reassigning it to the HDF5 store, thereby updating the data store:

Accessing CSV data on the web
It is quite common to read data off the web and from the internet.
Pandas makes it easy to read data from the web. All the pandas
functions that we have examined can also be given an HTTP URL, FTP
address, or S3 address, instead of a local file path, and all of them work
just the same as they work with a local file.
The following demonstrates how easy it is to directly make HTTP
requests using the existing pd.read_csv() function. The following retrieves
the daily stock data for Microsoft in April 2017, directly from the Google
Finance web service via its HTTP query string model:

Reading and writing from/to
SQL databases
Pandas can read data from any SQL database that supports Python
data adapters that respect the Python DB-API. Reading is performed
using the pandas.io.sql.read_sql() function, and writing to SQL databases is
done using the .to_sql() method of DataFrame.
To demonstrate, the following reads the stock data from msft.csv and
aapl.csv. It then makes a connection to an SQLite3 database file. If the file
does not exist, it is created on the fly. It then writes the MSFT data to a
table named STOCK_DATA. If the table does not exist, it is created as well. If it
does exist, all the data is replaced with the MSFT data. Finally, it then
appends the AAPL stock data to that table:

To demonstrate that this data was created, you can open the database
file with a tool such as SQLite Data Browser (available at https://github.com/s

qlitebrowser/sqlitebrowser). The following screenshot shows you a few rows of

the data in the database file:

Data can be read using SQL from the database using the
pd.io.sql.read_sql() function. The following demonstrates a query of the
data from stocks.sqlite using SQL and reports it to the user:

It is also possible to use the WHERE clause in the SQL as well as to select
columns. To demonstrate, the following selects the records where
MSFT's volume is greater than 29200100:

A final point is that most of the code in these examples was SQLite3
code. The only pandas part of these examples is the use of the .to_sql()
and .read_sql() methods, as these functions take a connection object,
which can be any Python DB-API-compatible data adapter, you can
more or less work with any supported database data by simply creating
an appropriate connection object. The code at the pandas level should
remain the same for any supported database.

Reading data from remote data
services
Pandas prior to 0.19.0 had direct support for various web-based data
source classes in the pandas.io.data namespace. This has changed, as
the functionality has been refactored out of pandas and into the pandasdatareader package.
This package provides access to many useful data sources, including:
Daily historical stock prices from either Yahoo! or Google Finance
Yahoo! and Google Options
Enigma, a provider of structured data
The Federal Reserve Economic Data Library
Kenneth French's Data Library
The World Bank
OECD
Eurostat
EDGAR Index
TSP Fund Data
Oanda currency historical rates
Nasdaq Trader symbol definitions
Note that because this data is coming from an external
data source and that the actual values can change over
time, it may be possible that when you run the code, you
get different values than those in the book.

Reading stock data from Yahoo!
and Google Finance
First, I want to say that unfortunately, Yahoo! has changed their API
and currently this breaks the implementation in pandas-datareader. It is not
known if this will be fixed. Therefore, the examples will only use Google
Finance.
To use the pandas-datereader package, we use the following import:

Stock data from Google Finance can then be objected using the
DataReader function by passing it the stock symbol, the data source (in
this case, 'google'), and the start and end dates:

Retrieving options data from
Google Finance
Pandas provides experimental support for Google Finance Options data
to be retrieved via the Options class. In the following example, the
.get_all_data() method is used to download options data for AAPL from
Google:

With this result, it is possible to determine the expiration dates by using
the .expiry_dates property:

The actual data is read using .get_options_data():

The resulting DataFrame object contains a hierarchical index which can be
used to easily extract specific subsets of data. To demonstrate, let's
examine several examples of slicing by the values using the index.
The following will return all the put options at a Strike price of $30. Using
slice(None) as one of the values in the tuple used to select by index will

include all Expiry dates:

We can narrow the date range by specifying a date slice instead of
slice(None). The following narrows the results down to those where the
Expiry date is between 2015-01-17 and 2015-04-17:

Reading economic data from the
Federal Reserve Bank of St.
Louis
The Federal Reserve Economic Data (FRED) of St. Louis (http://researc
h.stlouisfed.org/fred2/) provides downloads of over 240,000 US and
International time series from over 76 data sources, and it is constantly
growing.
FRED data can be specified by using the FredReader class and by passing
the specific series tag as the name parameter. As an example, the
following retrieves GDP information between two specified dates:

To select another series, simply specify the series identifier in the first
parameter. The site can be conveniently navigated through series and
data visualized directly on the site. For example, the following
screenshot shows you the series Compensation of employees: Wages
and salaries:

This data series is represented by the A576RC1A027NBEA ID and we can
download it with the following code:

Accessing Kenneth French's
data
Kenneth R. French is a professor of finance at the Tuck School of
Business at Dartmouth University. He has created an extensive library of
economic data that is available for download over the web. The website
for his data is http://mba.tuck.dartmouth.edu/pages/faculty/ken.french/data_library.html,
and it contains a detailed explanation of the data sets.
The data available at the site is downloadable in ZIP files and can be
read directly into DataFrame by specifying the dataset's filename
(without .zip) and using the FameFrenchReader function. As an example, the
following reads the Global Factors data:

Reading from the World Bank
Thousands of data feeds are available from the World Bank and can be
read directly into pandas DataFrame objects. The World Bank data catalog
can be explored at http://www.worldbank.org/.
World Bank datasets are identified using indicators, a text code that
represents each dataset. A full list of indicators can be retrieved using
the pandas.io.wb.get_indicators() function. At the time of writing, there were
16,167 indicators. The following retrieves the indicators and displays the
first five:

These indicators can be investigated using the World Bank website, but
if you have an idea of the indicator you would like to sample, you can
simply perform a search. As an example, the following uses the
wb.search() function to search for indicators with data related to life
expectancy:

Each indicator is broken down into various countries. A full list of country
data can be retrieved using the wb.get_countries() function:

Data for an indicator can be downloaded using the wb.download() function
and by specifying the dataset using the indicator parameter. The
following downloads the life expectancy data for countries from 1980
through 2014:

By default, the data is only returned for the United States, Canada, and
Mexico. This can be seen by examining the index of the results of the
previous query:

To get data for more countries, specify them explicitly using the country
parameter. The following gets the data for all known countries:

We can do some interesting things with this data. The example we will
look at determines which country has the lowest life expectancy for each
year. To do this, we first need to pivot this data so that the index is the
country name and the year is the column. We will look at pivoting in
more detail in later chapters, but for now, just know that the following
reorganizes the data into the country along the index and the year
across the columns. Also, each value is the life expectancy for each
country for that specific year:

With the data in this format, we can determine which country has the
lowest life expectancy for each year using .idxmin(axis=0):

The actual minimum value for each year can be retrieved using
.min(axis=0):

These two results can then be combined into a new DataFrame that tells us
which country has had the least life expectancy for each year and what
that value is:

Summary
In this chapter, we examined how pandas makes it simple to access
data in various locations and formats, providing automatic mapping of
data in these formats into DataFrame objects. We started with learning
how to read and write data from local files in CSV, HTML, JSON,
HDF5, and Excel formats, reading into, and writing directly from
DataFrame objects without having to worry about the details of
mapping the contained data into these various formats.
We then examined how to access data from remote sources. First, we
saw that the functions and methods that work with local files can also
read from web and cloud data sources. We then looked at pandas
support for accessing various forms of web and web-service-based
data, such as Yahoo! Finance and the World Bank.
Now that we are able to load the data, the next step in using it is to
perform the cleaning of the data, because it is often the case that the
retrieved data has issues such as missing information and ill-formed
content. The next chapter will focus on these types of issues in a
process commonly known as tidying your data.

Tidying Up Your Data
We are at that point in the data processing pipeline where we need to
look at the data that we have retrieved and address any anomalies that
may present themselves during analysis. These anomalies can exist for
a multitude of reasons. Sometimes, certain parts of the data are not
recorded or perhaps get lost. Maybe there are units that don't match
your system's units. Many times, certain data points can be duplicated.
This process of dealing with anomalous data is often referred to as
tidying your data, and you will see this term used many times in data
analysis. This is a very important step in the pipeline, and it can
consume much of your time before you even get to working on simple
analyses.
Tidying of data can be a tedious problem, particularly when using
programming tools that are not designed for the specific task of data
cleanup. Fortunately for us, pandas has many tools that can be used to
address these issues, and also help us be very efficient at the same
time.
In this chapter, we will cover many of the tasks involved in tidying data.
Specifically, you will learn:
The concept of tidy data
How to work with missing data
How to find NaN values in data
How to filter (drop) missing data
How pandas handles missing values in calculations
How to find, filter, and fix unknown values
Performing interpolation of missing values
How to identify and remove duplicate data
How to transform values using replace, map, and apply

Configuring pandas
The examples in this chapter utilize the following configuration of pandas
and Jupyter:

What is tidying your data?
Tidy data is a term that was coined in a paper named "Tidy Data" by
Hadley Wickham. I highly recommend that you read this paper. It can
be downloaded from http://vita.had.co.nz/papers/tidy-data.pdf.
The paper covers many details of the process of creating tidy data, the
end result of which is that you have data that is free of surprises and is
ready for analysis.
We will examine many of the tools in pandas for tidying your data.
These exist because we need to handle the following situations:
The names of the variables are different from what you require
There is missing data
Values are not in the units that you require
The period of sampling of records is not what you need
Variables are categorical and you need quantitative values
There is noise in the data
Information is of an incorrect type
Data is organized around incorrect axes
Data is at the wrong level of normalization
Data is duplicated
This is quite a list, and I assure you it is not complete. But these are all
issues that I have personally come across (and I'm sure you will too).
When using tools and languages not explicitly built for handling these
issues (like pandas is), they have been quite difficult to resolve. We will
examine how easy it is to fix these problems with pandas during this
chapter.

How to work with missing data
Data is missing in pandas when it has a value of NaN (also seen as
np.nan - the form from NumPy). This NaN value means that there is no
value specified for the particular index label in a particular Series.
How can data be missing? There are a number of reasons why a value
can be NaN:
A join of two sets of data does not have matched values
Data that you retrieved from an external source is incomplete
The NaN value is not known at a given point in time and will be filled
in later
There is a data collection error retrieving a value, but the event
must still be recorded in the index
Reindexing of data has resulted in an index that does not have a
value
The shape of data has changed and there are now additional rows
or columns, which at the time of reshaping could not be
determined
There are likely more reasons, but the general point is that these
situations do occur and you, as a user of pandas, will need to
address these situations to be able to perform effective data
analysis
Let's start an examination of how to work with missing data by creating
a DataFrame that has some missing data points:

There is here is not any missing data so let's add some:

This DataFrame now has missing data which exhibits the following
characteristics:
One row consisting only of NaN values
One column consisting only of NaN values
Several rows and columns consisting of both numeric values and
NaN values
Now let's examine various techniques to work with this missing
data.

Determining NaN values in
pandas objects
The NaN values in a DataFrame object can be identified using the .isnull()
method. Any True value means that the item at that location is a NaN value:

We can use the fact that the .sum() method treats True as 1 and False as 0
to determine the number of NaN values in a DataFrame object:

Applying .sum() to the resulting series gives the total number of NaN values
in the original DataFrame object:

This is great, as it can be an easy way to identify if data is missing early
in a process. If you are expecting your data to be complete, and this
simple check turns up a value other than 0, then you know you need to
look deeper.
Another way to determine this is to use the .count() method of a Series
object and DataFrame. For a Series method, this method will return the
number of non-NaN values. For a DataFrame object, it will count the number
of non-NaN values in
each column:

This then needs to be flipped around to sum the number of NaN values,
which can be calculated as follows:

We can also determine whether an item is not NaN using the .notnull()
method, which returns True if the value is not a NaN value; otherwise, it
returns False:

Selecting out or dropping
missing data
One technique of handling missing data is to simply remove it from your
dataset. A scenario for this would be where data is sampled at regular
intervals but devices are offline and hence a reading is not recorded.
The pandas library makes this possible using several techniques. One is
through Boolean selection using the results of .isnull() or .notnull() to
retrieve the values that are NaN or non NaN out of a Series object. The
following example demonstrates selection of all non-NaN values from the
c4 column of a DataFrame:

Pandas also provides a convenience function, .dropna(), which drops the
items in a Series where the value is NaN:

Note that .dropna() has actually returned a copy of DataFrame without the
rows. The original DataFrame is not changed:

When .dropna() is applied to a DataFrame object, it drops all rows from the
DataFrame object that have at least one NaN value. The following code
demonstrates this in action, and since each row has at least one NaN
value, there are zero rows in the result:

If you want to drop only those rows where all values are NaN, you can use
the how='all' parameter. The following sample drops only the g row, since
it has all NaN values:

This can also be applied to the columns instead of the rows, by
changing the axis parameter to axis=1. The following drops the c5 column,
as it is the only one with all NaN values:

Now let's examine this process using a slightly different DataFrame object,
which has columns c1 and c3 with all values that are not NaN. In this case,
all columns except c1 and c3 will be dropped:

The .dropna() method also has a parameter thresh, which when given an
integer value, specifies the minimum number of NaN values that must exist

before the drop is performed. The following code drops all the columns
with at least five NaN values (in this case, these are the c4 and c5 columns):

Again, note that the .dropna() method (and the Boolean selection) returns
a copy of the DataFrame object, and the data is dropped from that copy. If
you want to drop the data in the actual DataFrame, use the inplace=True
parameter.

Handling of NaN values in
mathematical operations
The NaN values are handled differently in pandas than in NumPy. We
have seen this in earlier chapters, but it is worth revisiting here. This is
demonstrated using the following example:

When a NumPy function encounters a NaN value, it returns NaN. Pandas
functions typically ignore the NaN values and continue processing the
function as though the NaN values were not part of the Series object.
Note that the mean of the preceding series was calculated
as (1+2+3)/3 = 2, not (1+2+3)/4 or (1+2+0+4)/4. This
verifies that NaN is totally ignored and not even counted as
an item in Series.
More specifically, the way that Pandas handles the NaN values is as
follows:
Summing of data treats NaN as 0
If all values are NaN, the result is NaN
Methods like .cumsum() and .cumprod() ignore the NaN values, but
preserve them in the resulting arrays
The following demonstrates all these concepts:

But when using traditional mathematical operators, NaN will be
propagated through to the result:

Filling in missing data
The .fillna() method can be used to replace the NaN values with a specific
value, instead of having them propagated or flat out ignored. The
following demonstrates this by filling the NaN values with 0:

Be aware that this causes differences in the resulting values. As an
example, the following code shows the result of applying the .mean()
method to a DataFrame object with the NaN values, as compared to a DataFrame
object that has its NaN values filled with 0:

Forward and backward filling of
missing values
Gaps in data can be filled by propagating the non-NaN values forward or
backward along a Series. To demonstrate, the following example will fill
forward the c4 column of DataFrame:

When working with time series data, this technique of filling
is often referred to as the "last known value". We will revisit
this in the chapter on time-series data.
The direction of the fill can be reversed using method='bfill':

To save a little typing, pandas also has global level functions pd.ffill()
and pd.bfill(), which are equivalent to .fillna(method="ffill") and
.fillna(method="bfill").

Filling using index labels
Data can be filled using the labels of a Series or keys of a Python
dictionary. This allows you to specify different fill values for different
elements, based upon the value of the index label:

Only values of NaN are filled. Note that the values with label a are not
changed.
Another common scenario is to fill all the NaN values in a column with the
mean of the column:

This is convenient, as missing values replaced in this manner skew the
statistical average less than if 0's are inserted. In certain statistical
analyses, this may be acceptable where the larger deviation using 0
values can cause false failures.

Performing interpolation of
missing values
Both DataFrame and Series have an .interpolate() method that, by default,
performs a linear interpolation of missing values:

The value of the interpolation is calculated by taking the first value
before and after any sequence of the NaN values, and then incrementally
adding that value from the start and substituting the NaN values. In this
case, 2.0 and 1.0 are the surrounding values, resulting in (2.0 - 1.0)/(51) = 0.25, which is then added incrementally through all the NaN values.
This is important. Imagine if your data represents an increasing set of
values, such as increasing temperature during the day. If the sensor
stops responding for a few sample periods, the missing data can be
inferred through interpolation with a high level of certainty. It is definitely
better than setting the values to 0.
The interpolation method also has the ability to specify a specific method
of interpolation. One of the common methods is to use time-based
interpolation. Consider the following Series of dates and values:

The previous form of interpolation results in the following:

The value for 2014-02-01 is calculated as 1.0 + (2.0-1.0)/2 = 1.5, since
there is one NaN value between the values 2.0 and 1.0.
The important thing to note is that the series is missing an entry for
2014-03-01. If we were expecting to interpolate daily values, there
should be two values calculated, one for 2014-02-01 and another for
2014-03-01, resulting in one more value in the numerator of the
interpolation.
This can be corrected by specifying the method of interpolation as time:

This is the correct interpolation for 2014-02-01, based upon dates. Also
note that the index label and value for 2014-03-01 is not added to Series; it is
just factored into the interpolation.

Interpolation can also be specified to calculate values relative to the
index values when using numeric index labels. To demonstrate this, we
will use the following Series:

If we perform a linear interpolation, we get the following value for label 1,
which is correct for a linear interpolation:

However, what if we want to interpolate the value to be relative to the
index value? To do this, we can use method="values":

The value calculated for NaN is now interpolated using relative positioning,
based on the labels in the index. The NaN value has a label of 1, which is
one tenth of
the way between 0 and 10, so the interpolated value will be 0 + (1000)/10, or 10.

Handling duplicate data
The data in your sample can often contain duplicate rows. This is just a
reality of dealing with data that is collected automatically, or even a
situation created when manually collecting data. In these situations, it is
often considered best to error on the side of having duplicates instead of
missing data, especially if the data can be considered to be idempotent.
However, duplicate data can increase the size of the dataset, and if it is
not idempotent, then it would not be appropriate to process the
duplicates.
Pandas provides the .duplicates() method to facilitate finding duplicate
data. This method returns a Boolean Series, where each entry represents
whether or not the row is a duplicate. A True value represents that the
specific row has appeared earlier in the DataFrame object, with all the
column values identical.
The following demonstrates this in action by creating a DataFrame object
with
duplicate rows:

Now let's check for duplicates:

Duplicate rows can be dropped from a DataFrame by using the
.drop_duplicates() method. This method returns a copy of the DataFrame with
the duplicate rows removed:

It is also possible to use the inplace=True parameter to remove the rows
without making a copy.
Note that there is a ramification to which indexes remain when dropping
duplicates. The duplicate records may have different index labels (labels
are not taken into account in calculating a duplicate). So, the row that is
kept can affect the set of labels in the resulting DataFrame object.
The default operation is to keep the first row of the duplicates. If you
want to
keep the last row of the duplicates, use the keep='last' parameter.
The following demonstrates how the result differs using this parameter:

If you want to check for duplicates based on a smaller set of columns,
you can specify a list of column names:

Transforming data
Another part of tidying data involves transforming the existing data into
another presentation. This may be needed for the following reasons:
Values are not in the correct units
Values are qualitative and need to be converted to appropriate
numeric values
There is extraneous data that either wastes memory and
processing time, or can affect results simply by being included
To address these situations, we can take one or more of the following
actions:
Map values to other values using a table lookup process
Explicitly replace certain values with other values (or even another
type of data)
Apply methods to transform the values based on an algorithm
Simply remove extraneous columns and rows
We have already seen how to delete rows and columns with several
techniques, so we will not reiterate those here. Now we will cover the
facilities provided by pandas for mapping, replacing, and applying
functions to transform data based upon its content.

Mapping data into different
values
One of the basic tasks in data transformations is the mapping of a set of
values to another set. Pandas provides a generic ability to map values
using a lookup table (via a Python dictionary or a pandas Series) using
the .map() method.
This method performs the mapping by first matching the values of the
outer Series with the index labels of the inner Series. It then returns a new
Series, with the index labels of the outer Series but the values from the
inner Series.
The following example shows how to map the labels in the index of x to
the values of y:

As with other alignment operations, if pandas does not find a map
between the value of the outer Series and an index label of the inner
Series, it fills the value with NaN. To demonstrate, the following removes the
3 key from the outer Series, which causes the alignment to fail for that
record, and results in a NaN value being introduced:

Replacing values
We previously saw how the .fillna() method can be used to replace the
NaN values with a value of your own decision. The .fillna() method can
actually be thought of as an implementation of the .map() method that
maps a single value, NaN, to a specific value.
Even more generically, the .fillna() method itself can be considered a
specialization of a more general replacement that is provided by the
.replace() method. This method provides more flexibility by being able to
replace any value (not just NaN) with another value.
The most basic use of the .replace() method is to replace an individual
value
with another:

It is also possible to specify multiple items to replace, and also to specify
their substitute values by passing two lists (the first of the values to
replace, and the second, the replacements):

Replacement can also be performed by specifying a dictionary for
lookup (a variant of the map process in the previous section):

If using .replace() on a DataFrame, it is possible to specify different
replacement values for each column. This is performed by passing a
Python dictionary to the .replace() method. In this dictionary, the keys
represent the names of the columns where replacement is to occur, and
the values of the dictionary specify where the replacement is to occur.
The second parameter to the method is the value that is used to replace
where there are matches.
The following code demonstrates this by creating a DataFrame object and
then replacing specific values in each of the columns with 100:

Replacing specific values in each of the columns is very convenient, as it
provides a shorthand for what otherwise would require coding a loop
through all the columns.
It is also possible to replace items at specific index positions, as though
they are missing values. The following code demonstrates this by
forward filling the value at index position 0 into locations 1, 2, and 3:

It is also possible to forward and backwards fill by using
ffill and bfill as the specified methods, but those are left
as an exercise for you to try on your own.

Applying functions to transform
data
In situations where a direct mapping or substitution will not suffice, it is
possible to apply a function to the data to perform an algorithm on the
data. Pandas provides the ability to apply functions to individual items,
entire columns, or entire rows, providing incredible flexibility in
transformation.
Functions can be applied using the conveniently named .apply() method.
When given a Python function, this method iteratively calls the function
while passing in each value from a Series. If applied to a DataFrame, pandas
will pass in each column as a Series, or if applied along axis=1, it will pass
in a Series representing each row.
The following demonstrates this by applying a lambda function to each
item of a Series:

When applying a function to items in a Series, only the value for each
Series item is passed to the function, not the index label and the value.
When a function is applied to a DataFrame, the default is to apply the
method to each column. Pandas iterates through all the columns,
passing each as a Series to your function. The result is a Series object with

index labels matching the column names, and the result of the function
applied to the column:

Application of the function can be switched to the values from each row
by specifying axis=1:

A common practice is to take the result of an apply operation and add it
as a new column of the DataFrame. This is convenient, as you can add onto
the DataFrame the result of one or more successive calculations, providing
yourself with progressive representations of the derivation of results
through every step of the process.
The following code demonstrates this process. The first step multiplies
column a by column b, and creates a new column named interim. The
second step adds these values and column c, and creates a result
column with those values:

If you would like to change the values in the existing column, simply
assign the result to an already existing column. The following changes
the a column's values to be the sum of the values in the row:

As a matter of practice, replacing a column with completely new values
is not the best way to do things and often leads to situations of
temporary (and potentially permanent) insanity, trying to debug
problems caused by data that is lost. Therefore, in pandas, it is a better
and common practice to just add new rows or columns (or totally new
objects), and if memory or performance becomes a problem later on, do
the optimizations as required.
Another point to note is that a pandas DataFrame is not a spreadsheet,
where cells are assigned formulas and can be recalculated when cells

that are referenced by the formula change. If you desire this to happen,
you need to execute the formulas whenever the dependent data
changes. On the flip side, this is more efficient than spreadsheets, as
every little change does not cause a cascade of operations to occur.
The .apply() method always applies the provided function to all the items
in Series, column, or row. If you want to apply the function to a subset of
these, then first perform a Boolean selection to filter the items you do not
want processed.
The following demonstrates this by creating a DataFrame of values and
inserting one NaN value into the second row. It then applies a function to
only those rows where all the values are not NaN:

The final method we will cover in this chapter is to apply functions using
the .applymap() method of DataFrame. While the .apply() method was always
passed an entire row or column, the .applymap() function applies the
function to each and every individual value.
The following demonstrates a practical use by using the .applymap()
method to format each value in a DateFrame to a specified number of
decimal points:

Summary
In this chapter, we have examined various techniques of tidying data.
We covered identifying missing data, replacing it with other values, or
dropping it from the overall set of data. We then covered how to
transform values into other values that may be better suited for further
analysis.
Now that we have tidied up our data within DataFrame or series, we
want to move from focusing on the cleanliness of the data to more
elaborate forms of modifying the structure of the data, such as
concatenation, merges, joins, and pivoting data. This will be the focus
of the next chapter.

Combining, Relating, and
Reshaping Data
Data is often modeled as a set of entities, the logical structures of
related values referenced by name (properties/variables), and with
multiple samples or instances that are organized by rows. Entities tend
to represent real-world things, such as a person, or in the Internet of
Things, a sensor. Each specific entity and its measurements are then
modeled using a single DataFrame.
There will often need to be various tasks performed upon and between
entities in a model. It may be required to combine the data for multiple
customer entities, which are sourced from multiple locations, into single
pandas object. Customer and order entities are often related to find a
shipping address for an order. It is also possible that data stored in one
model may need to be reshaped into another model, simply because
different sources model the same type of entities differently.
In this chapter, we will examine these operations that let us combine,
relate, and reshape data in our model. Specifically, in this chapter, we
will examine the following concepts:
Concatenating data in multiple pandas objects
Merging data in multiple pandas objects
How to control the type of join used in a merge
Pivoting data to and from values and indexes
Stacking and unstacking data
Melting data to and from wide and long format

Configuring pandas
We start the examples in the chapter using the following imports and
configuration statements:

Concatenating data in multiple
objects
Concatenation in pandas is the process of combining the data from
two or more pandas objects into a new object. Concatenation of the
Series objects simply results in a new Series, with the values copied in
sequence.
The process of concatenating the DataFrame objects is more complex.
The concatenation can be applied to either axis of the specified objects,
and along that axis pandas performs relational join logic to the index
labels. Then, along the opposite axis, pandas performs alignment of the
labels and filling of missing values.
Because there are a number of factors to consider, we will break down
the examples for concatenation into the following topics:
Understanding the default semantics of concatenation
Switching the axis of alignment
Specifying the join type
Appending data instead of concatenation
Ignoring the index labels

Understanding the default
semantics of concatenation
Concatenation is performed using the pandas function pd.concat(). The
general syntax to concatenate data is to pass a list of objects to be
concatenated. The following demonstrates a simple concatenation of
two Series objects, s1 and s2:

This concatenated the index labels and values of s2 to the end of those
from s1. This resulted in duplicate index labels, as alignment is not
performed during the process.

Two DataFrame objects can also be concatenated in a similar manner:

The default functionality results in the rows being appended in order,
and can result in duplicate index labels along the rows index.
The resulting set of column labels is defined by the union of the index
labels in the specified DataFrame objects. This is an alignment that is
applied across all the source objects (there can be more than two).
Pandas will insert the NaN values if a column in the result does not exist in
the DataFrame object currently being processed.

The following demonstrates the alignment of two DataFrame objects during
concatenation, where there are common columns (a and c) and also
distinct columns (b in df1, and d in df2):

does not contain column d, so values in that part of the result are NaN.
The same occurs for df2 and column b.
df1

It is possible to give each group of data in the result its own name using
the keys parameter. This creates a hierarchical index on the DataFrame
object that lets you refer to each group of data independently via the
DataFrame object's .loc property. This is convenient if you later need to
determine where data in the resulting DataFrame object was sourced.

The following demonstrates this concept by assigning names to each
original DataFrame object and then retrieving the rows that originated in the
df2 object (now indexed with the 'df2' label):

These keys can then be used to sub-select a specific set of data:

Switching axes of alignment
The pd.concat() function allows you to specify the axis on which to apply
the alignment during the concatenation. The following concatenates the
two DataFrame objects along the column axis, switching alignment to be
along the rows index:

This result now contains duplicate columns. This is because the
concatenation first aligns by the row index labels of each DataFrame object,
and then fills in the columns from the first DataFrame object and then the
second without regard to the row index labels.
The following demonstrates a concatenation along the column axis with
two DataFrame objects that have several row index labels in common (2 and
3), as well as along with disjoint rows (0 in df1 and 4 in df3). Additionally,
several of the columns in df3 overlap with df1 (a) as well as being
disjointed (d):

Since the alignment was along the row labels, the columns end up
having duplicates. The rows then have NaN values where the columns did
not exist in the source objects.

Specifying join type
A default concatenation actually performs an outer join operation along
the index labels on the axis opposite of the concatenation (the rows
index). This makes the resulting set of labels similar to having performed
a union of those labels.
The type of join can be changed to an inner join by specifying
join='inner' as a parameter. The inner join then logically performs an
intersection of labels instead of a union. The following demonstrates this
and results in a single row, because 2 is the only row index label in
common:

It is also possible to label groups of data along the columns using the
keys parameter when applying the concatenation along axis=1:

The different groups can be accessed using the .loc property and slicing:

Appending versus
concatenation
A DataFrame (and Series) object also contains a .append() method, which
concatenates the two specified DataFrame objects along the row index
labels:

As with concatenation on axis=1, the index labels in the rows are copied
without consideration of the creation of duplicates, and the column labels
are joined in a manner which ensures no duplicate column name is
included in the result.

Ignoring the index labels
If you would like to ensure that the resulting index does not have
duplicates and preserves all the rows, you can use the ignore_index=True
parameter. This essentially returns the same result, except with the new
Int64Index:

This operation also functions on concatenations.

Merging and joining data
Pandas allows the merging of pandas objects with database-like join
operations, using the pd.merge() function and the .merge() method of a
DataFrame object. A merge combines the data of two pandas objects by
finding matching values in one or more columns or row indexes. It then
returns a new object that represents a combination of the data from
both, based on relational-database-like join semantics applied to those
values.
Merges are useful as they allow us to model a single DataFrame for each
type of data (one of the rules of having tidy data), but to be able to
relate data in different DataFrame objects using values existing in both sets
of data.

Merging data from multiple
pandas objects
A practical example of merges would be that of looking up customer
names from orders. To demonstrate this in pandas, we will use the
following two DataFrame objects. One represents a list of customer details
and the other represents the orders made by the customers and what
day the order was made. They will be related to each other using the
CustomerID columns in each.

Now suppose we would like to ship the orders to the customers. We
would need to merge the orders data with the customers detail data to
determine the address for each order. This can be easily performed with
the following statement:

Pandas has done something magical for us here by being able to
accomplish this with such a simple piece of code. It has realized that our
customers and orders objects, both have a column named CustomerID, and
with this knowledge. It uses common values found in that column of both
DataFrame objects to relate the data in both and form the merged data
based on inner join semantics.
To be even more detailed on what occurs, what pandas specifically does
is the following:
1. It determines the columns in both customers and orders with common
labels. These columns are treated as the keys to perform the join.
2. It creates a new DataFrame, whose columns are the labels from the
keys identified in step 1, followed by all the non-key labels from both
the objects.
3. It matches values in the key columns of both DataFrame objects.
4. It then creates a row in the result for each set of matching labels.
5. It then copies the data from those matching rows from each source
object into that respective row and columns of the result.
6. It assigns a new Int64Index to the result.
The join in a merge can use values from multiple columns. To
demonstrate, the following creates two DataFrame objects and performs the
merge using values in the key1 and key2 columns of both the objects:

This merge identifies that the key1 and key2 columns are common in both
the DataFrame objects. The matching tuples of values in both DataFrame
objects for these columns are (a, x) and (c, z), and therefore, this results
in two rows of values.
To explicitly specify which column is used to relate the objects, you can
use the on parameter. The following demonstrates this by performing a
merge using only the values in the key1 column of both the DataFrame
objects:

Comparing this result to the previous example, the result now has three
rows, as there are matching a, b, and c values in that single column of
both objects.
The on parameter can also be given a list of column names. The
following reverts to using both the key1 and key2 columns, which results in
an identical result to the previous example where those two columns
where implicitly identified by pandas:

The columns specified with on need to exist in both the DataFrame objects. If
you would like to merge based on columns with different names in each
object, you can use the left_on and right_on parameters, passing the name
or names of the columns to each respective parameter.
To perform a merge with the labels of the row indexes of the two DataFrame
objects, you can use the left_index=True and right_index=True parameters
(both need to be specified):

This has identified that the index labels in common are 1 and 2, so the
resulting DataFrame has two rows with these values and labels in the index.
Pandas then creates a column in the result for every column in both the
objects, and then copies the values.
As both DataFrame objects had a column with identical name key, the
columns in the result have the _x and _y suffixes appended to them to
identify the DataFrame object they originated from. _x is for left and _y is for
right. You can specify these suffixes using the suffixes parameter and
passing a two-item sequence.

Specifying the join semantics of
a merge operation
The default type of join performed by pd.merge() is an inner join. To use
another join method, specify the join type using the how parameter of the
pd.merge() function (or the .merge() method). The valid options are:
: This is the intersection of keys from both DataFrame objects
outer: This is the union of keys from both DataFrame objects
left: This only uses keys from the left DataFrame
right: This only uses keys from the right DataFrame
inner

As we have seen, an inner join is the default and it returns a merge of
the data from both DataFrame objects only where the values match.
An outer join, in contrast, returns both the merge of the matched rows
and the unmatched values from both the left and right DataFrame objects,
but with NaN filled in the unmatched portion. The following code
demonstrates an outer join:

A left join will return the merge of the rows that satisfy the join of the
values in the specified columns, and also returns the unmatched rows
from only left:

A right join will return the merge of the rows that satisfy the join of the
values in the specified columns, and also returns the unmatched rows
from only right:

The pandas library also provides a .join() method that can be used to
perform a join using the index labels of the two DataFrame objects (instead
of values in columns). Note that if the columns in the two DataFrame objects
do not have unique column names, you must specify suffixes using the
lsuffix and rsuffix parameters (automatic suffixing is not performed, as
with merge). The following code demonstrates both the join and the
specification of suffixes:

The default type of join performed is an outer join. Note that this differs
from the default of the .merge() method, which defaults to inner. To
change to an inner join, specify how='inner', as is demonstrated in the
following example:

Note that this is roughly equivalent to the earlier result from Out [29],
except the result has columns with slightly different names.
It is also possible to perform right and left joins, but they lead to results
similar to the previous examples, so they will be omitted for brevity.

Pivoting data to and from value
and indexes
Data is often stored in a stacked format, which is also referred to as
record format. This is common in databases, .csv files, and Excel
spreadsheets. In a stacked format, the data is often not normalized and
has repeated values in many columns, or values that should logically
exist in other tables (violating another concept of tidy data).
Take the following data which represents a stream of data from an
accelerometer on a

An issue with this data as it is organized is: how does one go about
determining the readings for a specific axis? This can be naively done
with Boolean selections:

An issue here is, what if you want to know the values for all axes at a
given time and not just the x axis. To do this, you can perform a selection
for each value of the axis, but that is repetitive code and does not handle
the scenario of new axis values being inserted into DataFrame without a
change to the code.
A better representation would be where columns represent the unique
variable values. To convert to this form, use the DataFrame objects' .pivot()
function:

This has taken all the distinct values from the axis column and pivoted
them into columns on the new DataFrame, while filling in values for the new
columns from the appropriate rows and columns of the original DataFrame.
This new DataFrame demonstrates that it is now very easy to identify the X,
Y, and Z sensor readings at each time interval.

Stacking and unstacking
Similar to the pivot function are the .stack() and .unstack() methods. The
process of stacking pivots a level of column labels to the row index.
Unstacking performs the opposite, that is, pivoting a level of the row
index into the column index.
One of the differences between stacking/unstacking and performing a
pivot is that unlike pivots, the stack and unstack functions are able to
pivot specific levels of a hierarchical index. Also, where a pivot retains
the same number of levels on an index, a stack and unstack always
increases the levels on the index of one of the axes (columns for
unstacking and rows for stacking) and decrease the levels on the other
axis.

Stacking using non-hierarchical
indexes
To demonstrate stacking, we will look at several examples using a
DataFrame object with non-hierarchical indexes. We will begin our examples
using the following DataFrame:

Stacking will move one level of the column's index into a new level of the
row's index. As our DataFrame only has one level, this collapses a DataFrame
object into a Series object with a hierarchical row index:

To access values, we now need to pass a tuple to the indexer of the
Series object, which does the lookup with just the index:

If the DataFrame object contains multiple columns, then all the columns are
moved to the same additional level of the new Series object:

Values for what would have previously been different columns, can now
still be accessed using the tuple syntax with the index:

Unstacking will perform a similar operation in the opposite direction, by
moving a level of the row index into a level of the column's axis. We will
examine this process in the next section as unstacking generally
assumes that the index being unstacked is hierarchical.

Unstacking using hierarchical
indexes
To demonstrate unstacking with hierarchical indexes, we will revisit the
sensor data we saw earlier in the chapter. However, we will add an
additional column to the measurement data that represents readings for
multiple users and copy data for two users. The following sets up this
data:

With this organization in the data, we can do such things as examine all
the readings for a specific person using only the index:

We can also get all the readings of all axes and for all users at interval 1
using .xs():

Unstacking will move the last level of the row index into a new level of
the column index, resulting in columns having MultiIndex. The following
demonstrates the last level of this unstacking (the axis level of the index):

To unstack a different level, use the level parameter. The following code
unstacks the first level (level=0):

Multiple levels can be unstacked simultaneously by passing a list of the
levels to .unstack(). Additionally, if the levels are named, they can be
specified by name instead of location. The following unstacks the who and
axis levels by name:

To be thorough, we can restack this data. The following code will stack
the who level of the column back into the row index:

There are a couple of things worth pointing out about this result. First,
stacking and unstacking always move the levels into the last levels of the
other index. Note that the who level is now the last level of the row index,
but it started out earlier as the first level. This would have ramifications
on the code used to access elements via that index, as it has changed to
another level. If you want to put a level back into another position, you
will need to reorganize the indexes with other means than stacking and
unstacking.
Second, with all this moving around of data, stacking and unstacking (as
well as pivoting) do not lose any information. They simply change the
means by which it is organized and accessed.

Melting data to and from long
and wide format
Melting is a type of un-pivoting, and is often referred to as changing a
DataFrame object from wide format to long format. This format is
common in various statistical analyses, and data you read may be
already provided in a melted form. Or you may need to pass data in this
format to other code that expects this organization.
Technically, melting is the process of reshaping a DataFrame object into a
format
where two or more columns, referred to as variable and value, are created
by un-pivoting column labels in the variable column, and then moving the
data from these columns into the appropriate location in the value column.
All other columns are then made into identifier columns that assist in
describing the data.
The concept of melting is often best understood using a simple example.
In this example, we start with a DataFrame object that represents
measurements of two variables, each represented with its own column,
Height and Weight, and one additional column representing the person and
specified with the Name column:

The following melts this DataFrame, using the Name column as the identifier
column, and the Height and Weight columns as measured variables. The
Name column remains, with the Height and Weight columns un-pivoted into

the variable column. Then the values from these two columns are
rearranged into the value column, and ensured to align with the
appropriate combination values of Name and variable that would have
existed in the original data:

The data is now restructured, so that it is easy to extract the value for
any combination of variable and Name. Additionally, in this format it is easier
to add a new variable and measurement, as the data can simply be
added as a new row instead of requiring a change of structure to DataFrame
by adding a new column.

Performance benefits of stacked
data
Finally, we will examine why we would want to stack data. It can be
shown that stacked data is more efficient than using lookup through a
single level index and then a column lookup, or even compared to an
.iloc lookup that specifies the row and column by location. The following
demonstrates this:

This can have extreme benefits on an application performance if it is
required to repeatedly access a large number of scalar values out of a
DataFrame.

Summary
In this chapter, we examined several techniques of combining and
reshaping data in one or more DataFrame objects. We started the chapter
by examining how to combine data from multiple pandas objects. Then,
we examined how to concatenate multiple DataFrame objects, both along
the row and column axes. From this, we then examined how pandas
can be used to perform database-like joins and merges of data based
on values in multiple DataFrame objects.
We then examined how to reshape data in DataFrame using pivots,
stacking, and melting. Through this, we saw how each of these
processes provides several variations on how to move data around by
changing the shape of the indexes, and by moving data in and out of
indexes. This showed us how to organize data in formats that are
efficient for lookup from other forms that may be more of convenience
for the producer of the data.
In the next chapter, we will learn about grouping, and aggregate
analysis of data in those groups, which allows us to derive results
based upon like-values in the data.

Data Aggregation
Data aggregation is the process of grouping data based on some
meaningful categories of the information. Analysis is then performed on
each of the groups to report one or more summary statistics for each.
This summarization in this sense is a general term in that
summarization can literally be a summation (such as total number of
units sold) or statistical calculation such as a mean or standard
deviation.
This chapter will examine the facilities of pandas to perform data
aggregation. This includes a powerful split-apply-combine pattern for
grouping, performing group-level transformations and analyses, and
reporting the results from every group within a summary pandas object.
Within this framework, we will examine several techniques of grouping
data, applying functions on a group level, and being able to filter data in
or out of the analysis.
Specifically, in this chapter we will cover:
An overview of the split, apply, and combine pattern for data
analysis
Grouping by a single column's values
Accessing the results of a pandas grouping
Grouping using the values in multiple columns
Grouping using index levels
Applying aggregation functions to grouped data
An overview of transforming data
Practical examples of transformation: filling with means and zscores
Using filtering to selectively remove groups of data
Discretization and binning

Configuring pandas
The examples in this chapter use the following imports and configuration
statements:

The split, apply, and combine
(SAC) pattern
Many data analysis problems utilize a pattern of processing data
referred to as split-apply-combine. In this pattern, three steps are
taken to analyze data:
A dataset is split into smaller pieces based on certain criteria
Each of these pieces are operated upon independently
All the results are then combined back and presented as a single
unit
The following diagram demonstrates a simple split-apply-combine
process to calculate the mean of values grouped by a character-based
key (a or b):

The data is then split by the index label into two groups (one each for a
and b). The mean of the values in each group is calculated. The
resulting values from the group are then combined into a single pandas
object, which is indexed by the label representing each group.
Splitting in pandas is performed using the .groupby() method of a Series or
DataFrame. This method is given one or more index label and/or column
name; they will group the data based on the associated values.

Once the data is split, it is possible to perform one or more of the
following categories of operations on each group:
Aggregation: Calculate a summary statistic such as group means
or counts of the items in each group
Transformation: Perform group- or item-specific calculations
Filtration: Remove entire groups of data based on a group-level
calculation
The final stage, combine, is performed automatically by pandas, which
collects the results of the apply stage and constructs a single merged
result.
For more information on split-apply-combine, there is a
paper from the Journal of Statistical Software titled "The
Split-Apply-Combine Strategy for Data Analysis". This
paper goes into more details of the pattern, and although
it utilizes R in its examples, it is still a valuable read for
someone learning pandas. You can get this paper at http://
www.jstatsoft.org/v40/i01/paper.

Data for the examples
The examples in this chapter will utilize a dataset that represents
measurements of several device sensors. The data consists of readings
on the X, Y, and Z axis of both an accelerometer and orientation sensor:

Splitting data
Our examination of splitting data within a pandas object will be broken
into several steps. In the first, we will look at creating a grouping based
on columns, and then examine the properties of the grouping that is
created. We will then examine accessing various properties and results
of the grouping to learn several properties of the groups that were
created. Then we will examine grouping using index labels instead of
content in columns.

Grouping by a single column's
values
The sensor data consists of three categorical variables (sensor, interval,
and axis) and one continuous variable (reading). It is possible to group by
any single categorical variable by passing its name to .groupby(). The
following code groups the sensor data by the values in the sensor
column:

The result of .groupby() on a DataFrame is a subclass of a GroupBy object,
either a DataFrameGroupBy for a DataFrame or a SeriesGroupBy for a Series. This
object represents an interim description of the grouping that will
eventually be performed. This object helps pandas to first validate the
grouping relative to the data prior to execution. This can help in
optimization and identification of errors, and gives you a point where you
can check certain properties prior to what could be an expensive
computational process.
This interim object has many useful properties. The .ngroups property will
retrieve the number of groups that will be formed in the result:

The .groups property will return a Python dictionary whose keys represent
the names of each group (if multiple columns are specified, it is a tuple).

The values in the dictionary are an array of the index labels contained
within each respective group:

Accessing the results of a
grouping
The grouped variable can be thought of as a collection of named groups
and can be used to examine the contents of the groupings. Let's
examine these groupings using the following function:

This function will loop through each of the groups and print its name and
the first five rows:

An examination of these results gives us some insights into how pandas
has performed the split. A group has been created for each distinct
value in the sensors column, and the group is named after the value. Each
group then contains a DataFrame object consisting of the rows where the
sensor value matched the name of the group.

The .size() method returns a summary of the size of all the groups:

The .count() method returns the number of items in each column of every
group:

Any specific group can be retrieved using the .get_group() method. The
following code retrieves the accel group:

The .head() and .tail() methods can be used to return the specified
number of items in each group. This code retrieves the first three rows in
each group:

The .nth() method will return the n-th item in each group. The following
code demonstrates how to use this to retrieve the second row of each
group:

The .describe() method can be used to return descriptive statistics for
each group:

Groups are sorted by their group name in ascending order. If you want
to prevent sorting during grouping, use the sort=False option.

Grouping using multiple
columns
Grouping can also be performed on multiple columns by passing a list of
column names. The following code groups the data by both the sensor
and axis columns:

Since multiple columns were specified, the name of each group is now a
tuple representing each distinct combination of values from both sensor
and axis.

Grouping using index levels
It is possible to group by using the values in the index instead of the
columns. The sensor data is well suited for a hierarchical index, which
can be used to demonstrate this concept. Let's set up a form of this
data with a hierarchical index consisting of the sensor and axis columns:

Grouping can now be performed using the various levels of the
hierarchical index. This code will group by index level 0 (the sensor
names):

Grouping by multiple levels can be performed by passing the levels in a
list. And if MultiIndex has names specified for the levels, then these
names can be used instead of integers. The following code
demonstrates grouping by sensor and axis:

Applying aggregate functions,
transforms, and filters
The apply step allows for three distinct operations on each group of
data:
Applying an aggregation function
Performing a transformation
Filtering an entire group from the results
Let's examine each of these operations.

Applying aggregation functions
to groups
An aggregation function can be applied to each group using the
.aggregate() (or in short, .agg()) method of the GroupBy object. The parameter
of .agg() is a reference to a function that will be applied to each group. In
the case of a DataFrame, this function will be applied to each column of data
within the group.
The following example demonstrates calculating the mean of the values
for each sensor and axis:

As .agg() will apply the method to every column in each group, pandas
also calculates the mean of the interval values (which may not be of
much practical interest).
The result of the aggregation will have an identically structured index as
the original data. The as_index=False can be used to create a numeric index
and shift the level of the original index into columns:

Many aggregation functions are built in directly to the GroupBy object to
save you some typing. Specifically, these functions are (prefixed by gb.):
gb.agg
gb.height
gb.std
gb.aggregate
gb.hist
gb.sum
gb.apply
gb.indices
gb.tail

gb.boxplot
gb.last
gb.transform
gb.count
gb.max
gb.var
gb.cummax
gb.mean
gb.weight

gb.cummin
gb.median

gb.describe
gb.ngroups

gb.filter
gb.plot

gb.get_group
gb.rank

gb.cumprod
gb.min

gb.dtype
gb.nth

gb.first
gb.prod

gb.groups
gb.resample

gb.cumsum
gb.name

gb.fillna
gb.ohlc

gb.gender
gb.quantile

gb.head
gb.size

As a demonstration, the following code also calculates the mean for
each sensor and axis combination:

It is also possible to apply multiple aggregation functions in the same
statement by passing the functions in a list.

A different function can be applied to each column by passing a Python
dictionary to .agg(). The keys of the dictionary represent the column
name that the function is to be applied to, and the value of each
dictionary entry is the function. The following code demonstrates this
technique by calculating the mean of the reading column and returning the
length of the group in place of the interval value:

Aggregation can also be performed on specific columns using the []
operator on the GroupBy object. This code calculates the mean of only the
reading column:

Transforming groups of data
A GroupBy object provides a .transform() method that applies a function to
the all values in the DataFrame in each group. We will examine the general
transformation process and then look at two real-world examples.

The general process of
transformation
The .transform() method of a GroupBy object applies a function to every
value in the DataFrame and returns another DataFrame that has the
following characteristics:
It is indexed identically to the concatenation of the indexes in all the
groups
The number of rows is equal to the sum of the number of rows in all
the groups
It consists of non-grouped columns to which pandas has
successfully applied the given function (some columns can be
dropped)
To demonstrate transformation in action, let's start with the following
DataFrame:

New let's group by the Label column:

The following code performs a transformation that applies a function to
add 10 to each value:

pandas attempts to apply the function to all the columns, but since Label
and Other columns have string values, the transformation function fails (it
will throw an exception). Because of that failure, those two columns are
omitted from the result.
The result is also non-grouped, as the grouping structure is removed
from the result of a transformation. The resulting object will have an
index that matches the original DateFrame object's index, in this case, V, W, X,
Y and Z.

Filling missing values with the
mean of the group
A common transformation in statistical analysis with grouped data is to
replace missing data within each group with the mean of the non-NaN
values in the group. To demonstrate this, the following code creates a
DataFrame with a Label column with two values (A and B) and a Values column
containing a series of integers, but with one value replaced with NaN. The
data is then grouped by the Label column:

The mean of each group can be calculated using .mean():

Now suppose that we need the B group to have all NaN values filled in
because others using this data code may have difficulties handling the
NaN value. This can be performed succinctly with the following:

Calculating normalized z-scores
with a transformation
Another common example of transformation is creating normalized zscores on groups of data. To demonstrate this, we will take a randomly
generated series of values using a normal distribution with mean of 0.5
and a standard deviation of 2. The data is indexed by day and a rolling
mean is calculated on a 100-day window to generate samples of the
mean:

The rolling means have the following appearance:

At this point, we would like to standardize the rolling means for each
calendar year. The following code groups the data by year and reports
the existing mean and standard deviation of each group:

To perform the standardization, this code defines a z-score function,
applies it as a transform to each group, and reports on the new mean
and standard deviation:

And we can also compare the original and transformed data:

Filtering groups from
aggregation
Groups of data can be selectively dropped from processing using
.filter(). This method is supplied a function that can be used to make
group-level decisions on whether the entire group is included in the
result after the combination. The function should return True if the group is
to be included in the result and False to exclude it.
We will examine several scenarios using the following data:

The first demonstration will drop groups that do not have a minimum
number of items. Specifically, they will be dropped if they only have one
item or less:

The following example will omit groups that have any NaN values:

The next example will only select groups that have a mean that is greater
than 2.0, the mean of the entire data set (basically, this selects groups of
data that have an exceptional behavior as compared to the whole):

Summary
In this chapter, we examined various techniques for grouping and
analyzing groups of data with pandas. An introduction to the split-applycombine pattern was given along with an overview of how this pattern is
implemented in pandas. Then we learned how to split data into groups
based on data in both columns and in the levels of an index. We then
examined how to process data within each group using aggregation
functions and transformations. We finished with a quick examination of
how to filter groups of data based on their contents.
In the next chapter, we will dive deep into one of the most powerful and
robust capabilities of pandas - modeling of time series data.

Time-Series Modelling
A time-series is a measurement of one or more variables over a
period of time and at a specific interval. Once a time-series is captured,
analysis is often performed to identify patterns in the series, in essence,
determining what is happening as time goes by. This ability to analyze
time-series data is essential in the modern world, be it in order to
analyze financial information or to monitor exercise on a wearable
device and match your exercises to goals and diet.
pandas provides extensive abilities for modeling time-series data. In
this chapter, we will examine many of these capabilities, including:
Creating time series with specific frequencies
Representation of dates, time, and intervals
Representing a point in time with a Timestamp
Using a Timedelta to represent a time interval
Indexing using DatetimeIndex
Creating time-series with specific frequencies
Representing data intervals with date offsets
Anchoring periods to specific days of the week, month, quarter, or
year
Modelling an interval of time with a Period
Indexing using the PeriodIndex
Handling holidays with calendars
Normalizing timestamps using time zones
Shifting and lagging a time-series
Performing frequency conversion on a time-series
Up and down resampling of a time-series
Performing rolling window operations on a time-series

Setting up the IPython
notebook
To utilize the examples in this chapter, we will need to include the
following imports and settings:

Representation of dates, time,
and intervals
To begin to understand time-series data we need to first examine how
pandas represents dates, time, and intervals of time. pandas provides
extensive built-in facilities to represent these concepts as the
representations of these concepts are not implemented by Python or
NumPy robustly enough to handle the many concepts needed to
process time-series data.
Some of the additional capabilities include being able to transform data
across different frequencies and to apply different calendars to take into
account things such as business days and holidays in financial
calculations.

The datetime, day, and time
objects
The datetime object is part of the datetime library and not a part of pandas.
This class can be utilized to construct objects representing several
common patterns such as a fixed point in time using a date and time, or
simply a day without a time component, or a time without a date
component.
The datetime objects do not have the accuracy needed for much of the
mathematics involved in extensive calculations on time-series data.
However, they are commonly used to initialize pandas objects, with
pandas converting them into pandas timestamp objects behind the
scenes. Therefore, they are still worth a brief mention here as they will
be used frequently during initialization.
A datetime object can be initialized using a minimum of three parameters
representing year, month, and day:

The result has defaulted the hour and minute values to 0. The hour and
minute components can also be specified with two more values to the
constructor. The following creates a datetime object that also specifies
5:30 pm:

The current date and time can be determined using the datetime.now()
function which retrieves the local date and time:

A datetime.date object represents a specific day (it has no time
component). It can be created by passing a datetime object to the
constructor of datetime:

And you can retrieve the current local data using the following:

A time without a date component can be created using the datetime.time
object and by passing a datetime object to its constructor:

The current local time can be retrieved using the following:

Representing a point in time
with a Timestamp
The representation of date and time in pandas is performed using the
pandas.tslib.Timestamp class. A pandas Timestamp is based on the datetime64
dtype and has higher precision than the Python datetime object. In
pandas, Timestamp objects are generally interchangeable with datetime
objects, so you can typically use them wherever you may use datetime
objects.
You can create a Timestamp object using pd.Timestamp (a shortcut for
pandas.tslib.Timestamp) and by passing a string representing a date, time,
or date and time:

A time element can also be specified:

A Timestamp can also be created using just a time, which will default to
also assigning the current local date:

The following demonstrates how to retrieve the current date and time
using Timestamp:

As a pander user you will not normally create Timestamp objects directly.
Many of the pandas functions that use dates and times will allow you to
pass in a datetime object or a text representation of a date/time and the
functions will perform the conversion internally.

Using a Timedelta to represent
a time interval
To represent a difference in time we will use the pandas Timedelta object.
These are common as results of determining the duration between two
dates or to calculate the date at a specific interval of time from another
date and/or time.
To demonstrate a Timedelta, the following uses a timedelta object to
calculate a one-day increase in the time from the specified date:

The following demonstrates how to calculate how many days there are
between two dates:

Introducing time-series data
pandas excels in manipulating time-series data. This is very likely
because of its origins in processing financial information. These abilities
have been continuously refined over all of its versions to progressively
increase its capabilities for time-series manipulation.

Indexing using DatetimeIndex
The core of the time-series functionality in pandas revolves around the
use of specialized indexes that represent measurements of data at one
or more timestamps. These indexes in pandas are referred to as
DatetimeIndex objects. These are incredibly powerful objects, and they
allow us to automatically align data based on dates and times.
There are several ways to create DatetimeIndex objects in pandas. The
following creates a DateTimeindex by passing a list of datetime objects to a
Series:

This Series has taken the datetime objects and constructed a DatetimeIndex
from the date values. Each value of that index is a Timestamp object.
The following verifies the type of the index and the types of the labels in
the index:

It is not required that you pass datetime objects in the list to create a timeseries. The Series object is smart enough to recognize that a string
represents datetime and does the conversion for you. The following is
equivalent to the previous example:

pandas provides a utility function in pd.to_datetime() which takes a
sequence of similar- or mixed-type objects which pandas attempts to
convert into Timestamp objects and those into a DatetimeIndex. If an object in
the sequence cannot be converted, then pandas will create a NaT value
which means not-a-time:

Be careful, as the pd.to_datetime() function will throw an exception if it
cannot convert a value to a Timestamp:

To force the function to convert to dates instead of throwing an
exception, you can use the errors="coerce" parameter. Values that cannot
be converted will then assign NaT in the resulting index:

A range of timestamps with a specific frequency can be easily created
using the pd.date_range() function. The following creates a Series object
from DatetimeIndex of 10 consecutive days:

A DatetimeIndex can be used for various index operations such as data
alignment, selection, and slicing. The following demonstrates slicing
based by position:

To demonstrate alignment, we will use the following Series created with
the index of the subset we just created:

When we add s2 and date_series, alignment will be performed, returning
NaN where items do not align. The value at each index label will be the
sum of the values found at the same labels:

Items in a Series with a DatetimeIndex can be retrieved using a string
representing a date instead of having to specify a datetime object:

DatetimeIndex

can also be sliced using a string representing dates:

Another convenient feature of pandas is that DatetimeIndex can be sliced
using partial date specifications. As an example, the following code
creates a Series object with dates spanning two years, and then selects
only those items of the year 2013:

It is also possible to select items in a specific year and month. The
following selects the items in August 2014:

This also works with slices. The following returns items in August and
September, 2014:

Creating time-series with
specific frequencies
Time-series data can be created on intervals other than daily
frequency. Different frequencies can be generated with pd.date_range() by
utilizing the freq parameter. This parameter defaults to a value of 'D'
which represents daily frequency.
To demonstrate alternative frequencies, the following creates a
DatetimeIndex with 1-minute intervals by specifying freq='T':

This time-series allows us to slice at a finer resolution. The following
slices at the minute level:

The following table lists the possible frequency values:

Alias

Description

B

Business day frequency

C

Custom business day frequency

D

Calendar day frequency (the default)

W

Weekly frequency

M

Month end frequency

BM

Business month end frequency

CBM

Custom business month end frequency

MS

Month start frequency

BMS

Business month start frequency

CBMS

Custom business month start frequency

Q

Quarter end frequency

BQ

Business quarter frequency

QS

Quarter start frequency

BQS

Business quarter start frequency

A

Year-end frequency

BA

Business year-end frequency

AS

Year start frequency

BAS

Business year start frequency

H

Hourly frequency

T

Minute-by-minute frequency

S

Second-by-second frequency

L

Milliseconds

U

Microseconds

You can use the 'B' frequency to create a time-series that uses only
business days:

We can see that two days were skipped as they were on the weekend.
A range can be created starting at a particular date and time, with a
specific frequency, and for a specific number of periods using the periods
parameter. The following creates a 5-item DatetimeIndex starting at 201408-01 12:10:01 and at 1-second intervals:

Calculating new dates using
offsets
Frequencies in pandas are represented using date offsets. We have
touched on this concept at the beginning of the chapter when
discussing Timedelta objects. pandas extends the capabilities of these
using the concept of DateOffset objects. They are objects which
represent knowledge of how to integrate time offsets and frequencies
relative to DatetimeIndex objects.

Representing data intervals
with date offsets
objects are created at various frequencies by using passing
frequency strings such as 'M', 'W', and 'BM' using the freq parameter of
pd.date_range(). Under the hood, these frequency strings are translated
into an instance of the pandas DateOffset object.
DatetimeIndex

A DateOffset represents a regular frequency increment. Specific date
offset logic, such as "month", "business day", or "hour", is represented
in pandas with various subclasses of DateOffset. A DateOffset provides
pandas with the intelligence to be able to determine how to calculate a
specific interval of time from a reference date and time. This provides
the user of pandas much greater flexibility in representing date/time
offsets than just using a fixed numeric interval
A useful and practical example is calculating the next day of business.
This is not simply determined by adding one day to a datetime. If the date
represents a Friday, the next business day in the US financial market is
not Saturday but Monday. And in some cases, one business day from a
Friday may actually be Tuesday if Monday is a holiday. pandas gives
us all the tools required to handle these types of tricky scenarios.
Let's examine this in action by generating a date range using 'B' as the
frequency:

This time-series has omitted 2014-08-30 and 2014-08-30 as they are
Saturday and Sunday and not considered a business day.
A DatetimeIndex has a .freq property that represents the frequency of the
timestamps in the index:

Notice that pandas has created an instance of the BusinessDay class to
represent the DateOffset unit of this index. As mentioned earlier, pandas
represents different date offsets with a subclass of the DateOffset class.
The following are the various built-in date offset classes that are
provided by pandas:

Class

Description

DateOffset

Generic offset defaults to one calendar day

BDay

Business day

CDay

Custom business day

Week

One week, optionally anchored on a day of the week

WeekOfMonth

The x-th day of the y-th week of each month

LastWeekOfMonth

The x-th day of the last week of each month

MonthEnd

Calendar month end

MonthBegin

Calendar month start

BMonthEnd

Business month end

BMonthBegin

Business month start

CBMonthEnd

Custom business month end

CBMonthBegin

Custom business month start

QuarterEnd

Quarter end

QuarterBegin

Quarter start

BQuarterEnd

Business quarter end

BQuarterBegin

Business quarter start

FYS253Quarter

Retail (52-53 week) quarter

YearEnd

Calendar year end

YearBegin

Calendar year start

BYearEnd

Business quarter end

BYearBegin

Business quarter start

FYS253

Retail (52-53 week) year

Hour

One hour

Minute

One minute

Second

One second

Milli

One millisecond

Micro

One microsecond

pandas uses this strategy of using DateOffset and its specializations to
codify logic to calculate the next day. This makes using these objects
very flexible as well as powerful. DateOffset objects can be used in
various scenarios:
They can be added or subtracted to obtain a shifted date
They can be multiplied by an integer (positive or negative) so that
the increment will be applied multiple times
They have rollforward and rollback methods to move a date forward
or backward to the next or previous "offset date"
objects can be created by passing them a datetime object that
represents a fixed duration of time or using a number of keyword
arguments. Keyword arguments fall into two general categories. The
first category is keywords that represent absolute dates: year, month,
day, hour, minute, second, and microsecond. The second category
represents relative durations and can be negative values: years,
months, weeks, day, hours, minutes, seconds, and microseconds.
DateOffset

The following creates a 1-day offset and adds it to datetime:

The following calculates the next business day from a given date:

Multiple units of a specific DateOffset can be represented via
multiplication:

The following demonstrates using a BMonthEnd object to calculate the last
business day of a month from a given date (in this case, 2014-09-02):

The following uses the BMonthEnd objects .rollforward() method to calculate
the next month end:

Several of the offset classes can be parameterized to provide finer
control of the offset behavior. As an example, the following calculates
the date of the Tuesday (weekday = 1) in the week prior to 2014-08-31:

Anchored offsets
Anchored offsets are frequencies that represent a given frequency and
begin at a specific point such as a specific day of the week, month, or
year. Anchored offsets use a specific shorthand nomenclature. As an
example, the following strings specify a specific day of the week:
Alias

Description

W-SUN

Weekly on Sunday (same as 'W')

W-MON

Weekly on Monday

W-TUE

Weekly on Tuesday

W-WED

Weekly on Wednesday

W-THU

Weekly on Thursday

W-FRI

Weekly on Friday

W-SAT

Weekly on Saturday

As an example, the following generates an index that consists of the
dates of all Wednesdays between the two specified dates:

Anchored offsets can also be created using the annual and quarterly
frequencies. These frequency anchors are of the general form [B][A|Q]
[S]-[MON], where B (business days) and S (start of period instead end) are
optional, A is for annual or Q for quarterly, and MON is the three-digit
abbreviation for the month (JAN, FEB, ...).
To demonstrate, the following generates the business dates for quarter
end in the year 2014 with the year anchored at the end of June:

Representing durations of time
using Period
Many useful analysis operations on time-series data require that events
within a specific time interval be analyzed. A simple example would be
to determine how many financial transactions occurred in a specific
period.
These types of analyses can be performed using Timestamp and DateOffset,
where the bounds are calculated and then items filtered based on these
bounds. However, this becomes cumbersome when you need to deal
with events that must be grouped into multiple periods of time, as you
start to need to manage sets of the Timestamp and DateOffset objects.
To facilitate these types of data organization and calculations, pandas
makes intervals of time a formal construct using the Period class. pandas
also formalizes series of Period objects using PeriodIndex, which provides
capabilities of aligning data items based on the indexes associated
period objects.

Modelling an interval of time
with a Period
pandas formalizes the concept of an interval of time using a Period
object. A Period allows you to specify durations based on frequencies
such as daily, weekly, monthly, annually, quarterly, and so on, and it will
provide a specific start and end Timestamp representing the specific
bounded interval of time.
A Period is created using a timestamp and a frequency, where the
timestamp represents the anchor used as a point of reference and the
frequency is the duration of time. To demonstrate, the following creates
a period representing one month and which is anchored in August 2014:

A Period has start_time and end_time properties that inform us about the
derived start and end times:

As we specified a period that is August 2014, pandas determines the
anchor (start_time) and then calculates end_time based on the specified
frequency. In this case, it calculates one month from start_time and
returns the last time unit prior to that value.
Mathematical operations are overloaded on Period to calculate another
Period based on the given value. The following creates a new Period object

based on variable aug2014 which is shifted by 1 unit of its represented
frequency (which is one month):

The concept of the shift is very important and powerful. The addition of 1
to this Period object informs it to shift in time one positive unit of whatever
frequency is represented by the object. In this case, it shifts the period
one month forward to September 2014.
If we examine the start and end times represented in the sep2014 variable,
we see that pandas has gone through the effort of determining the
correct dates representing the entirety of September 2014:

Note that Period had the intelligence to know that September is 30 days
and not 31. This is part of the intelligence behind the Period object that
saves us a lot of coding, helping us to solve many difficult date
management problems.

Indexing using the PeriodIndex
A series of Period objects can be combined into a special form of
pandas index known as PeriodIndex. A PeriodIndex index is useful for being
able to associate data to specific intervals of time and with being able
to slice and perform analysis on the events in each interval.
The following creates a PeriodIndex consisting of 1-month intervals for the
year 2013:

differs from DatetimeIndex in that the index labels are Period
objects. The following prints the start and end times for all the Period
objects in the index:
PeriodIndex

pandas has determined the start and end of each month while taking
into account the actual number of days in each specific month.

Using PeriodIndex, we can construct a Series object using it as the index
and associate a value to each Period in the index:

We now have a time-series where the value at a specific index label
represents a measurement that spans a period of time. An example of a
series like this would be the average value of a security in a given
month instead of at a specific time. This becomes very useful when we
perform the resampling of the time series to another frequency.
Like DatetimeIndex, PeriodIndex can be used to index values using Period, a
string representing a period or partial period specification. To
demonstrate, we will create another series similar to the previous one
but spanning two years, 2013 and 2014:

Individual values can be selected using the specific index label using
either a Period object or a string representing a period. The following
demonstrates how to use a string representation:

Partial specifications can also be used, such as the following which
retrieves all values just for periods in 2014:

A PeriodIndex can also be sliced. The following retrieves all values for
periods between (and inclusive of) March and June 2014:

Handling holidays using
calendars
Earlier, when we calculated the next business day from August 29,
2014, we were told by pandas that this date is September 1, 2014.
This is actually not correct in the United States: September 1, 2014 is a
US federal holiday and banks and exchanges are closed on this day.
The reason for this is that pandas uses a specific default calendar
when calculating the next business day, and this default pandas
calendar does not include September 1, 2014 as a holiday.
The solution to this issue is to either create a custom calendar (which
we will not get into the details of), or use the one custom calendar
provided by pandas for just this situation, USFederalHolidayCalendar. This
custom calendar can then be passed to a CustomBusinessDay object that will
be used instead of a BusinessDay object. The calculation using this
CustomBusinessDay object will then use the new calendar and take into
account the US federal holidays.
The following demonstrates the creation of a USFederalCalendar object and
how to use it to report the days that it considers holidays:

This calendar can then be used to calculate the next business day from
August 29, 2014:

The resulting calculation now takes into account Labor Day not being a
business day and returns the correct date of 2014-09-02.

Normalizing timestamps using
time zones
Time zone management can be one of the most complicated issues to
deal with when working with time-series data. Data is often collected in
different systems across the globe using local time, and at some point,
it will require coordination with data collected in other time zones.
Fortunately, pandas provides rich support for working with timestamps
in different time zones. Under the covers, pandas utilizes the pytz and
dateutil libraries to manage the time zone operations. The dateutil
support is new as of pandas 0.14.1 and currently only supported for
fixed offset and tzfile zones. The default library used by pandas is pytz,
with support for dateutil provided for compatibility with other
applications.
pandas objects that are time zone-aware support a .tz property. By
default, pandas objects that are time zone-aware do not utilize a timezone
object for purposes of efficiency. The following gets the current time
and demonstrates that there is no time zone information by default:

This demonstrates that pandas treats Timestamp("now")
as UTC by default but without time zone data. This is a
good default, but be aware of this. In general, I find that if
you are ever collecting data based on the time that will be
stored for later access, or collected from multiple data
sources, it is best to always localize to UTC.

Likewise, DatetimeIndex and its Timestamp objects will not have associated
time zone information by default:

A list of common time zone names can be retrieved as shown in the
following example. If you do a lot with time zone data, these will
become very familiar:

The local UTC time can be found using the following which utilizes the
.tz_localize() method of Timestamp and by passing the UTC value:

Any Timestamp can be localized to a specific time zone by passing the
time zone name to .tz_localize():

A DatetimeIndex can be created with a specific time zone by using the tz
parameter of the pd.date_range() method:

It is also possible to construct other time zones explicitly. This model
can give you more control over which time zone is used in .tz_localize().
The following creates two different timezone objects and localizes a
Timestamp to each:

Operations on multiple time-series objects will be aligned by Timestamp in
their index by taking into account the time zone information. To
demonstrate this, we will use the following which creates two Series
objects using the two DatetimeIndex objects, each with the same start,
periods, and frequency but using different time zones:

The following demonstrates the alignment of these two Series objects by
time zone by adding the two together:

Once a time zone is assigned to an object, that object can be
converted to another time zone using the .tz.convert() method:

Now if we add s_pacific to s_mountain, the alignment will force the same
result:

Manipulating time-series data
We will now examine several common operations that are performed on
time-series data. These operations entail realigning data, changing the
frequency of the samples and their values, and calculating aggregate
results on continuously moving subsets of the data to determine the
behavior of the values in the data as time changes.

Shifting and lagging
A common operation on time-series data is to shift the values backward
and forward in time. The pandas method for this is .shift() which will
shift values in a Series or DataFrame a specified number of units of the
frequency in the index.
To demonstrate shifting, we will use the following Series. This Series has
five values, is indexed by date starting at 2014-08-01, and uses a daily
frequency:

The following shifts the values forward by 1 day:

pandas has moved the values forward one unit of the index's
frequency, which is one day. The index itself remains unchanged.
There was no replacement data for 2014-08-01 so it is filled with NaN.
A lag is a shift in a negative direction. The following lags the Series by 2
days:

Index labels 2014-08-04 and 2014-08-03 now have NaN values as there were
no items to replace.
A common calculation that is performed using a shift is to calculate the
percentage daily change in values. This can be performed by dividing a
Series object by its values shifted by 1:

Shifts can be performed on different frequencies than that in the index.
When this is performed, the index will be modified and the values
remain the same. As an example, the following shifts the Series forward
by one business day:

As another example, the following shifts forward by 5 hours:

A time-series can also be shifted using DateOffset. The following code
shifts the time series forward by 0.5 minutes:

There is an alternative form of shifting provided by the .tshift() method.
This method shifts the index labels by the specified units and a
frequency specified by the freq parameter (which is required). The
following code demonstrates this approach by adjusting the index by -1
hour:

Performing frequency
conversion on a time-series
Frequency data can be converted in pandas using the .asfreq() method
of a time-series object. When converting frequency, a new Series object
with a new DatatimeIndex object will be created. The DatetimeIndex of the
new Series object starts at the first Timestamp of the original and
progresses at the given frequency until the last Timestamp of the original.
Values will then be aligned into the new Series.
To demonstrate, we will use the following time series of consecutive
incremental integers mapped into each hour of each day for August
2014:

The following converts this time series to a daily frequency using
.asfreq('D'):

As data was aligned to the new daily time series from the hourly time
series, only values matching the exact days were copied.
If we convert this result back to an hourly frequency, we will see that
many of the values are NaN:

The new index has Timestamp objects at hourly intervals, so only the
timestamps at exact days align with the daily time series, resulting in
670 NaN values.
This default behavior can be changed using the method parameter of the
.asfreq() method. This value can be used for forward fill, reverse fill, or to
pad the NaN values.
The ffill method will forward fill the last known value (pad also does
the same):

The bfill method will back fill values from the next known value:

Up and down resampling of a
time-series
Frequency conversion provides a basic way to convert the index in a
time series to another frequency. Data in the new time series is aligned
with the old data and can result in many NaN values. This can be partially
solved using a fill method, but that is limited in its capabilities to fill with
appropriate information.
Resampling differs in that it does not perform a pure alignment. The
values placed in the new series can use the same forward and reverse
fill options, but they can also be specified using other pandas-provided
algorithms or with your own functions.
To demonstrate resampling, we will use the following time series, which
represents a random walk of values over a 5-day period:

Resampling in pandas is accomplished using the .resample() method and
by passing it a new frequency. To demonstrate this, the following
resamples the by-the-second data to by-the-minute. This is a
downsampling, as the result has a lower frequency and results in less
values:

Notice that the first value is -8.718220 whereas the original data had a
value of 0.469112. A frequency conversion would have left this value at
-8.718220. This is because a resampling does not copy data through
alignment. A resampling will actually split the data into buckets of data
based on new periods and then apply a particular operation to the data
in each bucket, in this case calculating the mean of the bucket. This
can be verified with the following which slices the first minute of data
from the walk and calculates its mean:

In downsampling, as the existing data is put into buckets based on the
new intervals, there can often be a question of what values are on each
end of the bucket. As an example, should the first interval in the
previous resampling be from 2014-08-01 00:00:00 through 2014-08-01 23:59:59,
or should it end at 2014-08-04 00:00:00 but start at 2014-08-03 23:59:59?
The default is the former, and it is referred to as a left close. The other
scenario that excludes the left value and includes the right is a right

close and can be performed by using the close='right' parameter. The
following demonstrates this, and notice the slight difference in the
intervals and values that result:

The decision about whether to use a right or left close is really up to you
and your data modeling, but pandas gives you the option for either.
Calculating the mean of each bucket is only one option. The following
demonstrates taking the first value in each bucket:

To demonstrate upsampling, we will resample the walk to minutes and
then back into seconds:

The upsampling created the index values for the second-by-second
data but inserted NaN values by default. This default behavior can be
modified using the fill_method parameter. We saw this when changing
frequency with the options of forward and backward filling. These are
also available with resampling. The following demonstrates how to use
the forward fill:

It is also possible to interpolate the missing values using the
.interpolate() method on the result. This will calculate a linear
interpolation between the values existing in the result for all of the NaN
values created during the resampling:

pandas also provides a very convenient resampling method referred to
as open, high, low, and close, by using the .ohlc() method. The
following example takes our second-by-second data and calculates
hour-by-hour ohlc values:

Time-series moving-window
operations
pandas provides a number of functions to compute moving (also known
as rolling) statistics. In a rolling window, pandas computes the statistic
on a window of data represented by a particular period of time. The
window is then rolled along a certain interval, and the statistic is
continually calculated on each window as long as the window fits within
the dates of the time series.
pandas provides direct support for rolling windows by providing a
.rolling() method on the Series and DataFrame objects. The resulting
value from .rolling() can then have one of many different methods called
which perform the calculation on each window. The following table
shows a number of these methods:
Function

Description

.rolling().mean()

The mean of values in the window

.rolling().std()

The standard deviation of values in the window

.rolling().var()

The variance of values

.rolling().min()

The minimum of values in the window

.rolling().max()

The maximum of values in the window

.rolling().cov()

The covariance of values

.rolling().quantile()

Moving window score at percentile/sample
quantile

.rolling().corr()

The correlation of values in the window

.rolling().median()

The median of values in the window

.rolling().sum()

The sum of values in the window

.rolling().apply()

The application of a user function to values in
the window

.rolling().count()

The number of non-NaN values in a window

.rolling().skew()

The skewedness of the values in the window

.rolling().kurt()

The kurtosis of values in the window

As a practical example, a rolling mean is commonly used to smooth out
short-term fluctuations and highlight longer-term trends in data and is
used quite commonly in financial time-series analysis. To demonstrate,
we will calculate a rolling mean with a window of 5 on the first minute of
the random walk created earlier in the chapter.

The generation of charts will be covered in more detail in
Chapter 14, Visualization
It can be seen how .rolling().mean() provides a smoother representation
of the underlying data. A larger window will create less variance, and
smaller windows will create more (until the window size is 1, which will
be identical to the original series).
The following demonstrates the rolling mean with windows of 2, 5, and
10 plotted against the original series:

Note that the larger the window, the more data is missing at the
beginning of the curve. A window of size n requires n data points before
the measure can be calculated and hence the gap in the beginning of
the plot.
Any user defined function can be applied via a rolling window using the
.rolling().apply() method. The supplied function will be passed an array
of values in the window and should return a single value. Pandas will
then combine the results from each window into a time-series.
To demonstrate, the following code calculates the mean average
deviation which gives you a feel of how far all values in the sample are
from the overall mean:

An expanding window mean can be calculated using a slight variant of
the use of the pd.rolling_mean function that repeatedly calculates the
mean by always starting with the first value in the time series and for
each iteration increases the window size by one. An expanding window
mean will be more stable (less responsive) than a rolling window,
because as the size of the window increases, the less the impact of the
next value will be:

Summary
In this chapter, we examined many of the ways to represent events that
occur at specific points in time and how to model these values as they
change over time. This involved learning many capabilities of pandas
including date and time objects, representation of changes in time with
intervals and periods, and performing several types of operations on
time series data such as frequency conversion, resampling, and
calculating rolling windows.
In the remaining two chapters of this book, we will leave the mechanics
of pandas behind and look more into both visualization of data and
applying pandas to analysis of financial data.

Visualization
One of the most important parts of data analysis is in creating a great
visualization to immediately convey the underlying meaning in the data.
Data visualization is effective, as we humans are visual creatures and
have evolved to be able to discern meaning when information is laid out
in a way that our brain can interpret almost immediately when the
impulses from the retina hit the brain.
Over the years, there has been significant research that has resulted in
many effective visualization techniques to convey specific patterns in
data. These patterns have been implemented in visualization libraries,
and pandas is designed to utilize these and make their use very simple.
This chapter will cover several of these techniques, primarily focusing
on matplotlib, and many of the common visualizations. We will do this in
three steps. The first introduces the general concepts of programming
visualizations with pandas, emphasizing the process of creating timeseries charts. During this, we will dive into the techniques of labeling
axes and creating legends, colors, line styles, and markers.
The second step will focus on the many types of data visualizations
commonly used in pandas and data analysis, including:
Showing relative differences with bar plots
Picturing distributions of data with histograms
Depicting distributions of categorical data with box and whisker
charts
Demonstrating cumulative totals with area plots
Relationships between two variables with scatter plots
Estimates of distribution with the kernel density plot
Correlations between multiple variables with the scatter plot matrix
Strengths of relationships in multiple variables with heatmaps

The final step will examine creating composite plots by dividing plots
into subparts to be able to render multiple plots within a single graphical
canvas. This will help the viewer of the visualization to relate different
sets of data at a glance.

Configuring pandas
The examples in this chapter will all be based on the following imports
and default settings. One small difference in this chapter is the
declaration of a seedval variable that is shared throughout the examples:

Plotting basics with pandas
The pandas library itself performs does not perform data visualization.
To perform this, pandas tightly integrates with other robust visualization
libraries that are part of the Python ecosystem. The most common of
these integrations is with matplotlib. This chapter will, therefore, focus its
examples on matplotlib, but we will also point you to other possible
libraries to try on your own. Two of these are worth mentioning.
Seaborn is another Python visualization library which is also based on
matplotlib. It provides a high-level interface for rendering attractive
statistical graphics. It has native support for NumPy and pandas data
structures. The goal of Seaborn is to create matplotlib graphs that look a
lot less scientific in nature. To learn about Seaborn, please visit the site
at http://seaborn.pydata.org/index.html.
While both Seaborn and matplotlib are exceptional at rendering data,
they both suffer from a lack of user interactivity. And although the
renderings from both can be displayed into a browser through tools
such as Jupyter, the renderings themselves are not created with DOM
nor do they make use of any capabilities of the browser.
In order to facilitate rendering in the browser and to provide rich
interactivity, several libraries have been created to integrate Python
and pandas with D3.js. D3.js is a JavaScript library for manipulating
documents and creating rich, interactive data visualizations. One of the
most popular of these is mpld3. Unfortunately, at the time of writing this
book, it does not work with Python 3.6 and could not be covered. But
please still check out D3.js at https://d3js.org and mpld3 at http://mpld3.github.io/.

Creating time-series charts
One of the most common data visualizations is of time-series data.
Visualizing a time series in pandas is as simple as calling .plot() on a
DataFrame or Series object that models a time series.
The following example demonstrates creating a time series that
represents a random walk of values over time, akin to the movements in
the price of a stock:

The .plot() method on pandas objects is a wrapper function around the
matplotlib library's plot() function. It makes plots of pandas data very easy
to create as its implementation is coded to know how to render many
visualizations based on the underlying data. It handles many of the
details such as selecting series, labeling, and axis generation.

In the previous example, .plot() determined that the Series contains dates
for its index and therefore the x-axis should be formatted as dates. It also
selects a default color for the data.
Plotting a Series of data gives a similar result as rendering a DataFrame
with a single column. The following code shows this by producing the
same graph with one small difference: it has added a legend to the
graph. Charts will contain a legend by default when generated from a
DataFrame.

If a DataFrame contains more than one column, .plot() will add multiple
items to the legend and pick a different color for each line:

If you want to use a column of data in a DataFrame as the labels on the xaxis of the plot (instead of the index labels), use the x parameter to
specify the name of a column representing the labels. Then use the y
parameter to specify which columns are used as data:

Adorning and styling your timeseries plot
The built-in .plot() method has many options that you can use to
change the content in the plot. Let's cover several of the common
options used in many plots.

Adding a title and changing
axes labels
The title of the chart can be set using the title parameter. The axes
labels are set not with .plot() but directly by using the plt.ylabel() and
plt.xlabel() functions after calling .plot():

Specifying the legend content
and position
To change the text used for each data series in the legend (the default is
the column name from DataFrame), capture the ax object returned from the
.plot() method and use its .legend() method. This object is an AxesSubplot
object and can be used to change various aspects of the plot before it is
generated:

The location of the legend can be set using the loc parameter of .legend().
By default, pandas sets the location to 'best', which tells matplotlib to
examine the data and determine the best place it thinks to put the
legend. However, you can also specify any of the following to position
the legend more specifically (you can use either the string or the numeric
code):

Text

Code

'best'

0

'upper right'

1

'upper left'

2

'lower left'

3

'lower right'

4

'right'

5

'center left'

6

'center right'

7

'lower center'

8

'upper center'

9

'center'

10

The following example demonstrates placing the legend in the uppercenter portion of the graph:

Legends can be turned off by using the legend=False:

Specifying line colors, styles,
thickness, and markers
pandas automatically sets the colors of each series on any chart. To
specify your own colors, supply style codes to the style parameter of the
plot function. pandas has a number of built-in single-character codes for
colors, several of which are listed here:
b: Blue
g: Green
r: Red
c: Cyan
m: Magenta
y: Yellow
k: Black
w: White
It is also possible to specify the color using a hexadecimal RGB code in
#RRGGBB format. The following example demonstrates both by setting
the color of the first series to green using a single-digit code and the
second series to red using the RGB hexadecimal code:

Line styles can be specified by using a line style code. These can be
used in combination with the color style codes by immediately following
the color code. Here are some examples of several useful line style
codes:
'-' = solid
'--' = dashed
':' = dotted
'-.' = dot-dashed
'.' = points
The following plot demonstrates these five line styles by drawing five
data series, each with one of these styles:

The thickness of a line can be specified by using the lw parameter . This
can be passed a thickness for multiple lines by passing a list of widths,
or a single width that is applied to all the lines. The following code
redraws the graph with a line width of 3, making the lines a little more
pronounced:

Markers on a line can be specified by using abbreviations in the style
code. There are quite a few marker types provided and you can see
them all at http://matplotlib.org/api/markers_api.html. We will examine five of them
in the next chart by having each series use a different marker from the
following: circles, stars, triangles, diamonds, and points:

Specifying tick mark locations
and tick labels
The location and rendering of tick marks can be customized using
various functions. The following code walks you through several
examples of controlling their values and rendering.
The values that pandas decides to use at label locations can be found
using the plt.xticks() function. This function returns two values: the
values at each tick and the objects representing the actual labels:

This tick array contains the locations of the ticks in units of the actual
data along the x-axis. In this case, pandas has decided that a range of 0
through 4 (the min and max) and an interval of 0.5 are appropriate.
If you want to use other locations, then provide them by passing a list to
plt.xticks(). The following code demonstrates this using even integers

from -1 to 5. This set of values will change both the extents of the axis as
well as remove non-integral labels:

The labels at each tick location can be specified by passing them as the
second parameter. This is shown in the following sample by changing
the y-axis ticks and labels to integral values and consecutive alpha
characters:

Formatting axes' tick date labels
using formatters
Formatting of axes' labels whose underlying data type is datetime is done
using locators and formatters. Locators control the position of the ticks
and formatters control the formatting of the labels.
matplotlib

provides several classes in maptplotlib.dates to help facilitate the

process:
,

,

,

,

MinuteLocator HourLocator DayLocator WeekdayLocator MonthLocator

, and

YearLocator

These are specific locators coded to determine where the ticks for
each type of date field will be found on the axis
DateFormatter
This is a class that can be used to format date objects into labels on
the axis
The default locator and formatter are AutoDateLocator and AutoDateFormatter.
These can be changed by providing different object implementations.
To demonstrate, let's start with the following subset of random walk data
from earlier examples; it represents only the data from January through
February 2014. Plotting this gives us the following output:

The labels on the x-axis of this plot have two series, the minor and the
major. The minor labels in this plot contain the day of the month, and
the major ones contain the year and month (the year only for the first
month). We can set locators and formatters for each of the minor and
major levels to change the values.
This will be demonstrated by changing the minor labels to start at
Monday in each week and to contain the date and day of the week (right
now, the chart uses weekly and only Friday's date-without the day
name). The major labels will use the monthly location and will always
include both the month name and the year:

This is almost what we wanted. However, note that the year is being
reported as 0045. To create a plot with custom-date-based labels, it is
required to avoid the pandas .plot() and go all the way down to directly
using matplotlib. Fortunately, this is not too hard. This snippet changes
the code slightly and renders what we need in the desired format:

We can use the .grid() method of the x-axis object to add grid lines for
the minor and major axes' ticks. The first parameter is True in order to
render the lines or False in order to hide them. The second specifies the
set of ticks. The following code replots this graph without the major grid
lines but while rendering the minor lines:

The final demonstration of formatting will use only the major labels, but
on a weekly basis and using a YYYY-MM-DD format. However, since these
would overlap, we will specify that they should be rotated to prevent the
overlap. This rotation is specified using the fig.autofmt_xdate() function:

Common plots used in
statistical analyses
Having learned how to create, lay out, and annotate time-series charts,
we will now look at creating a variety that is useful in presenting
statistical information.

Showing relative differences
with bar plots
Bar plots are useful in visualizing the relative differences in values of
non-time-series data. Bar plots can be created by using the kind='bar'
parameter of the .plot():

A multiple-series bar plot will be created to compare multiple values at
each x-axis label:

The stacked=True parameter can be use to stack the bars instead of being
side by side:

The orientation can be turned to horizontal using kind='barh':

Picturing distributions of data
with histograms
Histograms are useful for visualizing distributions of data. The following
code generates a histogram based on 1000 random values in a normal
distribution:

The resolution of a histogram can be controlled by specifying the
number of bins to allocate to the graph. The default is 10, and increasing
the number of bins gives finer details to the histogram. This code
increases the number of bins to 100:

If the data has multiple series, the histogram function will automatically
generate multiple histograms, one for each series:

To overlay multiple histograms on the same graph (to give a quick visual
difference of the distribution), call the pyplot.hist() function multiple times

before .show():

Depicting distributions of
categorical data with box and
whisker charts
Box plots come from descriptive statistics and are a useful way of
depicting the distributions of categorical data using quartiles. Each box
represents the values between the first and third quartiles of the data,
with a line across the box at the median. Each whisker reaches out to
demonstrate the extent to five interquartile ranges below and above the
first and third quartiles:

Demonstrating cumulative totals
with area plots
Area plots are used to represent cumulative totals over time and to
demonstrate the change in trends over time among related attributes.
They can also be "stacked" to demonstrate representative totals across
all variables.
Area plots are generated by specifying kind='area'. A stacked area chart
is the default:

Using stacked=False produces an unstacked area plot:

By default, unstacked plots have an alpha value of 0.5, so it is possible
to see how multiple series of data overlap.

Relationships between two
variables with scatter plots
A scatter plot displays the correlation between a pair of variables. A
scatter plot can be created from DataFrame by using .plot() and specifying
kind='scatter' as well as the x and y columns from the DataFrame source:

More elaborate scatter plots can be created by dropping down into
matplotlib. The following code demonstrates the use of Google stock data
for year 2016, calculates delta in the closing price per day, and then
renders close versus volume as bubbles of different sizes derived from
the volume:

Note the nomenclature for the x and y axes' labels, which creates a nice
mathematical style for the labels thanks to matplotlib's internal LaTeX
parser and layout engine.

Estimates of distribution with
the kernel density plot
A kernel density estimate plot, instead of being a pure empirical
representation of the data by estimating the true distribution of the data
which and smooths the data into a continuous plot. Kernel density
estimation plots can be created by using the .plot() method and setting
kind='kde'. The following code generates a normal distributed set of
numbers, displays it as a histogram, and overlays the kde plot:

Correlations between multiple
variables with the scatter plot
matrix
A scatter plot matrix is a popular way of determining whether there is a
linear correlation between multiple variables. This code creates a scatter
plot matrix with random values, and renders a scatter plot for each
variable combination as well as a kde graph for each variable along the
diagonal:

We will see this plot again when it is applied to finance, when
correlations of various stocks are calculated.

Strengths of relationships in
multiple variables with heatmaps
A heatmap is a graphical representation of data wherein values within a
matrix are represented by colors. This is an effective means to show
relationships of values that are measured at the intersection of two
variables.
A common scenario is to have the values in the matrix normalized to 0.0
through 1.0 and have the intersections between a row and column
represent the correlation between the two variables. Values with less
correlation (0.0) are the darkest and those with the highest correlation
(1.0) are white.
Heatmaps are easily created with pandas and matplotlib using the
.imshow() function:

Heatmaps will also be revisited to demonstrate correlations in the next
chapter.

Manually rendering multiple
plots in a single chart
It is often useful to contrast data by displaying multiple plots next to each
other. We have seen that pandas does this automatically for several
types of graphs. It is also possible to manually render multiple plots on
the same canvas.
To render multiple subplots on a canvas with matplotlib, make multiple
calls to plt.subplot2grid(). Each time pass the size of the grid the subplot is
to be located on (shape=(height, width)) and the location on the grid of the
upper-left location of the subplot (loc=(row, column)). The dimensions are in
the overall number of columns and not pixels.
The return value from each call to plt.subplot2grid() is a different AxesSubplot
object that can be used to specify the position of the rendering of the
subplot.
The following code demonstrates this by creating a plot based on two
rows and one column (shape=(2,1)). The first subplot, referenced by ax1, is
located in the first row (loc=(0,0)), and the second, referenced by ax2, is in
the second row (loc=(1,0)):

The subplots have been created but we have not drawn into either yet.
The size of any subplot can be specified using the rowspan and colspan
parameters in each call to plt.subplot2grid(). This means of specifying
spans is a lot like speng spans in HTML tables. This code demonstrates
using spans to create a more complicated layout of five plots by
specifying different row, column, and spans for each:

To render into a specific subplot, pass the target axis object to .plot()
using the ax parameter. The following code demonstrates this by
extracting each series from the random walk created at the beginning of
the chapter, and then by rendering each within different subplots:

Using this technique, we can perform combinations of different series of
data, such as a stock close versus volume graph. Given the data we
read during a previous example for Google, this code will plot the volume
versus the closing price:

Summary
In this chapter, we examined many of the most common means of
visualizing data from pandas. Visualization of your data is one of the
best ways to quickly understand the story that is being told within the
data. Python, pandas, and matplotlib (and even a few other libraries)
provide a means of very quickly getting to the underlying message and
displaying it beautifully too, with only a few lines of code.
In the next and final chapter of the book, we will examine the application
of pandas in finance, particularly stock price analysis.

Historical Stock Price Analysis
In this final chapter, we will use pandas to perform various financial
analyses of stock data obtained from Google Finance. This will also
cover several topics in financial analysis. The emphasis will be on using
pandas to derive practical time-series stock data and not on details of
the financial theory. However, we will cover many useful topics and
learn how easy it is to apply pandas to this domain and to others.
Specifically, in this chapter, we will progress through the following
tasks:
Fetching and organizing stock data from Google Finance
Plotting time-series prices
Plotting volume-series data
Calculating simple daily percentage change
Calculating simple daily cumulative returns
Resampling data from daily to monthly returns
Analyzing distribution of returns
Performing moving-average calculations
Comparing average daily returns across stocks
Correlating stocks based on the daily percentage change of
closing prices
Calculating stock volatility
Visualizing risk relative to expected returns

Setting up the IPython notebook
The examples in this chapter will all be based on the following imports
and default settings:

Obtaining and organizing stock
data from Google
Our first task is to write a couple of functions that help us with retrieving
stock data from Google Finance. We have already seen that this data
can be read using a pandas DataReader object, but we will need to
organize the data a little differently than how it is provided by Google
Finance, as we are going to perform various pivots of this information
later.
The following function will get all the Google Finance data for a specific
stock between the two specified dates, and also add the stock's symbol
in a column (this will be needed later for pivots).

The data will consist of a fixed 3-year window, spanning the years of
2012 through 2014. The following reads data for this 3-year period for
the MSFT ticker:

Now that we have a function that can get data for a single ticker, it will
be convenient to have a function that can read the data for multiple
tickers and return them all in a single data structure. The following code
performs this task:

The examples in this chapter will use historical quotes for Apple
(AAPL), Microsoft (MSFT), General Electric (GE), IBM (IBM),
American Airlines (AA), Delta Airlines (DAL), United Airlines (UAL),
Pepsi (PEP), and Coca Cola (KO).
These stocks were chosen deliberately to have a sample of multiple
stocks in each of the three different sectors: technology, airlines, and
soft drinks. The purpose of this is to demonstrate how to derive
correlations in various stock price measurements over the selected timeperiod among the stocks in similar sectors, and to also demonstrate the
difference in stocks between sectors.

We can read these with the following:

Note: During testing, it has been identified that depending
on your location, this may cause some errors due to URL
accessibility.

We will be particularly interested in the close price values in the Close
column. However, it would have been more convenient for us if we had a
DataFrame object indexed by date, and where each column was the price
for a specific stock, with the rows being the close value for that ticker at
that date. This can be done by pivoting the data, and is the reason for
adding the Ticker column when reading the data. The following function
will do this for us:

The following uses the function to pivot the data to the new organization:

The close values for all stocks are now values in a column for each
respective stock. In this format, it will be simple to compare the closing
prices of each stock against the others.

Plotting time-series prices
Now let's perform a graphical comparison of the closing values for AAPL
and MSFT. The following plots the adjusted closing price for AAPL:

The following shows MSFT:

Both sets of closing values can easily be displayed on a single chart to
give a side-by-side (or one over the other) comparison:

Plotting volume-series data
Volume data can be plotted using bar charts. We first need to get the
volume data, which can be done using the pivot_tickers_to_columns()
function created earlier:

We can now use this data to plot a bar chart. The following plots the
volume for MSFT:

A common type of financial graph plots a stock volume relative to its
closing price. The following sample creates this type of visualization:

Calculating the simple daily
percentage change in closing
price
The simple daily percentage change in closing price (without dividends
and other factors) is the percentage change in the value of a stock over
a single day of trading. It is defined by the following formula:

This can be easily calculated in pandas using .shift():

A quick check confirms that the return for AAPL on 2011-09-08 is
correct:

A plot of daily percentage change will tend to look like noise, as shown in
the preceding rendering. However, when we use the cumulative product
of these values, known as the daily cumulative return, it is possible to
see how the value of the stock changes over time. That is our next task.

Calculating simple daily
cumulative returns of a stock
The simple cumulative daily return is calculated by taking the cumulative
product of the daily percentage change. This calculation is represented
by the following equation:

This is calculated succinctly using the .cumprod() method:

It is now possible to plot cumulative returns to see how the various
stocks compare in value over time:

Resampling data from daily to
monthly returns
To calculate the monthly rate of return, we can use a little pandas magic
and resample the original daily returns. During this process, we will also
need to throw out the days that are not an end of month as well as
forward fill any missing values. This can be done using the .ffill() on the
result of the resampling:

Note the date of the entries and that they are now all month-end dates.
Values have not changed, as the resample only selects the dates at the
end of the month, or fills with the value prior to that date if it did not exist
in the source.
Now we can use this to calculate the monthly percentage changes:

This now allows the calculation of monthly cumulative returns:

The monthly returns have the following visualization:

This looks like the daily returns, but overall, it is not as smooth. This is
because it uses roughly a 30th of the data and is tied to the end of
month.

Analyzing distribution of returns
It is possible to get a feel for the difference in distribution of the daily
percentage changes for a specific stock by plotting that data in a
histogram. A trick with generating histograms for data such as daily
returns is to select the number of bins to lump values into. The example
will use 50 bins, which gives a good feel for the distribution of daily
changes across three years of data.
The following shows you the distribution of the daily percentage change
for AAPL:

This visualization tells us several things. First, most of the daily
movements center around 0.0. Second, there is a small amount of skew
to the left, but the data appears relatively symmetric.
We can plot the histograms of the daily percentage change for all the
stocks in a single histogram matrix plot. This gives us a means to quickly
determine the differences in stock behavior over these three years:

The labels on the axis are a bit squished together, but it's
the histogram shape that is important.
From this chart, the difference in the performances of these nine stocks
can be seen, particularly, the skewedness (more exceptional values on
one side of the mean). We can also see the difference in the overall
distribution widths, which gives a quick view of stocks that are more or
less volatile.

Performing a moving-average
calculation
The moving average of a stock can be calculated using .rolling().mean().
The moving average will give you a sense of the performance of a stock
over a given time-period, by eliminating "noise" in the performance of the
stock. The larger the moving window, the smoother and less random the
graph will be, but at the expense of accuracy.
The following sample calculates the moving average for MSFT over 30and 90-day periods, using the daily close value. The difference in the
reduction of noise can be easily determined from the visual:

Comparison of average daily
returns across stocks
A scatter plot is a very effective means of being able to visually
determine the relationship between the rates of change in stock prices
between two stocks. The following graphs the relationship of the daily
percentage change in the closing price between MSFT and AAPL:

This gives us a very quick view of the overall correlation of the daily
returns between the two stocks. Each dot represents a single day for
both the stocks. Each dot is plotted along the vertical based on the
percentage change for AAPL, and along the horizontal for MSFT.
If for every amount that AAPL changed in value, MSFT also changed an
identically proportional amount that day, then all the dots would fall along
a perfect vertical diagonal from the lower-left to upper-right section. In
this case, the two variables would be perfectly correlated with a
correlation value of 1.0. If the two variables were perfectly uncorrelated,

the correlation and hence the slope of the line would be 0, which is
perfectly horizontal.
To demonstrate what a perfect correlation would look like, we can plot
MSFT versus MSFT. Any such series when correlated with itself will
always be 1.0:

Getting back to the plot of AAPL versus MSFT, excluding several
outliers, this cluster appears to demonstrate only a moderate correlation
between the two stocks, as the values all appear to cluster around the
center.
An actual correlation calculation (which will be examined in the next
section) shows the correlation to be 0.1827 (which would be the slope of
the regression line). This regression line would be more horizontal than
diagonal. This means that for any specific change in the price of AAPL,
statistically, it would more times than not, not be able to predict the
change in price of MSFT on the given day from the price change in
AAPL.
To facilitate the bulk visual analysis of multiple correlations, we can use
a scatter plot matrix graph:

The diagonal in this plot is a kernel density estimation graph. The
narrower curves are less volatile than those that are wider, with the skew
representing the tendency for greater returns or losses. Combined with
the scatter plots, this gives a quick summary of the comparison of any
two stocks with two different visual metrics.

Correlation of stocks based on
the daily percentage change of
the closing price
Correlation is a measure of the strength of the association between two
variables. A correlation coefficient of 1.0 means that every change in
value in one set of data has a proportionate change in value in the other
set of data. A 0.0 correlation means that the data sets have no
relationship. The higher the correlation, the more ability there is to
predict a change in each, based on one or the other.
The scatter plot matrix gave us a quick visual idea of the correlation
between two stocks, but it was not an exact number. The exact
correlation between the columns of data in DataFrame can be calculated
using the .corr() method. This will produce a matrix of all possible
correlations between the variables represented the columns.
The following example calculates the correlation in the daily percentage
change in the close price for all these stocks over the three years of the
sample:

The diagonal is always 1.0, as a stock is always perfectly correlated with
itself. This correlation matrix can be visualized using a heat map:

The idea with this diagram is that you can see the level of correlation via
color, by finding the intersection of vertical and horizontal variables. The
darker the color, the less the correlation; the lighter the color, the greater
the correlation.

Calculating the volatility of
stocks
The volatility of a stock is a measurement of the amount of change of
variance in the price of a stock over a specific time-period. It is common
to compare the volatility of a stock to another stock to get a feel for which
may have less risk, or to a market index to compare the stock's volatility
to the overall market. Generally, the higher the volatility, the riskier the
investment is in that stock.
Volatility is calculated by taking a rolling-window standard deviation on
the percentage change in a stock (and scaling it relative to the size of
the window). The size of the window affects the overall result. The wider
a window, the less representative the measurement will become. As the
window narrows, the result approaches the standard deviation. So, it is a
bit of an art to pick the proper window size, based on the data sampling
frequency. Fortunately, pandas makes this very easy to modify
interactively.
As a demonstration, the following calculates the volatility of the stocks in
our sample, given a window of 75 periods:

Lines higher on the chart represent overall higher volatility, and the
change of volatility over time is shown as movement in each line.

Determining risk relative to
expected returns
A useful analysis is to relate the volatility of a stock's daily percentage
change to its expected return. This gives a feel for the risk/return ratio of
the investment in the stock. This can be calculated by mapping the
mean of the daily percentage change relative to the standard deviation
of the same values.
The creates a scatter plot that relates the risk and return of our sample
set of stocks, and labels the points with a bubble and arrow too:

The results of this immediately jump out from the visualization, but have
been more difficult to see by just looking at tables of numbers:
Airline stocks (AA, DAL, and UAL) have the highest risk but also
have the highest returns (Isn't that the general rule of investing?).
The tech stocks are of medium risk but also have medium returns.
Among the tech stocks, IBM and GE are the most conservative of
the four.
The cola stocks have the lowest risk but are also among the lowest
returns as a group. This makes sense for a high-volume commodity.

Summary
We have reached the end of our journey in learning about pandas and
the features it offers for data manipulation and analysis. Prior to this
chapter, we spent most of our time learning the features of pandas, and
in many cases, using data designed to demonstrate the concepts
instead of using real-world data.
In this chapter, we used everything that we've learned up to this point to
demonstrate how easy it is to use pandas to analyze real-world data,
specifically stock data, and to derive results from the data. Often, this
enables us to draw quick conclusions through visualizations designed
to make the patterns in the data apparent.
This chapter also introduced several financial concepts, such as the
daily percentage change, calculating returns, and the correlation of
time-series data, among others. The focus was not on financial theory
but to demonstrate how easy it is to use pandas to manage and derive
meaning from what was otherwise just lists and lists of numbers.
In closing, it is worth noting that although pandas was created by
financial analysts (hence its ability to provide simple solutions in the
financial domain) pandas is in no way limited to just finance. It is a very
robust tool for data analysis and can be applied just as effectively to
many other domains. Several of these are emerging markets that
represent a significant opportunity, such as social network analysis or
applications of wearable computing. Whatever your domain of use for
pandas, I hope you find using pandas as fascinating as I do.

