LEARN PYTHON
PROGRAMMING
CRASH COURSE FOR
BIGINNERS COOKBOOK
40 Example Programs, Modules and
Packages, Python Decorators, Python
3
With Web Scraping, Clean Code

By
Janani Sathish

TABLE OF CONTENTS
WHAT IS PYTHON_ YOU SHOULD LEARN PYTHON NOW!
JAVA VS PYTHON COMPARISON
PIP INSTALL AND PYPI
MODULES AND PACKAGES
NAME AND MAIN
PROGRAM TO CONVERT KILOMETERES INTO MILES
FIND THE SMALLEST NUMBER AMONG THREE NUMBERS IN
PYTHON
HOW TO PRINT HELLO WORLD IN PYTHON
FACTORIAL CALCULATOR OF A NUMBER IN PYTHON
GET INPUT FROM USER IN PYTHON IN STRING, INTEGER,
AND FLOAT FORM
DECORATORS WITH PYTHON OVERVIEW
PRINTING OF PRIME NUMBER IN PYTHON USING FUNCTION
PROGRAM TO PRINT MULTIPLICATION TABLE OF A GIVEN
NUMBER IN PYTHON
LEAP YEAR PROGRAM IN PYTHON USING IF ELIF CONDITIONS
IN PYTHON 3
CONVERT ASCII TO CHAR PYTHON
CONVERT CHARACTER OR LETTER TO ASCII PYTHON
GENERATORS WITH PYTHON
GENERATORS HOMEWORK OVERVIEW
GENERATORS HOMEWORK SOLUTIONS
HCF OF TWO NUMBERS BY DIVISION METHOD USING
EUCLIDIAN ALGORITHM
CALCULATE CUBE OF A NUMBER IN PYTHON BY LAMBDA
FUNCTION
ADD TWO FLOAT NUMBERS IN PYTHON

EVEN ODD PROGRAM IN PYTHON USING FUNCTION
HOW TO COUNT THE NUMBER OF VOWELS IN A STRING
PYTHON USING FOR LOOP
INTRODUCTION TO WEB SCRAPING
SETTING UP WEB SCRAPING LIBRARIES
PYTHON WEB SCRAPING - GRABBING A TITLE
PYTHON WEB SCRAPING - GRABBING A CLASS
PYTHON WEB SCRAPING - GRABBING AN IMAGE
PYTHON WEB SCRAPING
PYTHON WEB SCRAPING - BOOK EXAMPLES PART TWO
PYTHON WEB SCRAPING - EXERCISE OVERVIEW
PYTHON WEB SCRAPING - EXERCISE SOLUTIONS
PROGRAM TO CHECK WHETHER A NUMBER IS POSITIVE OR
NEGATIVE OR ZERO IN PYTHON
ADD SUBTRACT MULTIPLY OR DIVIDE TWO INTEGERS
NUMBERS
VOWEL OR CONSONANT PYTHON PROGRAM
CELCIUS TO FARENHEIT PYTHON CODE _ FAHRENHEIT TO
CELSIUS PYTHON
EXPONENTIATION (POWER OF A NUMBER) IN PYTHON USING
ANONYMOUS FUNCTION
WORKING WITH IMAGES WITH PYTHON
PYTHON IMAGE EXERCISES – OVERVIEW
PYTHON IMAGE EXERCISES – SOLUTION
PROGRAM TO CHECK WHETHER A CHARACTER IS ALPHABET
OR NOT IN PYTHON
LARGEST AMONG THREE NUMBERS IN PYTHON
HOW TO FIND LENGTH OF STRING IN PYTHON WITHOUT
USING LEN _ WITH LENGTH FUNCTION
HOW TO REVERSE A STRING IN PYTHON

SORT A STRING ALPHABETICALLY PYTHON
CREATE OR DECLARE EMPTY LIST PYTHON 3
WORKING WITH CSV FILES IN PYTHON
WORKING WITH PDF FILES IN PYTHON
PDFS AND SPREADSHEETS PYTHON PUZZLE EXERCISE
PDFS AND SPREADSHEETS PYTHON PUZZLE EXERCISE –
SOLUTIONS
REMOVE PUNCTUATION MARKS FROM STRING PYTHON
HOW TO FIND THE LARGEST NUMBER IN A LIST PYTHON
USING LIST APPEND METHOD
PYTHON HOW TO FIND THE LARGEST NUMBER IN A LIST
WITHOUT MAX
PYTHON HOW TO FIND THE BIGGEST NUMBER IN A LIST MAX
FUNCTION
SMALLEST NUMBER IN A LIST PYTHON USING LIST APPEND
AND FOR LOOP
SENDING EMAILS WITH PYTHON
RECEIVING EMAILS WITH PYTHON
PRINT THE SMALLEST NUMBER IN A LIST PYTHON USING
LIST SORT
HOW TO FIND THE SMALLEST NUMBER IN A LIST PYTHON
USING MIN FUNCTION
SUM OF ALL DIGITS IN A NUMBER PYTHON
SUM OF N NATURAL NUMBERS IN PYTHON USING WHILE
LOOP
NUMBERS DIVISIBLE BY OTHER NUMBERS
ADVANCED NUMBERS
ADVANCED STRINGS
ADVANCED SETS
ADVANCED DICTIONARIES
ADVANCED LISTS

ADVANCED PYTHON OBJECTS ASSESSMENT TEST
ADVANCED PYTHON OBJECTS TEST – SOLUTIONS
INTERACT FUNCTIONALITY WITH GUIS
GUI WIDGET BASICS
LIST OF POSSIBLE WIDGETS
WIDGET STYLING AND LAYOUTS
EXAMPLE OF WHAT A WIDGET CAN DO!
SWAPPING TWO NUMBERS WITH THIRD VARIABLE
SWAPPING TWO NUMBERS WITHOUT THIRD TEMPORARY
VARIABLE
PYTHON PROGRAM TO ADD TWO MATRICES USING NESTED
LIST
ADD TWO BINARY STRINGS PYTHON USING INT AND BIN
FUNCTION
PYTHON PROGRAM TO CONVERT DECIMAL TO BINARY
OBJECTS AND DATA STRUCTURES ASSESSMENT –
SOLUTIONS
CHAINED COMPARISON OPERATORS
GENERATE 0 AND 50 USING RANDIT RANDOM MODULE
ADD TWO NUMBERS PROVIDED BY THE USER PYTHON
FINDING TRANSPOSE OF A MATRIX IN PYTHON
PYTHON PROGRAM TO PRINT THE CALENDAR OF A GIVEN
MONTH AND YEAR

WHAT IS PYTHON_ YOU SHOULD
LEARN PYTHON NOW!
What is Python? Python is a general-purpose programming language,
which is easy to learn and dynamically initialised. It has an easy and
elegant syntax, with high-level and dynamic semantics, which makes it
an ideal language for beginners, scripting and rapid application
development. Python was first released in 1991 and created by Guido
van Rossum, a Dutch programmer best known as the author of the
Python programming language, who wanted to designed a language
very simple to write and easy to read. Thus, Python is much easier to
learn than any other programming languages. And it helps you create
beautiful applications, with less effort. But you're wondering: What
features and benefits does Python offer? There are many features
provided, so are the benefits of learning Python, especially as your first
language... Let's start with the benefits of learning Python. Easy:
Python is the best languages to get started with and the language
preferred by beginners and pros alike. Its easy syntax and high-level
features makes it one of the best languages, for anybody who wants to
start programming. Free: Python is an open source language, which
means that it is free for everyone to use. It can be freely modified and
redistributed for any purpose, commercial or not. Application: Python
can be used to develop almost anything, desktop mobile and web
applications. Plus it is very useful in many areas: data analysis,
artificial intelligence, machine learning and so forth. Library support:
Python has a massive support base, thanks to the fact that it is open
source and community developed. Millions of like-minded developers
work with the language on a daily basis. And they continue to improve
core functionality, which makes Python even better and more efficient.
Thus, it is a great way to network with other developers, share and
develop your skills. You can now understand why people in the world
love Python so much. But, What are its features? Simplicity: Python is a
language that is remarkably easy to learn, which means that it is much
easier to get your programs up and running. Since it requires a simple

elegant and beginner friendly syntax, that focuses on readability, the
programs you write are much easier to read - even if you are not a
skilled programmer. This is mainly because it is closer to the human
language, or how we write words, instead of a language that
computers used to read. Developers can read and translate Python
code much easier than any other languages. In turn, this reduces the
cost of program maintenance and development, because it allows
teams to work collaboratively and without significant language or
experience barriers. Interpreted: Python supports multiple
programming paradigms, including procedural, object-oriented and
functional programming. Most importantly: Python is an interpreted
language, which means that the written code is actually not translated
into a computer readable format... Python codes are executed line by
line, which makes debugging errors much easier and efficient. But this
comes at a cost, as it is much slower than other compiled
programming languages. Object orientation: object-oriented
programming is an approach used for modeling concrete and real world
entities into software objects, which have some data associated with
them and can perform certain functions. For instance, an object could
represent a person with a name, an age, an address, etc. And with
behaviors like: walking, talking or running. Its object oriented approach
aims to help programmers write clear and logical code, for small and
large-scale projects. Portability: there is no exclusivity, as Python and
all the necessary tools are available on all major platforms. It is
compatible with a long list of computers and operating systems, like
Windows, Linux, Mac OS and more. Furthermore, it uses a similar
interface on each one of those platforms, which means you can jump
between them easily - and if necessary. Embeddable and extensible:
Python can be embedded into an application, which will provide a
programmable interface for the users of this app. This is a great
feature, if you are putting together an app that will require working with
Python in a terminal. Additionally, Python supports the use of modules
and packages, which means that programs can be designed in a
modular style, and code can be reused across a variety of projects.
Even better, it can be shared and scaled for use in other projects, once
you have developed the module or package that you need. It is very

easy to import or export libraries. Python comes with the Standard
Python Library, offering integrated support for a variety of common
programming tasks, like syncing with web servers, searching through
text and modifying files... For a majority of other languages, you have
to create this content from scratch. Python also has an amazing
community that has built a number of additional useful tools. And you
could use them in your own programs. Do you need to work with PDF
documents? There is a comprehensive tool for that! Want to collect
data from web pages? No need to start from scratch: Python powers
Django, a complete and open source web application framework,
which can be used to simplify and speed the development process.
Open source: Python has a massive support base, thanks to the fact
that it is open source and community developed. Millions of likeminded developers work with the language on a daily basis, and they
continue to improve core functionality. The latest version of Python
continues to receive enhancements and updates. Therefore, it is a
great way to network with other developers, share and develop your
skills. One of the most promising benefits of python is that the Python
interpreter and the extensive standard library are freely available, in
both source and binary forms, and for all the major platforms. It can be
downloaded from the Python web site and may be freely modified or
redistributed for any purpose, commercial or not. Since Python is
available under an open-source license there are no licensing fees
either, despite the fact that it is copyrighted. The same site also
contains distributions and pointers to many free third-party Python
modules, as well as programs and tools. But also additional
documentation and so on. If this description of Python over your head
don't worry, you will understand it soon enough. What you really need to
take away from these sections is that Python is a programming
language used to develop softwares and web apps, including mobile. It
is relatively easy to learn, since the necessary tools and
documentations are available to all and free of charge. That makes
python accessible to almost anyone... If you have the time to learn, you
can create some amazing things. Therefore it can be used as a
stepping stone into other programming languages and frameworks.
Anyone can begin working with the language, all it takes is a bit of

patience and a lot of practice. If you are an absolute beginner and this
is your first time working with any type of coding language, Python is
definitely something you want. But, Why is Python getting so popular?
Because of all its features and benefits, you might have heard that
Python is popular. On one hand, it may seem that it doesn't really
matter how popular language is, if you can build the app you want to
build with it. But for better or worse, in software's development:
popularity is a strong indicator of the high quality of libraries you will
have available, as well as the number of job openings. So, is Python
actually that popular? YES, and there are plenty of stats to back this
one. Let's look at some analytics available and presented by
stackoverflow.com. They run as its called: stack overflow trends. Here
you can look at the trends for various technologies by tag. When you
compare Python to the other likely candidates that you could pick to
learn programming, you will see one is unlike the others. Notice the
incredible growth of Python, compared to the flat line or even the
downward trend of the other usual candidates. If you are betting your
future on the success of a given technology, which one would you
choose from this list? You got it, Python has a lot to offer. And you will
soon be able to write your own scripts. What is Python used for?
Actually, pretty much anything you want! Most automation, data mining
and big data platforms rely on Python. Python can also be used to
process text, display numbers or images, even solve scientific
equations and save data. In short, it is used behind the scenes to
process a lot of elements you might need or encounter on your
devices. This is because it is the ideal language to work with for
general-purpose tasks. For instance, it is used for GUI applications,
games development, scraping data from websites web and software
development, system administration utilities, scientific data analysis,
machine learning, and many more... The Python programming
language, also referred to as a scripting language, has considerably
changed these last few years. Because Python is now used to write
large commercial style applications, instead of just banal ones. Thus,
this reliance on Python has grown even more, so as the internet gained
popularity. Not only is Python a friendly and fun language to learn, but it
also powers the technology behind multiple world-class companies.

Actually, a large majority of web applications and platforms now rely on
Python, including Google's search engine, YouTube platform and the
web oriented transaction system of the New York Stock Exchange
(NYSE). You know that the language must be pretty serious, when it
comes to powering a stock exchange system. In fact there are also
many other big companies, among Pinterest, Instagram, Netflix,
Spotify, Disney, Yahoo, Nokia, IBM and many others, to name just a
few. You are probably wondering why any of this matters? That's
because once you learn Python, you will never have a shortage of
ways to utilize your skill. Not to mention, since a lot of big companies
rely on the language, you can make good money as a Python
developer. Career opportunities: In this dynamic world where
everything changes at a rapid rate, the popularity of Python never
seems to cease. Today, Python certification is one of the most sought
after skills, in the entire programming domain. Have you ever
wondered if it is really worth it? Python as a programming language is
easy and simple to learn. Python cuts development time in half with its
simple to read syntax and has easy compilation feature. It also has
plenty of libraries that support data analysis, manipulation and
visualisation. Therefore, it has evolved as the most preferred language
and considered to be the next big thing and a must, for professionals.
By the end of 2019, Python was delivering some impressive numbers.
A recent indeed.com inquiry also revealed at least 55,000 Python jobs
in the United States, with exponential salary figures. You can find many
job offers on the market. Most of the companies are seeking for the
following profiles, which may require Python skills. Software engineer,
Python developer, research analyst, data analyst, data scientist,
software developer... Are you now ready to learn Python? But you don't
know how to get started, or even what to learn? Whether you are new
to programming or a professional software developer looking to dive
into a new language, this project will teach you all of the Python basics
that you need to get started on your own projects. Python syntax,
variables, data types, operators, conditions, loops, methods and
functions, file handling OOP, and so many more. No matter what your
ultimate goals may be or if you work with a computer at all, you will

soon be finding endless ways to improve your life by automating tasks
and solving problems with Python programs that you will create.

JAVA VS PYTHON COMPARISON
Java and Python are the two most trending and Powerful languages of
recent times and it is quite common to get confused when it comes to
picking one out of the two. Now the most common question asked by
the beginners is which one is better Java or python. So let's get
started. The number of programming languages used in production
and day-to-day life has seen an enormous growth in the last decade
now from those bustling numbers. We are going to narrow our Focus to
the two most popular languages that have created quite a buzz
among the developers as well as the beginners. So let's begin with a
brief introduction of both the languages. Java is one of the most
fundamental languages that produces software for multiple platforms.
And the best thing is that it is machine independent and can be written
once and run anywhere python on the other hand is a simple easy to
read and high-level programming language, but program is mostly fall
in love with it because of the increased productivity that it provides
both of these have been the two most popular and controversial
languages of the decade. So let's move ahead and take a look at the
various aspects of comparison that will help us to find an answer to the
question which one is better out of the two now if we take a look at the
speed of java and python, the former is a statically typed programming
language, which makes it faster. Where is the later is an interpreter
which determines the type of data at runtime thus making it slower
comparatively when it comes to Legacy Javas history in the
Enterprise. And the world was coding style are typically larger and
more numerous. Where is python has less Legacy problem, which
makes it difficult for the organization's to copy and paste codes now
both the languages are pretty simple and easy to write but if we look
at the length of both the codes python consists of less number of lines
or shorter codes as compared to Java which are also easy to
understand another characteristic is the databases Java database
connectivity is most popular and widely used to connect whereas
pythons database access layers are weaker than jdbc that is why it is
rarely used in Enterprises. Now if I look at the Practical agility Java

provides more undeviating refactoring support then python because of
its static type system and universality of IDE for the development of
mobile and web applications. But python has become a popular
choice for all the recent Technologies, like data science, machine
learning, iot and artificial intelligence. Next up, If we look at the search
results of US and India in the last five years US has seen a drastic
drift in the domination of both the languages there has been a
significant growth in the search for python whereas the other has seen
a gradual decrease in the graph. India has also seen a growth in case
of python. The next feature of comparisons is the salary growth of java
engineers and python Engineers based on their experience. We can
see that there has been a steady growth in both the situations over a
certain period of time now if we compare the growth of both the
engineers in case of freshers python has a little Edge over java due to
its increased demand in the recent times nowadays. The jobs are
most related to Automation and artificial intelligence. Which prefer
Know what Java and that's exactly why we can see the shift in the
graph. Whereas if we look at the growth in case of experienced
Engineers Java dominates over the time because Java has been in
use way before python became popular and the experienced
Engineers find it convenient for them to stick to their comfort zone
instead of moving to a new language. Now, let us have a look at one of
the most important aspects that makes Java and python different from
each other and this might help you to finally decide the winner out of
the to let's have a look at some of the basic differences. Java is a
compiled programming language and the source code is compiled
down to bytecode by the Java compiler and the byte code is executed
by a Java virtual machine on the other hand python is an interpreted
language as the translation occurs at the same time as the program is
being executed now Java supports encapsulation inheritance.
Polymorphism and abstraction, which makes it an object-oriented
language python is also an object oriented language, but it has an
added Advantage. It is also a scripting language and it is easy to write
scripts in Python. Now statically typed programming languages do
type checking at compile time as opposed to run time. Whereas the
dynamically typed programming languages do type checking at

runtime as opposed to compile time and it helps you write a little
quicker because you do not have to specify types every time next if
we compare the number of lines in a code python can perform the
same action with fewer lines than the same code written in Java in this
example. We are printing the statement hello world using both the
languages but in Java, we need to define a class and a main function
which makes it a 3 line code already. Where is we can just use the
print function for the statement. Case of python in Java programming
language if you miss the semicolon at the end of a statement, it will
throw an error but there is no such need of any semicolon to end the
statement in case of python now another important difference in the
syntax of both. The languages is the indentation in Java. You must
Define a particular block using curly braces. Otherwise, the code won't
work. But in case of python there is no such sight of any curly braces,
even though indentation is mandatory. It also improves the readability
of the code. So if we take a closer look at all these aspects of
comparison, we can say that python has a slight Edge over java and it
would be fair to declare the former as the winner in this battle.

PIP INSTALL AND PYPI
Don't start off by talking about pipeline with Pip. Install pipeline is a
repository for open source third party Python packages. And if you've
worked of other programming languages it's similar to Ruby gen's in the
Ruby world ph packages C Panther Perl and PM for notes. Yes so far
we've really only use libraries that come internally of python and these
are known as the standard library or the built in libraries for Python
things like the math library. Now there are many other libraries available
that people have open source and shared on Type-I And these are also
called packages and we can use Pipp installed at the command line to
install these external packages. By installing Python from Python the
OR or by installing the Anaconda's distribution as shown earlier in this
project. You actually have already installed Pip Pip is a simple way to
download packages at your command line directly from the pipe pipe
repository. Now there are packages already created for almost any use
case you can think of. Python is a hugely popular language and it's
growing very quickly so that means if you ever want to work with
Python with some other external use case maybe you want to make
web development of Python so you would Google around and
eventually discover that there's libraries such as Django or flask for web
development of Python or maybe have a more specific use case like
working with PDSA Python or working with Excel documentation with
Python. In that case you can always do a quick Google search and
almost always the links that come up first are either at the pipe pipe
page for the package or the package documentation and will show you
a little exercise of what a good google search looks like. So we're going
to quickly do now show you how to download and install external
packages to do this. We'll open up our browser but we're also going to
keep working at our command line. So remember for Windows users
that means open up your command prompt. And for Mac OS and Linux
users that means open up your terminal. So let's have the browser
open along with our command prompt.

OK so here I am at my command line and let's show you how to install
a package that's hosted on Type-I something you do need to be aware
of is that your firewall may block Pipp from accessing the Internet. So if
you're on a work network or you're on a work computer you don't have
full admin permissions you may need to check that or talk to your
network administrator. But let's move on and we're all going to do here
is type P IP install space and then here's where you would actually put
in your package name. So there are a ton of packages out there. We're
going to start with a package that you may already have installed
because you've installed Anaconda and that's the request package
which allows you to request information from web sites online. So this is
just a general syntax of how you would download a package. Notice
here I'm typing this directly into the command line or directly onto my
terminal or command prompt. I'm not actually calling Python first a
command line utility so you hit enter here and you may get the
requirement already satisfied. Most likely if you install anaconda you
already have requests installed. So this is what it looks like when you
already have it. What I'm going through now is a library that you most
likely do not have yet. And that's the color Ramah library and it is just a
bit of a silly library that allows you to print out colorize text at your
command prompt or at your terminal. So type Pitman's tall Kalorama.

Notice the spelling here. Enter an. We actually already have it installed
because I ran this line already so we're going to do now is run the
actual Colorada external package so we just installed. So what I'm
going to do now is type python and let's try checking out Colorada so to
do this. It's actually quite simple. All it needs to do is say from color
Rahma import in it and then on the next line call in it. So basically is a
bit of an initialization function that allows you to set up depending on
what platform you're using and then what we can do is say from color
Ramah import and what we're going to do here is say import for. So
that's capital F O R E which stands for foreground. And then I will
create a print statement that says for dot and then an all caps red plus
and I will just say some red text and then hit enter. And now you see I
have a text and we can do that for a variety of colors so I can say now
prints for green plus switch to green. And now it's switch to green. So
again just a very simple library that allows you to incorporate color
directly at your command line. This is not a library we will ever really be
using again but it's just something fun that you can play with and you
can check the docs documentation simply by Google searching
Colorada. What I want to show you now. Let me quit out of this Python
session. Show you how you would actually create a Google search and
what kind of things to expect to pop up when you are looking for an
external package that you may not know ahead of time. So for example
let's try to solve the problem of trying to work Excel files in Python and
figure out a package that allows us to do that.

So we're looking for a Python package for any particular workflow. It's
always best to start off just the simple Google search. And I know
hopefully this is pretty obvious but a lot of times the best thing to do and
pretty much everybody does this no matter how experienced developer
they are is it just google search Python package for and then whatever
they're looking for whether it's Excel for PDA apps and you should
always end up seeing the top results some sort of link to helpful
information.

So I'll start off with the example for Excel. And as we scroll down we'll
eventually see Python excel or if you click on that link it actually reports
back a bunch of packages that are available. Open Excel excel or D X
you tills a ton of stuff that you can play around with.

So then we end up doing is you either go to the documentation or you
go straight to the download link. And typically when you go to the
download link it takes you to the Python software foundation Web site
for pipeline. So why Python python. And here's just official information
about the actual package the pending on how big the packages if it has
more users. It almost always has a separate documentation page and
the documentation will be linked somewhere in the top few lines so you
click here and pipe Packers documentation and it will take you to the
official documentation for that actual package.

And a lot of times they're hosted by read the docs thought I know. So
now here we see some nice documentation and all we can do is figure
out how to install it for this documentation or Typically we end up
realizing it's it's always just Pipp install and then the name of the actual
package. So we know that it's open by Excel. Let's now go back to our
command line. Install it.

So then here back or our command line. We're going to do is say Pipp
install open pie Excel hit enter and I've actually already done this before
but that's how you would install a package from the internet from Type-I
and then later on you could call it Python and then you should be able
to import open pie excel with no issues. That's the basics of using Pipp
install with Python and figuring out what external packages are a good
fit for you.

MODULES AND PACKAGES
So we understand how to install external packages that people
uploaded to pie pie. Let's explore how to career own modules and
packages and to clarify some of the semantics here. Module's it's really
just a PI script. So it's a fancy way of saying here's a postscript that I'm
using in another dot PI script. So that act of using it in another PI script
allows you to call it a module. Again this is really just semantics but
packages are then a collection of modules. However there's a key that
postscript called underscore underscore in its underscore underscore
the pie that needs to be placed inside of a folder to let Python know that
this collection of Pi scripts should be treated as an entire package. So
we're going to show all of this through some examples. Keep in mind

since we're dealing with postscripts here we're not going to be able to
show these examples through the notebook. Instead we're going to
need to do is use Sublime Text Editor or any other idea that works
without PI files in order to create the scripts and folders. Let's get
started by opening up Sublime Text Editor.

All right so we're going to start off by creating two files here. The first
one will save it to the desktop will say file new file or we can actually
save on it currently have save as and on my desktop. I'm going to say
this as my module not pi. So this is the module. And remember all the
module is just the top high script being called in from another file. So
let's create the other file say new file and this one we're going to save it.
Also on the desktop in the same location as my model of that pie and I
will say my program got pie and save that. So inside of my module what
I'm going to do is just create a very simple function will say F and then
say my func and all this does is it prints out hey I am in my module. Hi
control s to save that. And then in my program this is another dot PI
script and I want to use the code from my module. So here we can get
the idea that if you have a really large script you're not going to put
everything in one giant pie file. Instead it will be nice to split it up
between multiple dot PI files which means you split up between

different modules and then later we'll see how he can aggregate bunch
of modules to create a package.

So far we're going to do is in my program say from my module import
and then we're going to import my funk and let me make sure I spell
that right. OK it my underscore phunk and that means I can now call it
here. So I'll say my phunk. I'm going to say this. And let's see if it works
by going to our command line. So here I am now at my command line.
Remember I save these files at my desktop. So let's CD to the desktop
change directory and now I should be able to call Python and then call
my program that PI enter and I see hey I and my module pi. So we were
able to successfully call the other function from the other module the PI
file into my program that pi and this is the very basic way of how you
would actually format the PI scripts in order to not have everything in a
single script. Now at a certain point even this is going to start to be too
much and now you're going to want to aggregate modules together to
form a package and that way you can have different folders for different
packages. So let's now show you how to create a package's. So we're
going to come back here to my program that pi in my module top PI and
will open up and say new file and then we're going to save this Save As
and here at my desktop. I'm going to do a few things. The first thing I'm

going to do is create a new folder here and this folder will call it my main
package. Enter. And then inside of this folder we're going to create
another new folder and we'll call this sub package. So we're going to be
creating lots of files and folders here. So right now we have at my
desktop my module up high and I program that pie and I've also
created my main package folder and inside of that I have my sub
package. Now since these are just directories or folders we need to let
Python be able to understand that we want to treat these directories not
just as a normal directory but as an actual package. So to do that
inside both my main package and sub package I'm going to have to
create a file called underscore underscore in it I NIIT underscore
underscore that PI save that and make sure you have this in it. Py file in
your package. Now you don't actually need to write anything in this file.
It just needs to be there so that when Python goes searching through
these packages it understands that it's not just the normal directory it's
an actual package. So we're going to create one more files a new file.
Now we're going to say this under some package will create another
underscore underscore in it underscore underscore that py file. And
again this one is going to be blank as well. So we have both of these.
Notice here how sublime is telling us which are referring to this one in
my main package and this one in the package. So we're going to close
these. We're not going to be working with them anymore. We just need
to have them name there. OK. So I had my module and my program
what I'm going to do now is say file new file and I will say save as an
inside of my main package and I'm going to create some main script
that PI save that and then we'll also do a file new file. And let's put
another PI script instead of my sub package. So we will say file save as
an inside of the sub package along that other in that file We're going to
create the following. We will say my sub script that pi. So now I have
this outside module some main script inside of that main package
folder. This subscript inside of that sub package folder and then my
main program. So we can do is we can start playing around with this all
the way for my program. So what I'm going to do is inside of my
subscript will say if than say sub report and have that print out. Hey I'm
function inside my subscript control us to save that we're going to do a
very similar thing here in some main script and we will say the E-F will

call this report main and this will print out hey I am in some main script
in main pack which say that as well. OK. So let's take a look at the
rectory right now. We'll say open a file just so we can explore this. So at
my desk right now I have this my module that PI won't really be playing
with that anymore but instead I have this my program that pi and we
can think of my program that pi as the main the PI script. I want to run
and I want to organize my files into packages. So right now we've
explored how to actually create a single module which is just the dot PI
script and you can imagine we'd be importing from various modules so
various up-I scripts that at a certain point it's going to be too much and
we want to organize them into folders. So the way you would do that is
you would have packages which are just directories that have this in
the pie. So underscore underscore in an underscore underscore that
pie. And that tells Python hey this actual directory it has a bunch of
modules in it so you can call them using a certain syntax which we're
about to show you. So here we have some main script. You can
imagine I could have many more PI scripts are many more modules
inside of this package and we can keep going with sub packages as
long as they have this in that pie. And here you can see my subscript.
So I'm going to cancel this and I'm going to do is inside my program
that PI I've already know how to import from a module.

But now let's realize how to import from a package to import from
package what I can say is from my main package. I can either import
the actual module itself. Remember the module in my main package. It
was called some main script so we'll say some main scripts. And if I
wanted to import from a sub package what I would say from my main
package dot sub package and then I can import some module from
there. So in this case it was called My subscript So this is now how you
can organize not just into a single directory but you can actually
organize into subdirectories as well. And this is the syntax for that you
say dot the name of that sub package import and then import the
modules. And if you want you can go even further and actually import
only specific functions. So we'll show you how to do that in just a
second.

But let's actually call the functions from some main script. So from
some main script right here we want to call the function that's inside
that script so if we click back here we realized that that one is just
called Report main. So coming back world say some main scrip report
main close parentheses. So we're actually executing the function report
Main which is under some main script module which is under my main

package. Then we also want to if we look at my subscript that has the
subreport.

So let's run that as well. Will say my subscript call sub report open
close princes So let's save that and then let's run my program that pi at
the command line. So we can see what happens. All right so now here
back on my top of the command line I will say Python call my program
that pi and I hit enter and I see hey I am some main script in main
package and then hey I'm a function inside my subscript and that's it.
Now you've successfully not only created a module in the first part
lecture but you also created packages and sub packages. And in
general the idea here is just how do you organize various Paice scripts
as you begin to grow better and better in Python. You're going to write
more and more Python code. So at the beginning you'll create a couple
of modules to all be in the same folder. No big deal. Then as it starts
getting more and more unwieldy to have it all in the same folder all you
need to do is create directories that have that special underscore
underscore in it underscore underscore that py file. That just tells
Python hey this is now a package and then allows you to run. What we
see here. This my main package my main mean that's a package.

NAME AND MAIN
You often see at the very bottom of this mysterious line of code that
says if underscore underscore name underscore underscore is equal to
the string underscore underscore main underscore underscore colon
and then there's a block of code to be executed. So sometimes the
whole idea behind that line of code is that we're importing from a
module. You would actually like to know whether a modular function is
being used as an import or if you're using the original but py file of that
module. So we're going to do is explore all of this a little bit more. But
make sure to check the full explanatory text file that has a written
explanation of everything we're going to cover here. Well we're going to
do basically is just create two simple postscripts and try to show you
the idea behind that. If name is equal to main block of code that is
usually at the end a larger pie script files. Let's get started OK let's
begin by actually creating two new files will create them at my desktop.
I will save for this first file save as and I'm going to say this as one dot
pi. So this one is one of pi. Then I'll create a new file and I'm going to
save this one as to that pi to that PI again at my desk top swivel this
one to that pi. So make sure you have those saved. So let's think about
what actually happens when you call a Python script at your command
line. You go to your command line and you type python space the name
your script the PI. So what's actually happening when you call Python
my script the PI all the code that's the indentation level 0. Essentially
something like this is going to get run. So that means any code that
takes the level 0 is going to get run. And that would mean that your
functions which are automatically usually going to be defined in the
station level 0 in your classes. Also indentation level 0 are all going to
be defined. So unlike other languages in Python there's no main
function that you call somewhere at the top of your script that gets run
automatically. Instead what happens is just implicitly all the code at the
indentation level zero gets run when you call the script file and you
probably have an intuition of that by now since we've been working
through that strategy. The entire first half of the Project now in Python
there is actually a built in variable called name. So just like there's built
in functions this is a built in variable and it's quite obvious that it's built

in because we have two sets of double underscores in the beginning
and in the back of it. So that would allow you to have to really try to
overwrite it by accident. So what happens is this variable name gets
assigned a string depending on how you're running the actual script.

And if you run the script directly. So if I went to the command line and I
wrote out Python space one that pi what Python is going to do is going
to assign this built in a variable called name to be equal to underscore
underscore mean. So Python does this in the background. Well it really
does this. It as signs the string to the name variable. When you run it
directly. And that allows you to have an IF block to check if they're
equal to each other. So often will you do something like this. You say if
name is equal to Main and then you can do something because you
know that this particular PI file is being run correctly. And if you ever run
something directly of Python you know this case happens to be true. So
happens is often people just at the very bottom of their code they'll say
if name is equal to Main and then they say kind of run a bunch of
functions that they find here. So at top they do a bunch of function
definitions so function of one function and two so on and so on. So you
can imagine hundreds of lines of function definitions or classes and
then all the way at the bottom. They actually organized or code on what

they actually want to execute and they know that they want to execute it
because they say if this built in variable called name happens to be
equal to the string main then I know I'm running this py file directly. So
we're going to explore this whole idea a little further and to do that we're
going to do the following in one pie. So let's go back here.

This is one that pi. I will write out the following code. I will say DPF
create a function and this function is going to be very simple. It will say
func in one PI. So when you call that function it says func and one that
pi just printed that out and then I'm also going to do here is at an
indentation level of 0. So outside of this function I will say top level in 1
that pi. So now I have a function definition as well as a global print
statement top level and one that pi. Then at the bottom of this I will say
if you'll notice that sublime text that it will actually autocomplete this for
you if name is equal to mean. I'm going to delete this. So I have an IF
block of code here. So if name is equal to made that I know I'm running
this directly. So I will say one dot pi is being run correctly. And then I'm
actually going to line up in ELSE block with this if statement. You don't
see this that often usually you see if and then you execute your code.
But just to make it clear how this variable's working will also add in an
else there will say. Else. Print 1 pi has been imported so I'm going to

say that. And let's take a look at what happens. I find this function. I
print out this statement whenever you call one that pie and then
depending if one PI is the main script meaning and calling one that PI
directly at the command line I will print this out. Else That means the
variable name was not set to mean an old print this one that pi has
been imported. So now let's work with our second file to that pi will do
here is say import 1 and I will print out at the very top level. Let's print
out something like. Top level in two dot PI and since I just imported one
let's execute the function that's from 1 or say one that func and here are
going to have an if statement will autocomplete this if name is equal to
mean. I will print to the PI is being run directly else print to the PI has
been imported.

So let's save the changes in both of these and then open up our
command line. All right so the first thing we're going to do at our
command line is actually run one up PI directly.

So we run this. And we notice what happens. We get that print
statement top level in one up high and then we see from that if name is
equal to mean one that pie's being run directly. So we can see here that
that built in variable underscore underscore name underscore
underscore has been assigned that main string. So Python that knows
and the entire script can know that one that pie has been called directly.

But now let's check out Python to the PI. So now when I run this notifier
happens I get back top level and one that pi. But now one that pi it's
built in variable name has not been set to mean because it's been
imported. So now we get back one that pi has been imported and then I
get top level and to that pie funk in one PI and then to that Pye's being
run directly so that built in variable actually allows you to see whether
something is being imported or run directly. So that's the idea in
concept behind the variable name name and checking a physical to
main. Typically however what you see is people they don't really do it
the way we've done here with a check is something being run directly
or not. Instead we come back to Sublime Text Editor what they do is
instead of having an L statement here since they just say if name is
equal to me this is the same thing as saying run the script right.
Because we already know that if this happens to be the case then
someone is running one that PI directly. So what they do is they define
a bunch of functions up here or find their classes. So here's another
function pass. You write some other function function to say and then
down here at the bottom what you end up doing is you just call your
function so you'll say OK execute function to then execute function 1
and then maybe have a little bit of logic here but the main idea is that
this is more for code organization. You have all your functions and
classes defined up here and then your logic where you actually execute
things are defined. Here at the bottom and this is a really common
structure you will see for larger that by scripts especially when you
begin to use modules and packages. All right.

PROGRAM TO CONVERT
KILOMETERES INTO MILES

We will take input into kilometers and then convert it into miles. So you
see here that we are using input command. So we will take as input
and then convert it into these miles. Here you see that one kilometer is
equal to zero point six two one three seven one miles. So we have
defined here that this ratio is equal to zero point six two one three seven
one as one kilometer is equal to this in miles. So we have defined this in
our program code. Then here we are converting it into the miles. Here
you see that Miles is equal to KM multiplied by ratio. So we will multiply
kilometers with this ratio. So here we will bring the desert in Miles. Let's
execute discord.

We are going to execute it. So this program also used to input any
value. So we enter 10. So you see that 10 kilometers are equal to six
point two, one three salmon, one miles. We can all check this with other
value. So. 161 kilometers. So that is equal to about hundred miles and
160 one kilometers is equal to a hundred miles. So this what this was
the program to convert kilometers, two miles.

FIND THE SMALLEST NUMBER
AMONG THREE NUMBERS IN
PYTHON
This is the Python program to find the smallest among three numbers.

We are taking input from the user. The user will enter first number with
the help of prompt. Then second number, you see her. Then number
two is into input. And two, second number. Then the third number.
Then we will check with the help of condition, that which number is
smaller. We will check that if no one is smaller than equal to number
two and number one is smaller than equal to number three, then
smaller number is equal to number one ELIF. Number two is similar
than equal to number one and number two is smaller than equal to
number three. Then smaller number is equal to number two. So we
have checked first number here then, Jack. Second number here. So
we don't need to check the third number. We will just simply include

this with the help of ls that smaller number. Is it equal to number three?
So this brief statement will. But it there is some our last number. Among
the three numbers is the number one, two and three.

Is it? That here you see that we will enter first number, that is hundred,
second number is 200, and it turned number is a triple one. So we will
execute it and see. So you see here, that is somewhat less than
number among hundred two 200 and triple one is hundred. So this
program was to find the smallest number among three.

HOW TO PRINT HELLO WORLD IN
PYTHON
This address, this is the simple program to print Hello, World. So in
case of buy, tend to be used to print statement instead of print function
to take the to show the output while in case of patentee, we use print
function to get the output from a program called.

So this is a simple program to display the message. Hello world. This is
the basic programming Biton. So this proves hello world on the output
screen. So these are the comments.

These are the multi-line comments. By Tom with your lectures. So
these are the multiple line comments. We can comment any chord with
this has signed. So this chord will be commented and you see here that
nothing will execute at the is commanded by has signed. So in Biton,
the calls augmented with the help of her sign. So this is our output that
would be shown.

I will execute it. So you see here, there the output is here. Hello world. If
we want to include exclamation mark, we can also include. So you see
here that exclamation mark is here. Hello World. We tried this by
removing these Berent pieces, but it will show an error in decades offer
by 10 three, as we know that Biton T has a new print function instead of
print statement that was used in Python two.

I will execute it, but it will result in an error. So you see here that that is
syntax error, missing parenthesis in call to print. So that is the error. We
will have to close it in Baydon pieces. So only this is the way we can
show the output by specifying. So here, do you see that the output is
here?

We can write anything here. Peace. And. Love, I will execute it. So here
you see there the messages here be sent low. So you learn the basic
difference between Python two and Python three. That is all for Python
in Python. That is equal to but in statement and brain function in PI tend
to be.

FACTORIAL CALCULATOR OF A
NUMBER IN PYTHON
This is the part time program to find the pictorial of a number, so we are
defining here factorial function,

D.F. factorial of a number. This is the factorial function. So this is a
recursive function that repeats itself. So, uh, here we are giving the
condition if number is equal to one, then return the number. Else return
number multiplied by factorial number minus one. So what is the use of
this number? Minus one. So we know that factorial often number is the
product of an integer and all the integers below it. So if we are going the
number here as impulsive. Number four. So we will multiply four by the
next number is three. Then we will multiply. This is a the result of what
they are productive with. Two, that is the other number. You see that
here we have defined that number minus one. So four multiplied by
three, multiplied by two multiplied by one is equal to factorial all four
four. Similarly, when we want to find effect real all five, we will multiply

five by forward by three by two by one. So by this we will find the
factorial of a number. So you see that here we are going to ask the user
to enter and input the number. Here you see that number is equal to an
integer number. Input to enter a number. So we are here defining the
conditions if number is less than zero. But in fact, ordeal can not be
found for negative numbers. So by rule, we can not find the factorial
awful negative number. So it will return an added message. If the
number is less than zero, ELIF number is equal to zero. If the number is
equal to zero, what would be the condition? So the condition is falling.
So we know that zero has directorial value. All for one directorial offer.
Zero is equal to one one negative values. Don't have any victory at all.
Minus five, minus four or C minus six. I don't have any factorial. While
we can calculate the factorial of four, five, six and so on. So you see
that we will bring pierde factorial. Half a number is. And we will pass the
value here factorial number. And you see that this highlighted portion.
So we will positive value. We execute this. It will asks us to enter a
number. So we enter a number here. C five. And we will press enter. So
you see that factorial all five is one twenty.

We execute this program again and we will give the value is to six. So
you see there the value of factorial of 60 is equal to 720. If we give this
salmon as input. So this would be equal to 50 40.

So value all factorial of three is equal to six. Three multiplied by two,
multiplied by one. We will do this with the four. So that is equal to
twenty four for multiplied by three. Multiplied by two, multiplied by one.
So this is the factorial. Awful for.

So this is the factorial of four four multiplied between, multiplied by two,
multiplied by one, that is equal to 24. So this program called was to find
de factorial of a number, which prompted the user to.

GET INPUT FROM USER IN
PYTHON IN STRING, INTEGER,
AND FLOAT FORM

We are going to print a string and in the second block of gold, we are
going to print an integer number. And in the third example, we are
going to print out a floating point of value. So in this program, we will
print string number and floating point. We will take input from the user
and print the output. We will execute this first two block of code.

So we enter a string. Say my name. You see here that it is showing
name in the output. We, as you do it again and say a country. So it will
display the country as a reserve. This is a string of alphabets.

And in the second example, we will take an input of integer number
from the user. And we say that I am going to give it a string. You see
that it will show an error here, value error. So I will have to give it to a
number when you say I am giving it to. So the result is here. It has
showed the output. I give it the numbers. A hundred. So it shows the
output here.

No, I don't. This third block of Code Biton program get followed in
profonde the user. This is the command. In Green Line with the hair
sign in the beginning. So this is the input as flawed. This is this input
function is about taking the input. With the help of prompt from the user.
So it is showing a message entry followed here, floating value. So you
see here and float value. We give it to two point zero. So it will show two
point zero. If we give it as input number, say integer two. And check
what happens. You see that it is giving giving the two point zero as
output. Why it is giving 2.0 as we have used this for load function here.
So it will convert it into float and then display the reserve. So this

program called was about taking inputs in the form of string of
alphabets. And in the form of integer value and floating point. And then
displaying the.

DECORATORS WITH PYTHON
OVERVIEW
Let's discuss what that word Duckery actually means in this context.
Imagine that you created a function here representing it by just a simple
function. It does some simple stuff and then returns something. So you
create this simple function and now you want to add some more
functionality to it. Or in other words add a more code where you could
do is take your original simple function then add some more stuff to it
keep doing the old stuff and then return something. But this idea of
adding new functionality basically represents a problem because you
have two options here. Either you can add the extra code otherwise
known as adding functionality to your old function but then you have a
problem of not being able to call your original function. You've added it
in some way with that new functionality. The other option is to create a
brand new function where you copied all the old code and then added
new code to that. The problem with that though is that you had to
recreate the entire function over again even though it's just a copy and
paste. It's not ideal. You had to actually make another function but what
you actually want to remove that extra functionality at a later date. Well
it have to do is delete that function or make sure you don't call it so be it
manually making sure you don't have the old function. There's got to be
a better way. So what would be nice is if you had an on off switch where
you could quickly add that new code or add that new functionality and
then turn it back off again. This is where the decorator comes into play.
Python has a concept called decorator's that allow you to quickly tack
on extra functionality to an already existing function and then if you no
longer want that functionality you just delete one line from the decorator
so they use the. Operator and are then placed on top of the original
function so you can easily add on or turn off extra functionality with a

decorator so you just take your original simple function and then you
have some decorator which connects to some extra code and then you
can add in extra functionality. Then if you don't want that extra
functionality you just delete that at some decorator line. On top of the
function. So this idea is pretty abstract when you actually practice it
with Python syntax because it's kind of this mysterious one liner here.
On top of your function. So what we're going to do is we're going to go
through the steps of manually building out a decorator ourselves to
show what that operator is actually doing behind the scenes. We're also
going to learn about some concepts such as passing a function within
another function. We're going to go step by step and build this out very
slowly. So let's open up a Jupiter notebook and get started. OK lets
start off by actually building out our own decorator's manually. We need
to review a few concepts though and introduce some new ones such as
assigning functions or passing in functions into other functions.

So we can do is create a simple function called func and this is going to
return one so I can call that function and execute it and it get back 1.
Remember we also discussed that if you just say func with open and
closed print CS you'll get back the information that hey you have a
function here. You won't actually execute the function. That means we

can actually assign functions to other variables and then execute them
off that variable. So let me show you what I mean by that. For example I
will say create the hello function that returns back hello so I can execute
hello or I can just ask Hey hello what is that. Well it's assigned to a
function. I couldn't say.

Greets is equal to hello and Python won't complain. In fact. Now check
out what I can do. I can see called greets and it returns back the string
Hello. So what we want to ask ourselves is greet. Just pointing to hello.
Or has it made its own copy of the hello function. We can easily test
that by deleting hello and then seeing if we can still call great. So right
now I can still execute hello I'm going to delete. Hello and if I try
executing Hello Now I'll say hey hello is not the find. Makes sense. We
just deleted it. Now let's see what happens when I call accrete. So
grete still returns. Hello. So even though we deleted the name Hello the
name Green is actually still pointing to the original function object and
it's important to know that functions are objects that can be passed into
other objects. So now is shown example of passing in a function within
another function or calling functions within other function. And this is
going to tie in a lot with that scope and nested statements lecture that

we had previously. So I'm going to make a couple of new cells here just
to clear that screen.

Now let's create a function called hello and it takes in a name will have
the default name be Jose and the simple hello function is going to say
hello function has been executed. So right now if I call. Hello. It just
says hello function has been executed. Makes sense. Now let's define a
function inside of this function. I'm going to now say grete and what this
does is it just whips. It's going to return sort of I'm using return a longer
print and it's going to print backslash T. That's a way to escape
character for a tab and let's say this is the great function inside. Hello.
So if I rerun these cells I still just get back hello. Function has been
executed. So let's think about what's happening here. I have this
function. Hello. It takes in some default name by Jose and it just prints
out the hello function has been executed. We're actually not using the
name yet inside of this function. I'm defining another function called
greet and greet returns. This is a great function inside Hello. Notice
here I'm just defining great. I'm not actually calling it so let's call it
outside of Greece. I'm going to print greets. Notice I'm printing it
because greed returns back the string. So now when I run this I get
back. Hello. Function has been executed. And then I get back tab. This

is the great function site. Hello. Because we find the inside hello and
then we executed it inside hello as well. So let's define another function
inside. Hello call welcome and we'll do the same thing. We'll see a
return tab. This is inside. This is say this is welcome inside Hello. And
then after that we're going to execute welcome and it's really important
here that you pay attention to the indentation because it's really easy to
mess things up. I have the indentation here for hello and everything else
here is lined up. And then I have these two lines indented because
they're part of the Greek definition and they're part of the welcome
definition. I don't actually call greet and welcome inside of these
functions that I call it only inside Hello. So notice here that these print
statements are lined up. Hello. You can always copy and paste from the
notebooks in case you're getting any sort of indentation or syntax
errors. So when I run this I get back. Hello function has been executed
and we have these tabs here to kind of show that the great and
welcome functions are actually inside the hello function and at the very
end of all this I can still say this is the end of the hello function

so I run this the whole function is executed. I define. I find welcome that
I actually execute gry execute welcome and print. This is the end of
Hello. Now something to notice here is that greet is defined inside of the

hello function and welcomes the find inside of the hello function. That
means the scope is limited to the hello function. I can only execute greet
and welcome inside of hello if I try to execute them. Outside of this hello
function. For example if I try to call. Welcome. It says Hey welcome is
not the find that which makes sense because it was only defined inside
of this hello function. And as long as you didn't define green earlier it will
also end up being an error. So here we have this idea that greet and
welcome. Their scope is limited to hello. But what if you want to access
these functions outside of Hello. Well we could do is have the hello
function actually return a function. Remember that up here we were
able to assign functionality in this manner. It would be really cool if our
helo function instead of just printing out the execution of greet it
returned. Great. So here's what I'm going to do. I'm going to delete
these three lines. And then I'm going to print out.

I am going to return a function and will say if the name is equal to Jose
return. Greets else return welcome. OK so let's think what's going to
happen here. Right now my default name is Jose. I print out Hello
function has been executed. Then I define two functions. One is called
gry one's called Welcome. I print out hey I'm going to return a function
and then we say hey if the name was Jose return the group function or

else return the welcome function with that's going to allow us to do is it's
going to allow us to return a function which we can then assigned to a
variable just like we did earlier appear.

So let's see an example of that. We're going to say my new funk is
equal to hello. And we'll pass in the name Jose which is also a default
name so you could just say hello. And I get printed out the low function
has been executed. I'm going to return a function. So because the
name was hello this function after doing these two print statements it
actually returned back the function which was defined inside of Hello.
And now if I call my new phunk notice here it says function main. Hello.
Locals greet.

So it's actually that pointed to that greet function inside hello and I can
execute it and it returns back the string tab. This is the great function
inside hello which I can then print just like we did before to actually see
the string itself. This is the great function inside. Hello. So this is the
idea of being able to return a function within another function. Let's see
one last very simple example. I'm going to have a function here called
Cool and what it's going to do is have another function inside of it called
Let's Go supercool and this is just the string all this function does is it
returns back. I am very cool. And then this function cool is actually
going to return super cool so I can say that some func is equal to the
result of executing cool. Remember that cool itself returns super cool.
So now some phunk is actually the supercool function. And if execute it
Ill say I am very cool. So this is just a simple idea of having a function
defining a function inside of that function and then returning that
function and we're going to use this as our idea of building out a
decorator. The last thing we need to think about is actually having a
function as an argument with the idea of being able to return a function
and assign that to something and then passing in a function its
argument will have all the tools we need to actually create our own
decorator.

So let's quickly see an example of passing in a function as an
argument. I'm going to say hello and the hello function now is just going
to say hi. Jose so we have that function. Hello. And I will create another
function called other. And this takes an some defined function. So
notice here this is just a variable name I could call this whatever I want
it and what it's going to do is say Prince other code runs here. And then
it's actually going to execute that function. I'll say taking that function
and open close Princie executed. So what does this mean. It means I'm
going to build actually pass in a function into this other function do
some stuff and then execute the function. This is known as passing a
function as an argument. Previously we just saw how we could return
functions and then execute them when we assign them to a new
variable name. Over here we're going to see now how we can pass in
functions into another function. This is pretty cool stuff. Will say other
and I'm going to pasan. Hello. Something that's key to notice here is
that I'm passing in hello I'm just passing in the wrong function.

Hello I'm not executing hello So just to make it clear there is. Hello
when you just pass it in. And then there's hello when you execute it. I
just actually want to pass on the raw function because this raw function
is going to be executed inside the other function. I don't want to actually
execute the function here so I won't say other passen hello so I don't
have open and close princes because I don't want. Hi Jose. I want to
actually pass in the main function there because other function I s going
to then execute it for me and say Hi Jose. So think about what you
expect to see when you run the cell. I should be seeing other code runs
here then the other code is going to grab hello and execute it in this line
and print out the result so that I should see. Hi Jose. So the other could
run here. Hi Jose when I run this. And that's exactly what we see. So
now we understand that we can return functions and we can have
functions arguments with those two main tools. We're actually going to
now be able to create a decorator. We have the tools we need to
quickly create some sort of device that is an on off switch when we
want to add more functionality to a decorator so I'm going to create a
couple of these cells here and finally get to the part where we create a
new decorator.

I will say the new decorator and this takes an we'll call it original
function and inside of my new decorator function I'm going to say wrap
func and what this wrap func represents is the extra functionality that
you want to decorate this original function with. So what this does is
we're going to print some extra code before the original function. And
you can imagine this doesn't have to be a print statement. It could be a
bunch of other code then we're going to take in that original function
that was passed and executed and then we're going to print some extra
code after the original function so notice what we're able to do. We're
passing in the original function adding in some X code before executing
the original function and then adding some code after then we're going
to do here is just return the wrap function. So you can kind of think
about this as the idea of a president with some wrapping paper. The
actual original function is the present and then we're going to
essentially put it inside a box and wrap around it. Which is why it's
called Decoration. So you're kind of decorating the function with some
wrapping paper the wrapping papers is the extra code that can go on
top of the function before or after the function below it. So this is a
function just like we did before if hello and greet except now the names
reflect what's actually happening here. We created some new decorator
function. It takes in an original function and inside of this we find this

wrapper which has some extra code before it executes that original
function puts in some X code after it and then returns the wrap function.

So then I'm going to create a function here and this function is going to
need a decorator so that we call func needs decorator. And what this
does is it prints out. I want to be decorated. So the idea is we want to
add in some extra functionality to this original guy. This function needs
a decorator right now if I just call function needs a decorator I just get
back I want to be decorated. What would be really cool is if I could
somehow add in some extra code using the framework that I've built
out here and this is actually really easy. All I need to do is say grab my
decorator and pass in this funk that needs a decorator because
remember it's going to take the original function here. So let's say
phunk needs a decorator and pass that in. No I'm not executing it and
just saying. New decorator and then phunk needs a decorator so that I
can call this my decorated function is equal to this function that needs a
decorator pass than the new decorator. So it's going to happen is when
you pass in this original func needs a decorator. It says OK that's
erosional function. And then instead of the wrap function we add in
some X code before we execute that original function. So we would
print I want to be decorated then we print out some extra after the

function. And with this new defined wrapping function we return the
wrapped version of the original function which is all that this line is
doing here. It's taking in that function that wants that greater wrapping it
and some extra stuff and then returning back a wrapped version of that
function.

So I run this and then I can call my decorated function and I see this.
So Mexico before the original function I want to be decorated and some
X code after the original function. Now what we did is actually quite
complicated because I had to define all this stuff here. But there's a
special syntax for what is essentially this line. And the special syntax is
that operator. So if I wanted to actually create new decorator what I
could do is say at new decorator say DMF. Well let's just actually grab
the original one. We're going to copy this here paste it here. Run this.
And now when I call func needs a decorator I get back some extra code
for the original function. I want to be decorated some actual code after
the original function. So notice what happens here. This keyword of at
new decorator when you put it on top of function it just says OK I'm
going to pass this function into this as the original function. I'm going to
do something to it add some X could after Add some x recode or x x x
could before call the original function. Add some extra code after wrap

that into a nice function and then return that wrapped version. That's all
the decorators doing here essentially wrapping it around. Then if you
ever want to turn this off well it's easy you just commet this out and if
you were to rerun this you no longer have that wrapping. So this is now
your on off switch having that at symbol there. Realistically you really
won't be having to do this sort of coding of a new decorator of the
wrapping function et cetera. You don't have to worry about that. Well
you'll be doing is you're going to be using a web framework or someone
else's library and just adding in these new decorators to maybe render
a new Web site or point to another page. So they're really commonly
used in web frameworks such as jingle or flask which is why it's
important to understand behind the scenes what the decorator's
actually doing. Now they stand behind the scenes what it's doing. You
can simply just use this abstract idea that when you tack on this new
decorator it's just decorating your function with some extra code.

DECORATORS HOMEWORK
What I want you to do is actually just check out some web
frameworks. I don't expect you to be using decorators until much
further in your coding career.

So that's why this homework is optional. The first thing I want you to do
is just check out the web framework Flask.

So Flask is gonna allow you to create web pages in Python. So if
you're interested in becoming more of a full stack developer, and that's
kind of the path you want to take as far as your Python coding career,
go ahead and check out Flask. It's a really fun way to make websites.
But what's interesting about it, is that decorators are heavily integrated
into the way the web framework works. So I want you to check that
out, and then also click this link to learn about how to use view
decorators. So they actually have a whole page kind of describing
how they use these function decorators, and how they work in their own
application. Okay, so this is a really nice way to see how decorators
are used in real life.

After that, if you're still really interested in web pages with Python, what
I want you to do is check out Django, which is a more heavy-duty, and
probably more popular web framework for Python. So you can check
that out as well. And last but not least, in this decorators homework
notebook, I have a few definitions for what a framework is and what
an API is, in case you're wondering what I've been meaning by web
framework. Okay, so again, this homework is optional. But I do
encourage you to a least check out Flask and Django on view
decorators, just those pages, 'cause it is a super interesting topic of
how you're able to develop web pages with Python.

PRINTING OF PRIME NUMBER IN
PYTHON USING FUNCTION

So. We are taking input from the user through prompt. By this line of
code number is equal to antigen input, enter any number. So we will
check whether input number is prime or not. You know, that number is
set to be prime. If it is DIY, zable only by one and itself. So three
salmon, 13 are prime numbers. But two L six are not pruyn. As we can.
They wiped them by two three. In case of footwell we can divide it by
two, three, four and six. And the number itself. And with one we can do
a white twelve by one, two, three, four, six and by two. Well. So you
must also remember that a prime number is always positive. So we will
check this in the beaning. This condition, if number is greater than one,
if the number is a positive number. So we have given it here, prime
number is always greater than one. We have commented this. And in
this line we will check if the number is greater than one here. We will
start our loop. So you see that here? So the loop begins from here in

this loop. We will check that we will divide the input number by all
numbers in the range of two to number minus one. We did it. We did
this to check whether there are any positive Wiser's other than one.
And number itself. So if any day wiser is found, then we display the
message that the number is naughty prime. As we display the message
that the number is a prime number. So you see that we have used to
break statement here. We have used big statement. So what is the
purpose of this statement? We have used it in a loop to come out of the
loop. As soon as any positive divisor is found as there is no further
check required. So the other condition is that this ls print number is a
prime number. So if the enter number is less than or equal to one, then
it is not a prime number. We have there multi-line comments. Else print.
Number is not a prime number. So this else body. Belongs to this block.
So we know that in Python, we use indentation in the cord that
separates the lines, a block of code from other block of gold. So empty
spaces are used as indent. We will execute Dischord and check.

We will check one. So you see that one is not a prime number, as we
know, that prime number is always greater than one. So this condition
is not fulfilling here. When we enter one as input, the first condition, if
the number is greater than one, does not fulfill. So it returns. The
number is the naughty prime number here.

So we will check to sort of each check minus one first. So you see that
minus one is naughty. But I'm number minus one is the naughty prime
number. We as you discord again and check two. So you see that too
easy prime number as it is only DIY ziebell by two and by one.

We'll check three as input and we see that. Plea is a prime number. So.
I would check this with four, which is DIY ziebell by two and one and
four yourself. So you see that four is not a prime number? No, we enter
too well as input here. So you see that, well, is not a prime number, we
enter 13 to check if our condition will be met. Then you'll see that it is
doing that. 13 is a prime number. So this program was about taking
input from the user through prompt and then checking it, whether it is.

PROGRAM TO PRINT
MULTIPLICATION TABLE OF A
GIVEN NUMBER IN PYTHON
In this program, user is asked to enter the number and the program
reads the multiplication table of their specific number that is entered by
the user. So this program uses for loop. This is the multi-line comment
here. This is the multi-line comment. And this is the prompt for entering
a number four with the multiplication table to be printed. And this will
print the table.

This statement, and this is the loop body. So here you see that this
program uses for loop that runs from one to ten in the range of one to
ten. Here we have specified two values. First value is one. And the
second value is a lemon. So this starts from the one and it two aracy
add the value of a ten. So here what we write. The result is a minus one
from decent value delivery. I trade from one to ten values. So and the
input number is multiplied by the loop counter in each step to display
the steps of the multiplication table.

So we will execute this program. Enter the number. Say we are going to
find the table of eleven. So you see here that multiplication table of
eleven is eleven. Multiplied by one is equal to eleven. That we have
specified here. This symbol we have specified here and the number is
here. Eleven. And this is the loop counter.

We multiplied the number by this counter. So this going to start as one
and two and add two. Ten. This is the range of four that counter and
this Louisville outrate until it reaches its final element, two of the range.
So it will display the table. We will execute it again and we will bring the
table all for ten. So here you see that then multiplied by one is will do
ten and and so on. Ten multiply where ten is equal to hundred. So this
program.

LEAP YEAR PROGRAM IN PYTHON
USING IF ELIF CONDITIONS IN
PYTHON 3

So in this program called, we have hardcoded the value of the year as
2000. And we will check whether it is a leap year or not. So if we want
to get input from the user, we can change the program called. By this
line of gold, we will not comment this line. So you see that year is equal
to integer input. Enter e're. So this will prompt the user to enter a
specified year, say, 2000 to 2020, 2019, 2018. 1990. 1996
whatsoever. But every comment. This line, this will not run as we know,
that commands don't run in the cold. A commented out line or a blog
does not execute in the python and in Python. We commend to out a
block of code or we comment with the help of it has signed. So we have
hardcoded coded the value of the year as 2000 and we are now
checking this with the help of these conditions. Whether if the year

divided by four is equal to zero, divided by hundred is equal to zero,
divided by a 400 is equal to zero, then print the year is a leap year. Ls
The year is not a leap year. So we see that. You see that in this line, if
your hair is divided by four is equal to zero, then the year is equal to
leap year. So this line is connected to it. And the second line? We see
that. This line of code, you say that this LC is connected to this one.
That means if the year is divided by four and nothing is remainder, then
the year is a leap year. Ls this program will print. The year is not a leap
year. We have used this format year. So what is meant by this format?
So this format will change this year into a specified format from a
module. So we execute this code. So it says that 2000 is a leap year.

So we change the year to 2000 19. And check.

So you see that 2019 is not a leap year. So this is our conditioned
block. There are three conditions we help with the help of these
conditions. We will check whether a year is a leap year or not a leap
year. So this was a Python program to check if the area is leape or not.
We hardcoded evalu we gave as input. We can also check it with the
help offer prompt. If we not comment to our this line of called. So you
see here that. We have removed this command and changed it into a
block, a line of code. So we will enter a year 2020 and press enter. So
it shows that 2020 is a leap year.

We will execute it again and test. Enter the year 2000. Nineteen. So
2019 is not a leap year. So we checked this with the help of for two
different methods. One method was with the help, all for a hardcoded
value, while other method is with the help, all for a prompt use.

CONVERT ASCII TO CHAR
PYTHON
This is the program to find a character from an input, a suitable I value,
so, yes, suitable a value is given in this case.

We have given 64 here. Then we will bring the relevant corresponding
character here. In this case, this will be Airdrie sign. We will change this
with 36. And it will give us the output as a dollar sign, which ended with
thirty eight and executed again. So it returns ampersand. We change it
with the ninety six. And execute it again. It's 30 90s salmon.

It was in Somali and the V.V. changes with the 70s salmon sea and
execute it all again. So this is equal to Capital M.. We change it with the
75.

So that is equal to capital in 97 is equal to some all a you see here and
here. This is a program to find a character from an input agency. Why is
FSC double a value? But with the help of food user prompt, we will
enter any number save. We are going to enter a 90 salmon. So you see
here that here we have a we are giving it to us say 60 forward as input.
So you see here that this is the air sign. We will give it to 36 evalu and
check. This is dollar sign.

We will execute our game. We will. Give forty eight. You see here?
Zero. We will give forty nine. No. That will be equal to one year. We will
change this with 14 nine and execute it again.

CONVERT CHARACTER OR
LETTER TO ASCII PYTHON
In this program called We Will Find these STW I value offic character
from entering the character as an input and we will return the. Well,
value in number.

So we are using order function here or DCF to order. Function. So this
is a built in function in Python that accepts a character string of land to
one. So we can not enter a string of lamp more than one. We can not
enter. Say, let's suppose we can not enter Dubberly. It will show an
error. So we will have to enter just to a single valued single land value
of a string as an argument. And this then discord will return the Unicode
code point for that character. So since the first two, 128 Unicode points
are seen as a STW value. So we can use this function to find the
suitable a value of any character.

We will execute this program and we'll find what is going on in this
program. So we will enter, say, capitally. So it is giving the output at
sixty five. So the SCADA, a value of a character is 65. We know that
small it has different citable a value. So we will execute it again and
check whether what is the value. Awful small all. That is equal to 90
salmon. We will check then see. Dollar sign. We are going and going to
enter a dollar sign. I think it will return 36 or yes.

And we will execute the ampersand. It will be equal to I think. 34. Let's
see. 38. Sorry. And we will as you did. Again, we will give an average
sign. That is. Of values. Sixty four. Now we give one. So you see that
one has value of forty nine in this system of gold too, has the value of
fifty and three has a value. Awful. Fifty one. We will check the value of
nine and then zero. You'll see here. Fifty seven. And we will check the
value all four zero connecter. So you see here that Zillow has value of
forty eight and one had the value of forty nine. Dollar sign had the value
all. Thirty eight. Authority 36. I forgot it. So this program was to find.

GENERATORS WITH PYTHON
We're going to be discussing generator's. We've already learned how to
create functions using the DPF keyword and the return statement
generator functions allow us to write a function that can send back a
value and then later resume to pick up where it left off. So as I
mentioned that type of function is a generator in Python. The basic idea
is that generators allow us to generate a sequence of values over time
instead of having to create an entire sequence and hold it in memory.

The main difference in syntax when you're programming is the use of a
yield keyword statement. So when a generator function is compiled they
become an object that supports some sort of iteration protocol. That
means when they're actually called in your code they don't return a
value and then exit instead. Generator functions will automatically
suspend and resume their executions. They are around the last point of
value generation. The advantage here is that instead of having to
compute an entire series of values upfront and hold it in memory the
generator computes one value and waits until the next value is called
for. So you can imagine if you wanted to get all the numbers between 1
and 1 million. You have two options here. You can either start
generating values 1 2 3 4 and then feed them that way. For example in
a for loop. Or you would create a giant list of numbers 1 through a
million and then slowly pick off those numbers from memory. So this is
what the range function is actually doing. The first way it's generating
numbers. So instead of producing that giant list from 1 to 1 million in
memory. Since that's kind of wasteful if you're using an a for loop
instead what it does is it just keeps track of the last number you asked
for the step size which by default is one to provide a steady flow of
numbers so generating the numbers over time instead of creating a
giant list in memory. Now if the user didn't need that list would they
have to do is transform the generator to a list with list range from 0 to 10
or zero to a million or whatever their start and stop values are. So that's
why when we're working a range. If we actually want to take you the list
of numbers we have to cast to a list because range itself is a generator
and it's just remembering the last number it sent out. And then the step
size to generate the new number. That way it doesn't have to store this
huge list in memory and it makes a lot more efficient. So let's explore
now how to create our own generators. We're going to open up a
Jupiter notebook in order to get that better understanding of generators.
We're going to create some.

First I would create a normal function and this function is going to be
called create cubes. And what this function does is it's going to create a
list of cubes from 0 up to and whatever number the user asked for. So
in this case we'll say result is equal to a list and then we will say for x in
range n take results and the pen X to the power of three. It's cube and
then at the end we're going to return. Result. So if I want to create
cubes up to 10 I run this and I get back this list. So notice what's
happening when we actually work with a normal function. We have to
create an empty list and then we go for every number from zero. Up to
that value we append the cubed value to this result. So we're keeping
this entire list in memory. Now that may be useful if you actually want
the list but sometimes maybe you just want to say for x in create cubes
print x. Now notice what happens when we print them. We actually
really only needed one value at a time to print them. We didn't need the
whole list stored in memory. In fact we just need the previous value and
then whatever the formula is to get to the next value in order to generate
all these cubes. So instead of actually creating this giant list in memory
it would be better if we just yielded the actual cube numbers.

So that's what we're going to do now. So let's go back to this create
cubes function. I'll zoom in here. I don't need the list anymore because
I'm not going to store any of this in memory. Instead well do a save for x
in range and instead of returning the result. At the very end I'm just
going to call yield and this is a keyword lips y. I e l d. I'm going to yield
that cube x value and then if I run create cubes. Now I get back the
same results it says for X and create cubes. Print x and then getting
back the exact same thing except now create cubes is way more
memory efficient. The first way if I had passed then a really big number
here would have had to create the entire list in memory of the cube
numbers from 0 to 10000 and then from there if we wanted to iterate
through it we would have had that list in memory. But now I don't have
this list in memory instead of just yielding the values as they come.

So then create cubes. Here is a generator generating those values as
you need them. Now keep in mind. Let's turn this back to 10. If I were
just to call create cubes by itself I no longer see that list. I just see. Hey
you have a generator object here at this location in memory and you
need to iterate through it.

If you actually want the list of numbers if you do end up just wanting the
actual list itself you could cast it to a list and then get back to the list.
But create cubes itself has the option of just yielding it to be more
memory efficient. So let's now create another example which calculates
a Fibonacci sequence and a Fibonacci sequence. All it is is if you have
a number a followed by a number B then B is defined as the sum of the
last two numbers. So let's actually show you what I mean by that. We're
going to say the F generate fib for generate Fibonacci that's going to
generate if you actually sequence up to an so we can start with equals
1. Because one other Fibonacci sequences start with equal zero and
because 1 it's really up to you and we'll say for I in range and I'm going
to yield a and then in order to actually recalculate and B for the
Fibonacci sequence I can do the following. I can say do a little tuple
matching here a b is going to equal to be a plus b. And this allows me
to avoid any issues with trying to reassign a and b all they're still being
played around with. So let's walk through what's happening here. The
generation of the Fibonacci sequence of equal 1 equal 1 for Iron Range
and we yield a and then we're going to reset a to be equal to B and then
B is going to beat to the sum of that previous A-plus B. So in this case
the first round we have 1 1 and then we have 1 2 and then from there
we have 2 3 then 3 5 5 8 13:21

we'll be able to see this when we run this we'll say for number in
generate the notchy up to 10 percent the number and we were in that
we get to see this Fibonacci Sequence occur. So what if this was a
normal function just to kind of show you the difference between yielding
something and creating a normal function. In that case we would have
to store everything. So we would have the same output as some empty
list. And instead of yielding everything we'd have to say output a pand
A. And then after we did that entire four loop I would end up returning
the output. And if I run this it looks the same as the results. But this is
way less memory fashion because I'm holding everything in the list in
memory instead of just yielding them as I need them. So when you want
to iterate through some sort of generation sequence it becomes a lot
better to use this yield keyword instead of storing thing in a list.
Especially if you expect that number to be really large and if you're
creating a huge list. So the key to fully understanding generators is the
next function and the entire function. So let's explore those concepts
now. Going to create a couple of new empty cells here. Well first start
off with the next function.

So to do that I'm going to create a very simple generator and all this
generator does is it says for x in range 3. So I've already predefine the

range. We won't have these or press that in. I will yield X so what does
that actually mean. It means if I say for x in simple gen France actually
let's say numbers so we don't get confused by the x in there we say for
a number in simple gen print number I get back 0 1 2.

So let's now assign G equal to a new instance of simple gen. So here
I'm actually calling simple gen here. And let's take a look at G. Is this
generator object. And I can ask for the next G and let's print out the
results here. And I get back zero.

So then if I ask for the next one after that I get back 1 and this is what
the generator object is doing internally when you call that yield keyword.
It's remembering what the previous one was and then returning the next
value given later formula. It's following. It's not holding everything in
memory so that

we can print out the Next G when we get back to and then eventually
you're going to see because we only went up to three. It'll say stop
iteration because after yielding all the values next calls a stop iteration
error. And what this error does is it informs us that all the values have
been yielded. Now you may be wondering why we don't get this error
while using a for loop nets because a for loop automatically catches this
error and stops calling next. So this is another interesting thing to think
about when you're actually calling this for loop on this generator. What
the for loop is doing is it saying hey give me the next thing hey give me
the next thing hey give me the next thing. So that's what this 4 is doing
internally on this generator object. Finally I want to show you the entire
function so I T E R and the function basically allows us to automatically
iterate through a normal object that you may not expect.

So I'm actually going to first say s is equal to hello and I already know I
can iterate through the string so I can say for letter and s print the letter
and I get back. H E L L O. Now unfortunately that doesn't mean the
string itself is going to be able to iterate with the next function. In fact if I
say next on s they'll say hey this string object is an iterator. So what this
actually means is that the string object does support iteration because
we went through a for loop on it but we cannot directly iterate over it just

like we did if a generator using the next function in order to do that to
basically turn this string into a generator.

So we can iterate over we're going to say let's underscore it her and
then call the function on it. And then now we can call next on the version
of it to get back h and then we callback next on the next one to get
back. And so on. So now you know you know how to convert objects
that are iterable into iterators themselves. And I know there's a lot of
kind of strange semantics here that iterators iterable and generators but
the main takeaway from this lecture really has to do with that yield
keyword. So if you scroll all the way back up if you really are going to
take one thing from this lecture it's really how to create your own
generators with yield. Usually when you're working of code you're not
going to be actually using that next function that often you're not going
to be using that function that often. Really those are being called behind
the scenes for you already where you will be using. Is this yield keyword
when you eventually find yourself creating your own generators. You
can check out the notebook which has two links at the bottom for really
useful Stack Overflow answers explaining some more aspects of
generators.

GENERATORS HOMEWORK
OVERVIEW
There's a solutions notebook that goes along with this. And the first
problem is create a generator that generates the squares of numbers
up to some number. And we did a really similar example of this in the
actual lecture

and then problem too is to create that generator that yields N random
numbers between a low and high number. So those are the inputs. You
have a low number and a high number and you want and random
numbers. Remember they're generated using the yield keyword

and then problem is to use the function to convert the string below into
an iterator. We pretty much actually did this exact same thing in the
lecture before this

and then problem for this is just something to kind of think about. And
it's mainly to explain the use case for a generator using a yield
statement where you would not want to use a normal function with a
return statement. And this is kind of the same thing O.S. over and over
again in regards to memory management.

And then we hear we have a quick extra credit problem where can you
see if you can explain what's actually happening here with this Jenna
Komp variable. So we've never really covered this in the lecture
because it's a pretty advanced topic but you might be able to figure it
out if you google generator comprehension and more or less that's
actually the answer itself. But maybe you can explore this a little more.

GENERATORS HOMEWORK
SOLUTIONS
Let's get started OK.

Here I am underneath the python generators folder. There's the
iterators generated homework solution file.

Let's go over problem one. Whereas you create a generator that
generates the squares of numbers up to some end. We actually did a
very similar example of this in the lecture for generators. All you have to

do is say for I in range n and then you want it to yield the squared of I.
And then you could then create a generator and print out those square
numbers.

Problem 2 was a very similar problem except we wanted to create a
generator for random numbers between some low and high number.

And in this case what you're doing is instead of yielding the square of
the number we do is you take advantage of this random Rantz integer
function and then yield some random dot ran it and then passen low
and high because remember this function itself is going to generate a
number and then we're going to do than yield it in order to create a
generator out of this entire function. And here we have the generating
random numbers.

Problem 3 was to use the functions convert the string below into an
iterator. We actually did the exact same thing in the lecture for this. But
all you have to do is say hello and then pass on to the entire function
and that's it. You can then call next on S and it's gone from being an
iterable to an iterator

problem forced to explain a use case for a generator using a yield
statement where you would not want to use the normal function and
basically is the thing I've been saying all along during the lecture is that
the output has a potential taking up a large amount of memory and you
only intend to iterate through it. You don't want the entire thing at once
then that makes sense to use a generator and then the extra credit was
can you explain what a comp is bhalo. So we actually didn't cover this
in the lecture but if you google generator comprehension this is exactly
what this is. It's like a list comprehension but instead of actually
creating the list in memory it's going to generate it. So all you need to
do here is switch out the square brackets for princes and you turn your
list comprehension into a generator so that you can iterate the
generator and not hold all of this in memory.

HCF OF TWO NUMBERS BY
DIVISION METHOD USING
EUCLIDIAN ALGORITHM
Here in this program, we will find the FCF. By using Euclidian algorithm.
What is this algorithm, the Euclidian algorithm is based on the fact that
FCF of two numbers. Why is their differences as well? So I will
elaborate it in detail.

So first, we will see that we are going to define this function, define
compute FCF awful to numbers X and Y, and after eight two we will go
through a wide loop that will take Devault value all four Y. And it will
outrate until it reaches until the result reaches zero. And here we see
that in this algorithm, we divide the greater by the smaller and take the
remainder. No, we will divide Somalia by this remainder also. So this is
the logic all for this Euclidian algorithm. So we repeat until the
remainder is equal to zero. For example, fuzzy that we are going to

execute to this code. We have taken two values, 300 hundred. And the
other value is at 400. And

we will compute the HCF all four more diesel numbers. And in the end,
we will bring it and disability SBF of these two numbers that I will
execute discord. You see here that the FCF is a hundred. So when we
divide 400 by 300, we get the remainder, all 400. And

we see that we will take an example. We want to die white 30 by.
Twentyfold. So you see here that in case of 24 and 30, the SCAF would
be equal to six. So according to the Euclidian algorithm, we die white
Pertti by these 30 value by 24. And then the remainder is equal to six.
Then we die white 24 with that remainder. That was six. And then the
remainder is equal to zero. Hence, six is the required FCF. In this case.
So this is our answer output. While in the case of 300 and 400
numbers, the output was equal to hundred. So this is the why loopier,
the body of why we will outrate through it. And until the value of
remainder. B becomes equal to zero. So this algorithm will.

CALCULATE CUBE OF A NUMBER
IN PYTHON BY LAMBDA
FUNCTION
This is the Python code to illustrate cueball fate given no. So in this
program code, we will show you the difference between a defined
defining it function and a lambda function, anonymous function. So in
case of defining a function, we define their function with a certain name,
such as in this case.

We have defined a function with the name of Cube, the cube y. Here we
will give the a value to this function for which we are going to take the
cube after execution. We also need to return the desert here, which we
see that we are going to return the reserve to here in the form of these
four ram code. So we will have to return the result from where the
function was called using the return key. So we use this return key word
in the simple building defined function, while in case of lambda function,
we don't need to use any return statement. You see here that this

lambda function is just simple to use. It's very easy to use. We don't
need to define something. So we will try this. First example. We have
defined cube here. Then we will return the values that you see here that
the values are multiplying by three times, multiplying by with each other
by three times. Here you see that we want to take the cube of five. So
five will multiply by with itself three times, five by five by five. As it is
specified by here. So this will return the value. So this is the return. The.
This will is done resulting from where the function was called. And
finally, we will print the result to output. So we'll execute this program.
So you see here that the result of this program called is it here? That is
125.

So if you want to try another example, we want to take the cube off to
that is equal to eight. So you see here, there the answer output is here.
So this output was shown with the help of four simple simply defining a
function while we tried this with the help of a lambda function. So we
are going to take the cube of six. You see here that. This is the LAMDA
function. This is anonymous lamda function, and we have not defined
anything here. And we are also not going to define the tuns or reserves
resource. So Lamda definition does not include a return statement. It

always contains an expression which is returned. So the expression is
here. It is containing an expression and it will return the value according
to this expression. So we can also put a lambda definition anywhere in
a function that is function is expected. And we do not have to assign it
to it. But are you able at all? We don't need to assign it to variable. So
this is the simplicity of the lambda function that makes it unique as
compared to this one. So for lambda function is quite too interesting
and different. I will execute this. So you see here that the cube of six is
here. That is equal to two hundred and sixteen.

We will change this input as to. And Jack, since you see here that the
output B is here.

We will also run this scored and the output is year eight. So here you
also see that here we are going to include t number of lines, three lines
of code in this program with the defining it function Y in case of lambda
function, lambda anonymous function. We are using just two simple
lines. And we are going to calculate the output. So it's quite easy
function and we can also use the other building functions.

ADD TWO FLOAT NUMBERS IN
PYTHON
So I will teach you the addition of two numbers in two different ways. As
I want that you learn as maximum as possible.

So in the first example, we will assign the values ourselves, while in
second example we will ask the user to give input numbers. We will use
the prompts, are keen to ask the user to do it. So we start with first
example. This is a program to add to numbers. We are giving two floor
values as input value. One as five point five. And value two as equal to
4.5. So these are float values, floating point numbers. And in this line,
we are adding them both values. So this is the comment adding the two
given numbers. This is the formula of some sum is equal to integer
value one plus integer value two, as we have given the. Sody.

We have given the floating values as input, so we will use this as here
and then we will display the result. By this brief statement, the sum is
equal to the sum which will come as a result of this line of code that will
be displayed here under so. In this example, you see that we have
hardcoded devalues. So do you know what is meant by hard coded
values? Hardcoded values? Have you heard about it or not? I will tell
you that what these values mean, hard coded values, means that we fix
Detta or barometer's in a program in such a way that they can not be
altered without modifying the program. So if you will change this as
equal to three point five, we will modify it. Otherwise, we can nor
change decent value

if we want to change this value to as one point five. We will have to
modify it. Otherwise we can not change it. So in this example, we have
hardcoded values. Value one as 5.5. And value two as one point five.
We will then discord.

So you see that the sum is equal to seven point zero. So if we give the
input as one point zero.

So you see that the. Input is one as value to an input is a 5.5 as value
one. So the sum is here. Let's suppose we change this to one for to see
what will be the output. So the output is the same, three point five plus
one is equal to 4.5. So you see that this is a floating point. This is a
integer value. So these are two different values. But here we are going
to convert it into a flawed. We are converting this value to that is equal
to an integer value value to his integer value. We are converting it into
four. And then we will print the sum.

EVEN ODD PROGRAM IN PYTHON
USING FUNCTION
this program is a boat. Even or odd. So this is the. Program to check
you one or odd. We will give an input to this program and check
whether a given number given input is even or are so. We know that no
one divided by two is equal to even. And if no, that is not divided by two

is called as all no. So in this program could really see value into every
year number. And then we divide the number.

You see that we are guim giving it to input into the variable number as
input. And then we divide the number by two to see whether it is an
even or an odd number. So you see that we have used this flag. That
number is divided by two. If flag is equal to zero, then put into number.
It is an even number. So you know that when a number say, well, 16,
20 is divided by two. Then it returns nothing as a remainder. So this is a
condition about that. And if the flag is equal to one, we mean that if we
divide 20 or say that we die white three by two and we get get to one as
a remainder, then three would not be an equal number. Else it will be an
odd number. This program will present it as an odd number. And. We
see that in the last line. This program will print error, invalid input if we
give input to other than even or no say we give it as a battle character,
as input or an empty space or any thing. Others, such as Alphabet. We
will execute this program. We give it as input to one. So you see that
one is an odd number here. This is the output. And to any number one,

we entered one. And the result is here one is an odd number.

So we give it input as to. And check to is an even number, then we will
give input as say. Three and check threes in our number. We know
that.

So we give it zero as input. So zero is an even number. No, we will
check this program code with the help of this we entered has signed. It
will return an error. So you see that value error. It will return as a value
error. So this program goal was to check even or odd by taking input
from the user through prompt command. The user gives an input
number.

HOW TO COUNT THE NUMBER OF
VOWELS IN A STRING PYTHON
USING FOR LOOP

So hence we have taken a string as input. This is the input string IP
and a score SDR string. So. Here we see that make it suitable for kids,
less comparisons. So what is meant by this line of code? So using the
method gets hold. We return a lower case virgin. Awful. That stream so.
And here we see that make a dictionary with each wall. A key and
values zero. So we are taking the help of dictionary in this program
called and we will represent the values and their total numbers and a
value. And it's key in this case, awful program. So here we see that this
gold count is equal to. So we're using Feron keys. So what is the
meaning or object? Object of desire from keys. So with the help of the
study method from Keys, we construct a new dictionary with each wall
as it's key and all values equal to zero. You see that here, though value
awful wobbles is zero as we have not run this program. Still, Berta,
after E2, it will. Add values if it will find some wobbles in this string. It
will continue to add the values in this form in the form of food.
Additionally, we know that in a dictionary we have a key and then its
value. We have a key and then its value. So additionally comprises
keys and their values. So here we see that this is the string. Awful.
What was E I owe you? These are the walls. 11 letters in A.B.C. and.
Here in this block of gold, we even in vivid store. The initialization awful
count. We will outrate the input stream using it for a loop here. You see

that this is the file loopier for vector in inputting. If these wild characters
are in decirte Ringa, then if character encounters. Then code is a
character plus one is equal to one. So here we will continue to add plus
one plus one plus one if we will find the character. We will continue to
add plus one in the total result to total value of a particular key. So we
will outrate the input screen using this for loop. And in each outrage we
will check if the character is in the dictionary keys. And then if it is true
that this keys is true. And if it is a Walburn, then we will increment it with
the help of this one. We will increment etre with the value off of one. If it
is true, if it is a while. Then finally, we will bring the total count, total
number, all four revolvers. Present in this surgery.

So. We will execute this called. So we see here that this was our string.
Hello. Have you tried all tutorial section yet? So there we see. That is a
key. And it has a value of two. And E is a key. It has a value of five.
Isaac Key and three has ever. And it has a value of three or is a key
and value. All five is assigned to this. All you is a key having the value
three in this program we will count where you have been used. So this
is one you second you and this one is the third to you. And similarly, we
will count the letter E 11 E. So here we see that one. Do. Four and five.

So you see here that. These levels are printed in the output as in the
form of a dictionary specification. They are in the form of a dictionary. A
e i o u a key. And it has a certain value that comes after counting with
the help of this for loop. So I hope that you understand well with this
example. And don't forget to practice this program.

INTRODUCTION TO WEB
SCRAPING
Web scraping is a general term for techniques involving automating the
gathering of data from a Web site. As you can imagine, there's often
Web sites that have information that you want to use for some other
project. However, actually manually going in and copying and pasting
the information yourself would just take too long to be realistically
possible. So in this section, we're going to learn how to use Python and
a couple of Python libraries to conduct web scraping tasks such as
downloading images or information off of a Web site. In order to web
script of Python, where we first need to understand are the basic
concepts of how a Web site works. So if you've already taken a project
on just basic Web development, you may actually already know a lot of
the information we're going to show here in order to web script of
Python. What we really need to understand are how the front end of a
Web site delivers information to your browser. And that includes
basically three major topics. H.T., Amelle, CSX and JavaScript. Now,
you don't need to technically know each time LCROSS and JavaScript
in depth in order to actually scrape a website. You just need to know
enough to be able to understand what your browser is showing you. So
let's first, just very briefly have an overview of how a Web site connects
to the Internet and then how your browser displays information to you.
So when a browser loads a Web site, the user gets to see what is
known as the front end of the Web site.

Let's imagine that you wanted to read an article on Wikipedia. So what
you do? You open up your computer. You connect to the Internet. You
open up your browser and then your browser. You're going to pass into
your URL to your Wikipedia article. And then Wikipedia returns back
some information to your browser and your browser displays it in a
format that you can read. So this is a human readable format.

But really what Wikipedia is returning is code such as an H. HTML
document, which stands for hypertext markup language. And this is
special code that your browser is able to read and understand in order
to display something that looks nice for a human to read.

So what we're going to be doing instead is being able to read this
HCM, L and C assess and JavaScript code that Wikipedia is sending
back to us. And we're going to use a Python Web scraping program to
directly grab what we want. Maybe we want to actually grab the
Wikipedia logo off of this. So we would be able to search this H. T
Amelle document and find where that logos images such as a JPEG or
Panji file, and then use that for some other project.

Or maybe you want to grab some information off this e-mail document.
Python will be able to do that as well. So can grab images and
information off this H t mail document. And convert it into another
python object, such as a python list. OK, so there's a couple of things
we need to understand in order to perform web scraping effectively.
The first one is actually not technical. It's the rules of Web scraping that
you should abide by. The second one also not really technical. It's the
limitations of web scraping. So we want you to have realistic
expectations coming into this section. And then the third one is more
technical. It's just an understanding of basic HP, Amelle and CSX. So,
again, you don't need to become an expert in each team LCROSS in
order to perform web scraping. You just need to know enough about
them. They are able to actually find what you're looking for in the H
team L and C assess code. OK, so let's get started. First, the rules of
web scraping. You should always try to get permission before scraping.
If you make too many scraping attempts or requests, then it's possible
that your IP address could get blocked, which means you won't even
be able to visit that Web site in a normal browser. Now, if you're dealing
with a Web site that gets millions of visitors, I feel like Wikipedia and
you're just going to scrape it a few times to get some information, then
really that's no problem because that Web site deals with much, much

higher traffic. But keep in mind that some sites do automatically block
scraping software. So you should always make sure and check the
permissions or rules or guideline page for whatever particular Web site
you're going to be attempting to scrape. So always trying to get
permission before scraping. And you should also check the laws of
whatever country you're operating in to see if it's legal to web scrape.
Typically, it's OK. But again, you should always consult the Web site
rules in order to make sure you're OK. The second thing I want to talk
about are the limitations of web scraping and in general, every Web site
is unique, which means, unfortunately, every Web scraping script is
unique. So you can't really just take one Web scraping script in Python
and just easily apply it to any other Web site in the world, since every
Web site's HD mail code is going to be unique to that Web site. More
than likely, you're going to have to adjust your script in order to fit other
Web sites. And keep in mind that any slight change or update to a Web
site may completely break your Web scraping script. So the scripts in
general are pretty static and they're not gonna be able to adjust to
changes in the Web site. So this is something that is a little annoying
about Web scraping. And it's the fact that if you plan to have kind of a
long term Web scraping project, then it's more than likely you're going
to have to make adjustments to that script over time. But our goal in this
section of the project is to be able to generalize the skill set of using
Python to perform web scraping so you can take the general ideas and
then apply them to Web sites instead of having to try to copy some
cookie cutter code. So really, what we want to do is become experts in
looking up information and generalizing the process of web scraping so
you can apply it to unique situations.

OK, now let's talk about the main front end components of a Web site.
If you're already familiar of H, Team L and CSX and even a little bit of
JavaScript, you should actually be OK for the rest of this and you can
skip forward. But if Python is your first language, then you may not be
familiar with these concepts. So here are the actual three main
components of the front end of a Web site. Essentially, these are the
three things that are being passed into your browser and then your
browser uses this to show you something that's human readable. And
Python is basically going to grab these raw documents or this raw code
itself and then extract information that it wants from it. So when viewing
the Web site, that browser is not going to show you all that source
code. Instead, it shows you the HDL and some success in job script
that the Web site sends to your browser and your browser processes
that information. Each mail is used to create the basic structure and
content of a Web page, so each T.M. actually contains the information
that's shown on the Web site, such as the words written in a paragraph
on the Web site. CSX, which stands for cascading style sheets, is used
for the design and style of a Web page. So based off the female
elements, they'll be connected to some sort of style, such as font size or
color or positioning on the Web site. And that's what CSX does. So H.
Theno main information on the Web site. CSX is going to be the design

and style of that H.T. mill. And then finally, there may be JavaScript,
which is used to define the interactive elements of a Web page. And
often for our scraping jobs, we will actually have to worry that much
about JavaScript. Really, it's the H.T. mail that we're looking for. And
we can use CFS to help us find it. But let's go into a little more depth on
each of these. So really, as I mentioned, for effective basic web
scraping, we only need to have a basic understanding of each Timal
NC assess. And what's going to happen is Python can view these HDL
and CNS elements programmatically and then extract information from
the Web site. So let's explore some example. Each L and C assess in a
little more detail. And don't worry about fully understanding this right
now. We're gonna see a lot more examples of this when we're Web
scraping of Python. In subsequent lectures. So, as I mentioned, HST,
HDL is hypertext markup language, and it's present on every single
Web site on the Internet. That is essentially the base of a Web page.
And what's interesting is you can right click on a Web site and select
view page source in order to get an example of what each team out
looks like. So we're going to be showing that actual view page source
later on in next. But let's see a small example of some each team. I'll
code and just highlight a couple of important components here.

We have an example of what is very, very basic Web site would have
for its H team L code. That very top line typically says something like
doctype h t mail, which is essentially telling whatever program is
reading this file. Hey, this is an h t e-mail file. So the document type is H
team. And then what we have are various tags or elements. So we have
this general H, team L tag and notice we have a starting tag and then a
closing tag and the closing tags. Each team, Timal, are denoted with a
forward slash. So you'll notice that pattern. A lot of an opening tag and
then a closing tag. And then at the top of an H t Amelle file, we have the
head portion. So the head portion basically contains certain high level
information of the Web page itself, such as what the title on the browser
tab will show or connections to things like in other CFS file. And then we
have the body component of an H t Mel file. And this contains the vast
majority of the information that the Web site or Web page is going to
display. And we have things like headers, which is bolder tax and
things like paragraphs, which is just a paragraph of text information.
The main thing to understand here is that there's actual tags we can
search for. So for some reason later on, programmatically, we wanted
to grab the text, some paragraph from this document. I can notice that
it's in between these P tags, which is actually stands for a paragraph
tags. And I'll be able to use Python to look for things that are in between
those paragraph tags. So main thing you need to know about each
team l in regards to Python Web scraping is the fact that there's an
opening tag and a closing tag. And we can look for information between
those tags. CSX stands for cascading style sheets. CSX gives style to a
Web site. And what I mean by style are things like changing the colors
or fonts or general look of a Web site. CSX uses tags to define what
H.T. male elements will be styled.

All right. So here we see again a very simple H team file. However,
we've added a connection to CSX and we filed a particular component
or element from this H. Timal file. The first change your notice is that
inside the head section, we've actually linked to a CSX file. So we have
this link tag and we say, OK, this relationship is going to be stylesheet,
essentially telling it that this is going to be a CSX file. And then H. RF is
essentially the reference for the actual file, essentially telling this A.T.M.
document where to find this CSX file, which has things like descriptions
on font size, color position, et cetera. And now the way CSX works is
once you link to the CSX file, you have things like I.D. and classes.
There's actually more levels to this. And CSX. But for our purposes, we
really just need to know about I.D. and classes when it comes to CSX.
So notice here inside this paragraph tag that had some text in between
the opening tag and closing tag in the opening tag. I now have this link
to I.D. is equal to Perret. To compare it to is an I.D. call inside the CSX
file. And so now that this paragraph tag has a connection to I.D. equal
to Parratt two, it's going to grab its style choices from the pair to I.D.
inside that dot CSX file. So what is it that CSX file looks like? Well, let's
take a look.

This is an example of what the style that CSI style looks like, and it will
essentially have this hash tag symbol pair to and then notice. It almost
looks like a dictionary here of the property. And then the value for it. So
it says color red, which means anything tagged or linked to this I.D. of
Pareto or a parameter to whatever you want to call it is going to be
colored red when it's read in by a browser. So what this is doing is it's
going to color this some text inside this paragraph with red. And this
hash tag symbol is basically denoting that it's an I.D.. And typically
ideas are only used once per each HTML document. Now could have
also been a class call. So it could have been class as equal to
something like cool or whatever, arbitrary string here that links the CSX
documents. And then it would look something like this, we would have a
dot instead of a hashtag, because this is now a class call and classes
denoted by a period or dot. And then we have the properties,
something like color is red. And then the font family is poor, Don. OK.
So classes are typically used when you want to add the same style to
multiple elements across each tamale file. So think of ideas as typically
a one use and then classes as multi use.

So then in a much larger CSF file, you could have something that looks
like this, you could have P, which basically says all paragraph elements
in an H t Amelle file are gonna have color red, specific font, family,
specific font size. Or we can adjust to something like some class, the
noted by the period and then color font, family, font size or an I.D.,
which is going to effect typically one element inside the H Timmo file
with in this case, the color blue. So this is what a full CSF file could look
like. All right. So I know there was a lot of information that we just threw
at you, but don't worry about memorizing this. We're going to see lots of
examples. And it's going to be a lot clearer when you actually see how
this all connects with Web scraping and python. The main ideas that I
really want you to get out of this lecture is the fact that the H t m. file is
going to contain the information. A C assess file contains the styling
information, and then we can use H.T., Mel and C assess tags to locate
specific information on a page. And the whole idea was scraped off
Python. If you're gonna point Python to a particular either CSF tag or
ASML element and then just grab information based off that. Now to
Web scrape of Python. We can use the beautiful soup and requests
libraries. And these are external libraries outside of basic python. So
you need to install them with either Konda or Pip at your command line.
So directly at your command line, use PIP, install requests, pip, install

Elex M.L., which is going to be used with a beautiful super library. And
then pip install B.S. four, which is how we can install a beautiful soup
for and I know a beautiful soup, kind of a strange name, but you'll see
why they call it a soup later on. Now if you're using an anaconda
distribution, you should be able to use KONDA install instead of PIP
install. And I'm actually going to install all of these in the next lecture so
you can see what I mean.

SETTING UP WEB SCRAPING
LIBRARIES
So we're going to be doing here is we will install the necessary libraries
at the command line. And then we're going to explore how to inspect
elements and view the source of a Web page. Keep in mind for this
second part, we do highly suggest you use Google Chrome as your
Web browser, because that way you can follow along exactly with us.
But if you're using something like Firefox or Microsoft Edge, then you
should be able to follow along anyways because the tools are available
in all major browsers. They might just be named slightly differently. But
in general, you should be able to inspect elements and view the page
source in any browser. But if you're having trouble finding it, go ahead
and just use Chrome. Let's get started by installing the necessary
libraries to do this. I'm going to open up my command line so you can
either open up your terminal on Ubuntu or Mac OS or if you're on
windows, you can open up your anaconda prompt or command the
prompt. Let's get started. All right. Here's my anaconda prompt. If you
have any issues with your normal command prompt of windows. Go
ahead and give a go at the anaconda prompt. And what we need to do
here is we to install three libraries. Just make sure they're installed. If
you're using Anaconda as your main setup, you should be able to use
KONDA install. If not, you can always use PIP install as well.

So the first one we're gonna install is called requests, which actually
allows us to make a request to a Web site and then grab the
information off of it. Sean, go ahead and say PIP install requests.
Notice that mine's already satisfied. Next, will you want to do is pip
install l x m l and that's going to be used later on by the beautiful soupe
library in order to essentially decipher what's inside. What requests
returns. So use Pip, install Alex Amelle again. Sorry. Satisfied for me.
And then finally, I'm going to pip install B. S four, which stands for
Beautiful Soup, version four. So go ahead. Is A pip install B as for. And
this case, we already got it. OK. So that's it for these libraries. Again,
it's requests. L x m l. Those aren't ones or else lowercase. And then B.
S four. And you can check out the previous slide in case you need to
understand that. And you can also check out the notebook. We have
the list. They need to install there as well. So once we have those three
libraries, we should be good to go in a notebook. We can confirm this
by go ahead and you might need to restart your computer. But after you
restart, you should be able to open up a new notebook and then import
requests. You should also be able to import B.S. for and if you can do
that inside of a notebook, then you're pretty much good to go. OK, so
now what I want to do is show you how you can view a page source as

well as inspect a particular element inside the Chrome browser to do
this. I'm going to go to Wikipedia article page.

All right. So here I am at the Wikipedia article page for Jonas Salk,
which if you don't know who he is, he actually developed the polio
vaccine, saving lots of lives. And now what we're going to do is take a
look at the source code that your browser is receiving from Wikipedia
and then converting it to something that you can read as a human. So
what we're gonna do here is go in and. Right, click on the page and you
should see the option to view page source. Now, be careful not to
Akseli. Right. Click on something that is actually a link such as here.
University of Michigan. If you right click that, we'll ask you to do things
related to the link and said choose somewhere on the Wikipedia article
that looks like just general whitespace and they should be able to view
page source. There's also a shortcut which on my browser is control
plus you.

All right. So if we hit view page source, we actually now get this source
h m l documents inside of a new tab and we can see that just like our
simple examples. There's doctype h Amelle. There's this head tag, a
bunch of stuff in the head. Things like the title, which is what the
information goes in the tab here. And if you keep going you'll see a
bunch of different links. And if you keep going further after that, you'll
start seeing things like H1 or header tags. And then you can see the
I.D., class calls, et cetera. Now, something to keep in mind is when
you're web scraping, you're not going to be opening up this huge file
and then trying to find something here that's actually really hard to do
given how much information is here is suddenly possible. And it is part
of the process, depending on what you're trying to achieve. But in
general, what we really want to do is just be able to hone in on a certain
section and then see what ideas it might have. So to do that, well, we
can do is we'll come back to this article and let's imagine I was
interested in trying to grab this image of Mr. Selke. So what I can do is I
can go ahead and.

Right. Click here and then hit inspect. And what inspect is going to do
is is essentially just going to open and highlight that particular section of
the H. Timal document that is related to whatever happened to be
inspecting, which in this case, if you kind of hover over, you'll highlight
is that actual image. So I can see the image. And then later on, we're
going to learn how we can actually grab this image, download it and
save it onto our computers. And you can do this sort of inspection for
really anything on the page. So, for example, if you happen to be
interested in the table of contents here, you could right. Click this here,
inspect and then you can become. Or you could come here and start
looking at what class calls are related to things in the content or table of
contents. And you can actually kind of open these and expand these,
see that they're a list item, et cetera. Now, this sort of thing is where it
definitely helps to know H. L and CSX. It will make your Web scraping a
lot easier. So if you do plan to be using Python for a lot of Web scraping
tasks, I highly recommend that you learn. H. Tim L. and CSX first
Earley's try to boost your skills in that because it's going to make your
life a lot easier when it comes to Web scraping, because you'll be able
to read this information easily. OK, so if that being said, there was just a
couple of things I wanted to show you here, which was, again, how you
can inspect the source, which is right, click view page source, and then

we get this giant source and then also how to inspect a particular
element, which is just right. Click and then inspect. And it basically
highlights any particular element that we're looking at.

For example, we're highlighting this second paragraph and you can
expand on that and then view any links that were there and the actual
material itself. And if you really wanted to, you can actually start editing
this. So, for example, I can start deleting here. And then if I click back.
Notice it deleted here as well. Keep in mind, not leading Wikipedia for
everybody. I'm just leading this particular instance of Wikipedia that my
browser is reading because I'm editing that source code.

PYTHON WEB SCRAPING GRABBING A TITLE
we're finally going start Web scraping off Python. And we'll begin by
showing you how you can grab a page title from any Web site. So let's
go ahead and get started by opening up a Jupiter notebook. OK, here I
am at the Jupiter notebook. Before we begin, I want to again point out
that everything and all the code we show here is inside the notebook
that goes along with this lecture, which called Guide to Web Scraping.

And this notebook is going to be used for most of the lectures
throughout this section, of project.

So I want to show you here that there's a lot of information that's
accessible to you inside this guide to Web Scraping Notebook. We go
and break down each time, all documents, a little bit of CSX Web
scraping guidelines as well as what to install. And so we're gonna start
off this example, Task Zero, which is grabbing the title of a page. And
we're going to be using example dot com for this, which is just a very
simple example, domain page.

All right. So let's go ahead and get started. First, you'll notice that we
have this example domain page unexampled dot com. The page title is
going to be the text that shows up inside of this tab. So, for example,
dot com, that example domain for the Wikipedia article that we saw
about Jonas Salk. That title is Jonas Salk. Dash Wikipedia. So let's go
ahead and show you the process in order to do some web scraping.

The first thing you have to do is import. Requests. So that's step one.
And then what we need to do is need to get a Web page through a
request. So we say something like result is equal to. Requests. And
then we call the get method off requests and we simply passin the
actual YORO. So in this case, for example, domain, it's HTP. It's
actually not secure. It's not HTP. Yes. But you're going to say HTP
colon forward slash, forward slash to be the BW dot example dot com.
So this is where you would put in the euro and make sure to include
either HTP or HTP s depending on what the website actually has. So
most sites are actually now HTP s. But keep in mind for some very
simple sites, they actually may just be HTP, which essentially means
whether or not they're secured. OK, so if you get any error on that, you
want to double check your firewall and make sure it's not blocking
Python from reaching out to the Internet and grabbing information now
that we have this result. Let's go ahead and check the type. So we have
this request that models and it's a response. So essentially what
happened here is the request library that we downloaded goes and
gets a response from W-W, that example dot com, and we can actually
then call result dot text and it's an attribute. So if I run this, notice that
it's actually this H.T. mail documents. And if I take a look at example
domain and hit view page source, it's essentially this information here
just stored as a giant python string. And this is nice because anything I
can do if a python string, I can now do this large text. However, this is
actually just a string in order to pass through this. What we need to do
is use beautiful soup. The beautiful soup library, which we installed with
B.S. for, is actually going to allow us to then grab and easily obtain
information from this. Due to I.D. or class calls or HCM attacks. So right
now we just have this giant string and we're going to convert it into a
soup. So you can imagine that a soup, you have ingredients that go into
a soup and then beautiful soup basically thinks of an e-mail document
as kind of this giant soup. They can then grab information from like you
could grab ingredients from.

So go ahead. And now import B.S. for the next step is to actually create
the soup variable. So we'll say soup is equal to B.S. for DOT. Beautiful
soup. And we're gonna pass on two things here. We're going to pass in
this texturing. And then finally, a string code for what engine to use to
pass through this H tamale text. And for this, it's l x m l noticed I am
passing this in as a string. And these are ls not ones. And that's why we
actually had to pip install El SML because beautiful soup uses that on
the back end to essentially go through this H tamale document and then
figure out what is a C SS class. What is a C SS I.D.. Which are the
different H tamale elements and tags et cetera. So if I run this and now
call soup, you'll notice that soup has essentially made this really easy to
read. And now it looks exactly the same as the source code we saw in
this example dot com. So essentially we went from kind of this rostering
to this soup object. And now the soup object is smart enough to be able
to grab things based off their tags or elements. So here we can see
there is this title example domain. So now what I want to do is grab that
from the soup. And the way I can do that is with soup that select. So we
can say soup dot select, and this is where you can actually grab things
from this H html document. And for this very first simple example where
we're gonna do show you how you can grab just raw H. Tamao
elements. So we're not focused on anything. We'll see assess.

Basically, we're just looking for these tags. So things like H1 div body
things happen to be in between these sort of less than or greater than
symbols. So we have this H1 tag, this paragraph tag, et cetera. So
we're going to do is we simply say as a string here, passan, one of the
tag names. So the tag we were interested in was up here, which was
the title tag. So notice there is an opening title and then a closing title.
And in between is what we're really looking for. So we say soup dot
select and we can passan that each time element tag. And notice it
brings back this example domain. So basically looks through this
document and it's smart enough to figure out, OK, where are these
titled. Notice that by default it actually returns a list because technically
there could be more than one tag or element on this page, especially for
really complicated pages. So let's imagine that I wanted to grab
paragraphs. I could say instead of Title P, which is the paragraph tag
run that now I get a list of all the paragraph tags on that page. So here's
one paragraph. And then there's a comma. And here's another
paragraph. So this is what you do for just selecting simple each team.
Elements as you just pass in as a string the name of the element. So
you could do div body asml p. Let's go ahead and do H1 here. Run that
and I can see example domain. So, again, the thing keep mind is when
you call this, it does include those tags, so that opening and closing.
And it also automatically reports back a list, even if there's just a single
element that is return of that result. So because of that, you're probably
next wondering let's go back to title here. How you can grab just the
actual text, because if I'm searching for a title, I probably don't want to
actually return this opening and closing title tag. I probably just want the
actual text. Well, in this case, I need to grab the first item off of this. So
let's go ahead and grab that first item. And now I have that string. So
this indexing describes the first item off the list.

And once I have that, I can use the get. Text method, which just returns
back the stream. So let's imagine I wanted to just grab this string here
of this domain is for an illustrative example, etc., then I would say
souped up. Select title lips, actually, paragraph. So P and let's go
ahead and return this back of some object. So we'll say site.
Paragraph's is equal to suit. That's like pee. So, again, the string code
matches up with some sort of H team L tag here. And now if I take a
look at, say, paragraphs, as expected, it's a list. So if I want the very
first item in that list, I can say go ahead and index at zero. That gets me
back. This paragraph tag. And if you notice here, I check the type of
this. This is not a string. It's actually a specialized, beautiful soup
object, which is why I can do something like call. Don't get taxed on it.
So keep in mind, this is a string. It's a special, beautiful soup object,
which then means I can do this, get text and it returns back this as a
string. OK. So we learned a couple of important things here. And let me
just go over the steps briefly. The first thing you do is we import
requests. We say requests that get passed on your euro. You may
need to double check if it's HTP or HTP. Yes. You get back this
response which has this text attribute. You go ahead.

And after you import B.S. for you pass in that result, that text along with
elec smells the code of what to use to decipher this into beautiful soup,
which then creates this easy to use soup object. And the main thing we
do at this soup object is we just select elements off of it. And so a big
part of this is understanding how to use this select code and what pass
on here as the string, because the rest of this pretty much stays the
same for most other Web sites. Pretty much for all the Web sites we're
gonna be working with for import requests, say requests, stop get. And
then we create the soup object. The tricky part here is figure out what
do you pass in into the select string. So this is the kind of where the
work happens. As far as Web scrapings concern everything else before
this pretty much stays the same. It's figuring out the different string
codes you can pass in here. And that's where it becomes really helpful
to understand each team attacks and CSF calls.

PYTHON WEB SCRAPING GRABBING A CLASS
we're going to show you an example of grabbing all the elements
associated with a class inside of a Web site. As we previously
mentioned, a big part of Web scraping off the beautiful soup library in
Python is figuring out what string syntax to pass in to the soup, that
select method, because pretty much everything before that soup, that
select method is going to be the same regardless of the website. It's
figuring out that string syntax. That can be the tricky part. So I want to
do is go through a table of some common examples and these make a
lot of sense. If you already know the CSX syntax, since that's where this
string syntax is derived from.

So this table on the left hand side shows you an example, syntax. And
then on the right hand side basically describes what the matching result
would be throughout that soup documents. And this table is present
inside the lecture notebook. So I just want to briefly go over these. The
first row is going to grab every element with a certain tag. And we saw
that in their previous example when we grabbed, for instance,

everything of a paragraph tag that is the P tag or everything with a title
tag. Now we want to grab everything or a particular I.D. so we can do
that by saying soup that select. And then we use a hashtag symbol right
in front of whatever the element idea is. So in the HDMI document,
you'll see something like I.D. is equal to then some sort of string I.D.
code. And you can use that with the hash tag soup that select. And it
will grab that I.D. element. Similarly, for a class, we did the same thing
except instead of a hash tag. It's a period. And this follows along with
CSX syntax, if you're familiar with filling out a CSX documents. And if
you want to get a little more complex and look for elements within
elements, there's a couple different ways to do this. We can say soup
that select something like div span and there's a space in between
those two element names. And what that does is basically it grabs any
elements named span within a div element. And you can switch those
out for any element names. So essentially it's saying find any elements
named on that second string within that first string, if you want it to be
even more precise for directly within something, you can use the
greater than symbol. And basically what this would return back are any
elements named span directly within a div element with absolutely
nothing in between. OK. So all of these string codes are derived from
CSX syntax. So I would highly encourage you if you're having trouble, if
these two just learn a little bit of CSX. And again, we have a little bit of
guide for you in our notebook. But we can also do is show you an
example of using these. So let's go in and do that. Let's show you how
to grab all the elements of a particular class from a real Web page with
Python and beautiful suit. Head back to that same notebook. We were
working in last time. All right. Here I am at the Jupiter notebook. What
I'm going to do is head over to Wikipedia page or Wikipedia article, and
you can choose any major Wikipedia article that has a table of contents
for this particular example. We're going to do here is we're gonna check
out grasshoppers Wikipedia article. And in case you don't know, Grace
Hopper is a famous computer scientist. And what we're gonna do is
let's imagine for some reason I want to grab all the strings in this table
of contents. So there's a couple of different ways we can do this. But
the main way we want to understand is the ability to inspect a particular
elements on a page and then grab an associated class. Now, typically,

there's more than one class or I.D. or system of calls. You can do in
order to grab information off of a Web page. But let's go ahead and just
get you practicing with a generalized method, which is once you figure
out what you're interested in grabbing. Go ahead and write. Click on
one of these and then hit inspect.

So essentially, right. Click on what you actually want to grab and you'll
notice that if we take a look at the elements that are returned, it looks
like we have a couple of classes here. We have something that says
classes equal to TLC. No. Another one that says class is equal to TLC
text. And we can be an expanding on this. And as we go through these
elements, you'll noted that they're highlighted in the actual Web page.
So it's basically telling you what everything is associated with. So, for
example, if I expand on this list, I see class TLC level one, some sort of
H reft to retirement. Essentially, it will bring you down to the retirement
section of that page. I can keep expanding and I see the actual text that
I want here called retirement and I see it's associated with the class T o
c text. And that makes a lot of sense because it stands for most likely
table of contents text. So let's go ahead and see if we can use this
class call t o c text in order to grab all the strings that are in the table of

contents. So let's begin by heading over back to our Jupiter notebook.
And

let's create a new request. So I'm going to say, ah, yes. Is equal to
requests. Don't get and then I'm going to pass on the full YORO. Go
ahead. Just. Copy and paste this here. And there's the full year Earl, I
need to include this HDTV piece. So we'll go ahead and make that
request again. Make sure to have any firewall or any sort of Internet
issue that's blocking this request. And then we make a soup out of the
text from that request. So we'll say B.S. four is equal to beautiful soup.
Ah, yes. Result thought text. And then we tell. Beautiful suit to use l x m
l in order to decipher it. We run that and now we have our soup. So if
we check out the soup, it's gonna be quite large. Because there's a lot
of stuff in that Wikipedia article. But we can see here basically grab the
entire contents from that page.

OK, so now it comes time to figure out what to select from this. So
obviously this may take some experimentation, but we already saw
when we were inspecting elements that this TOEIC text class looks like
a good contender. So what I want to do is a soup thought select. And
then passing the appropriate string code. And because we're working
class equals. That means the first one should be a period. Or DOT. And
then I'm going to pass in the class name. So it says classes equal to t o
c text. So let's pass that. N t o c. Text. I run that and here I can see all
the spans that have that particular class called TOEIC text, so starts off
with early life and education, career or two, et cetera. So it looks like
we're actually able to use that class call in order to grab all the
information or the strings off this table of contents. And you can do that
for essentially anything that's linked appropriately with a class call on
this Web page. So going to come back here and let's imagine that I
actually just want this text, not the span in class call. So recall, we can
actually then loop through this and grab the text attribute from these
items. So, for example, that very first item here, if we check the type.
Recall, it's a specialized, beautiful soup element tag. It's not just a
normal python string.

So if I say my first item is equal to soup that select at zero. Then I can
see first item here. And after I've go ahead and define it, I can say that
tab. And I can see all the various attributes and method of calls here.
And pretty much the one we're most interested in is just grabbing the
text. So that's a text attribute that's available to us, which just returns
the text in between those spang calls early life and education, which
means if I wanted to print out all those strings,

I could say for item in soup that select. And they will say t, o, c. Text.
Prints. Item, dot text. We run that and then we get to see the results.

PYTHON WEB SCRAPING GRABBING AN IMAGE
We're going to show you how to grab an image from a Web site. Again,
using Python. So now that we understand how to grab text information
based on tags and element names, I want to explore how to grab
images from a Web site. Images on a Web site typically have their own
your own link ending in something like that, J. Peg or Dot PMG.
Beautiful soup can then scan a page and locate the specialized HD
timal image tags that essentially the notes where that you are all is
being linked to. And then beautiful soup can grab this list of your URLs,
essentially grabbing all the images on a Web page. Then we can
download those your URLs as images and write them to the computer.
Keep in mind that you should know that always check copyright
permission before downloading and using an image from a Web site.
We're going to go ahead and use images from Wikipedia, which are

open source. So let's go ahead and open up our notebook and check
out a Wikipedia article.

OK, here I am back at the notebook we're using previously for this
example. I'm going to be using the article on Wikipedia for Deep Blue,
which is a very famous chess playing computer. And we're going to do
it, see if we can grab the images off of this particular Web page. So
notice that there's actually two images here that are in the article. One,
is this a picture of deep blue? And then one is of Kasparov playing in
nineteen eighty five. And those look to be the main images on this
particular page. So first we need to do is make a request to this page.
Turn it into a soup. And then using our skills with the Chrome browser,
inspect these actual images and see what we should be looking for as
far as either a class name or an element tag. And keep in mind, there's
usually more than one way to web scrape the same information off a
page. The last thing I want to note here before we get started is there is
actually a Wikipedia article that describes different things about images
on Wikipedia. And most images used on Wikipedia are actually part of
Wikimedia Commons. And keep in mind that even if you do see a
picture on Wikipedia, there is a chance that it could be copyrighted in
some way. So you should always be careful of that. And you should

keep mind that basically here we're just going to download these
images and I don't plan on reselling these images in any way. So it
should be OK from a copyright standpoint. But keep in mind, if you're
gonna be doing something like Delany's images and then selling them
as your own, you should be extremely careful because you may be
violating some sort of copyright so you can go ahead and just Google
search 10 things you may not know about images on Wikipedia. And it
describes a lot of things that are important to understand about images
on the Web site. OK. So we're going to do here. It's going to come back
to this Jupiter notebook.

And let's make a fresh request. We'll say Arias is equal to. Requests
don't get. And then I'm going to pass in the you are all for this deep blue
chest computer. You can just copy and paste from the election book if
you want.

And then let's go ahead and make a soup out of it, say soup equal to
B.S. for that beautiful soup. Passing the resulting text there and then
use Alex Amelle as the library. And then if you check out Sue. There is r
h html document. OK, so what we need to do is figure out what we're
actually going to use for this soup that select. And typically, there's
more than one option.

If we take a look at these images, what I'm going to do is right. Click
and inspect them. And I can see there's a bunch of different information
here. One is that I notice there's an I M.G. image tag and notice here
that it's color differently than other things like classes and I.D. because
it's an H. Timal element, just like a div is or just like paragraph is with P.
So what it could do is try to just grab everything with I M.G.. So I come
back here.

I could just say I M.G. and I just passant I am G because it's an H
Timal element tag, it's not a particular class or I.D. so I don't need to
worry about hashtags or periods. Okay. So you can see here I get back
this list of everything that has this image tag associated with it. Now
keep in mind, this could be more than the actual images within the
article. So you'll notice that within this information. Let's go ahead and
grab the first one so we can explore it easily. There's this ult, which
basically means if the image can't be found, go ahead and show an
alternative. The main thing we're looking for when we're dealing with
images is this right here. S RC C, which essentially tells this tag what is
the source of the image? So each image on a Web site is going to have
its unique. You are all they can kind of tell because they'll typically end
in something like PMG or JPEG or some sort of image file. So here I

can see this symbol, support vote, et cetera. So what I'm going to do is
I can simply copy the string here. That's source, not with the quotes,
just everything in between those quotes and a copy this and I'm going
to paste it into my browser. And when I paste into my browser, it kind of
looks empty. But if you'll notice at the very center, there's this green
plus sign. And that's because on the actual Wikipedia article, there's
more images than just this image of Deep Blue and of Kasparov
playing chess. In fact, there's an image here for different articles on
chess programming. There's an image here for the Wikipedia logo.
There's the little immature for this person. And there's an image here for
this plus sign. So there actually could be images all over this page that
are outside of the article. There's a little settings tool here. There's a
little star cetera. So just choosing all images may actually not be
specific enough. It's definitely a good start. If you're having trouble
finding the particular classes or I.D. calls on a page, because for sure,
these two images are going to be with an image tags. But let's imagine
I just want images that are within the article. I don't want every image
on the page. So off to be a little more careful in my inspection and I will
simply inspect. The image that's within the article and see if I can hone
in on maybe a class or I.D., and if you start looking closely, you'll notice
that within this image there is actually a class. It says class is Thum
image. So what I'm going to do is see if I can just select everything with
a thumb image and if that's the right class call for images that are within
the article and part of the article, not just an image on the page. So
instead of selecting all images,

I'm going to try to select that class call of dot thumb image. And again,
I'm using this dot here because it's a class. I run this and it looks like I
have two links, which is already looking good for us because I know
there was really only two images within the article itself. So let's confirm
this by just grabbing what's under source, as I see. Going to copy this
and let's paste it into our browser. And we can see here that it worked
for the first one. And let's confirm the second one. So we're gonna get
around the second source here. Copy this. Paste in. And it looks like
that's also the correct corresponding image. So it looks like the right
call here was to be specific enough to a class instead of just grabbing
everything with an image tag. This is something you'll have to
experiment with, depending on what website you're working with as
well as we are. Final goals are. But let's imagine my goals were just to
grab those two images that were within the article. Perfect. So now that
I have that one, I'm going to do is check out the image information and
see if I can download it.

So let's go ahead and grab the image of the computer, which was the
first one. So I'll say computer is equal to super select. When I say some
image and let's just grab that first image. So there's the computer. And
we have this information here. And what I want to do is actually just
want to grab a particular portion of this notice you have something like
class equals data file with equals, source set equals source height
equals. If you're looking for just a particular aspect or parameter call
here we can do is almost treat this as a dictionary because recall
computer is not a string. It's a specialized tag object. And because it's a
tag object, it means you can actually do a call like a dictionary for any
particular part of this tag. So if I said class, it would return back Thum
image. And that means if I said source, which is what I'm actually
interested in, it returns back this string. So this string is what I actually
want to download. And one real quick way we could just link this to a
notebook is if I copy this string, select the cell and say cell cell type.
Markdown. What I could do is actually paste this within my own image
tag because markdown actually supports these image hacks. So I
could say I M.G. source equal to and then pacien as a string.

That source. So here what I'm saying is image, source equal to. And
then this giant string and then one I'm going to do is close it off. Hit
enter. What this mark down cell actually does is it grabs that euro and
then displays it inside the notebook. So if that's something you want to
do within your own notebooks, it's kind of a fun little trick. And again,
the tricks for that were to take cell cell type. Turn it into markdown. And
this essentially supports just basic H came out where we have this
image tag source and then the JPEG. Keep in mind, though, if this link
ever changes, then the notebook will disappear or essentially make
something broken. So let's say they change it or you accidently spell
this wrong. I was gonna say Deep J. Peg, run this. You'll get this little
broken image sign. OK, so I'm gonna go ahead and delete that cell.
Now, because we don't want to be dependent on this Web site, let's
imagine I want to download this maybe for a school presentation or
something like that. What I can do is make a new request specifically
on this, Yoro. So let's go ahead and do that.

What I'm going to say is. Image link is equal to. Requests don't get. And
now I'm just going to pass in. This link itself. So copy and paste that.
And what I need to do is in front of this ad, htp, yes, so say H.T., CPS,
Colon and then the phone link. So essentially I'm making a request on
this specific link, which is the link if we put this in our your URL for the
computer. So if I were a copy this here. And paste it. I can see that this
is what that code is going to make a request for, just this particular
image. So we go ahead and run this. And now I can say image link.
And this is going to have a content attribute. And what this is, it's the
raw content of the actual image. So this is a binary file. And this is the
computers way of representing internally. What this image actually
looks like is actually kind of not readable by human. There's a binary
file. However, Python is smart enough to be able to read and write this
file and save the image onto your computer. And we do this by opening
a new file and then writing to it and then closing to it.

So recall that this image linked to content has the information I need.
And I want to save this onto my computer in the form of an image. And
the way we do that is I say something like F is equal to open. Go ahead
and choose your file name so I can say my computer image. That Jay
Pegg. Typically, you're gonna want to make sure that this ending
matches the ending of your YORO, which was J-P and then. For the
writing or reading permission to recall the actual mode we're gonna be
doing. It's going to be W B, which means write binary. So the notes
binary writing, because that's not a typical string or text file. It's actually
a binary representation of that image. So we're going to open up this
new JPEG image, which I just created through the open come in. So
recall, this essentially makes this JPEG file for us and then we're going
to do is say F but. Right. Image. Link content. So now I went ahead and
wrote that to this Chapei that we just created. And then I'm going to
close. There we go. And so now you should be able to see locally this
JPEG file. So if I hit a file open. Scroll down here. I was working with
this untitled notebook. Notice now I have this my computer image, that
JPEG. And this is going to save wherever your notebook happens to be
located. If you want to save this somewhere else, then simply provide
the full file path of where you want to save it. So you could do
something like see users, forward, slash, etc.. So depending on what

computer and os, you can save this technically anywhere in your
computer. If you just say J Peg, you'll save it to the exact same location.
Your notebook is in which you can always confirm with PWI. OK, so I
may delete that. So we have this my computer image. If I click this open
notice, it downloaded the actual image and now we have it written on
our computer. OK. So that's an example of downloading images. So let
me just do a quick overview of everything we did here, because it was
quite a bit. We went ahead and made a request on a Web site. Turned
that into a soup. And then we had to select a particular tag or class call.
If you just do image tags, they'll grab all the images on the page. If
you're looking for something more specific. See if you can find a class
call or an I.D. call to further specify your results. After that, we can go
ahead and confirm the source by just grabbing this and pasting it into
our browser. Confirm that's the image we want once we know the
actual your URL for the image we want. We go ahead and make a
request on that image. You URL. Then we can't open it. Write it and
close it. And the thing to keep in mind by opening it is that it should be
right. Binary or WB mode.

PYTHON WEB SCRAPING
Keep in mind we're still working with the same lecture notebook guide
to web scraping as we did in the previous lectures. Basically, we've
already seen how to grab elements just one at a time, such as a couple
of images off a single Wikipedia article. But realistically, we want to be
able to grab multiple elements and most likely across multiple pages of
a Web site. And this is where we can combine our prior python
knowledge with the Web scraping libraries to create really powerful
scripts that are heavily customized to whatever task we're trying to
achieve. We're going to be using a Web site specifically designed to
practice Web scraping called w w w dot to scrape dot com. We're going
to be practicing grabbing elements across multiple pages. Let's go
ahead and get started. I'm going to go back to Jupiter notebook.

OK, here I am at Jupiter Notebook. The Web site we're working with is
called to scrape dot com. It's a Web site specifically designed for
people to practice web scraping on. So we don't need to worry about
asking for permissions. And so there's two different Web sites. One is
called books. And then one is called quotes. Quotes is what you're
going to be working with for your project later on your exercises. But
we're going to practice with this book's Web site. It's a fictional
bookstore and it's available at books to scrape PACOM. You can also
just click on the image and it will take you directly to books to scrape
dot com.

And basically what this is, it's kind of like a fake bookstore. Web site
has a list of books here. We can add of things to our basket. There's
prices here. And then if we click on a book, it'll take us to the
information for price. How much is in stock? The star rating and then
says warning's the demo Web site. Basically, everything's kind of
randomly assign, has a product description, product information and so
on. So there's lots of different tasks you can play around with here. And
I would encourage you after you work with us on this multiple page
scheme that you kind of pick your own task and see if you can practice
with your new skills. But what we're going to do is let's try to get the title
of every book that has a two star rating. So I'm going to write down our
goal here in The Notebook.

So our goal, get the title. Of every book with a two star rating. So that
means we're gonna have to be doing a lot of inspection on this Web site
to figure out what particular class calls to use. Now, the first thing I'm
going to do here is import requests and import B.S. for since that's
what we're going to be working with. And the second thing I have to
realize is if I scroll down here. Notice it says 1000 results showing one
to 20. So that means if I scroll down, that this is actually page one of
fifty, which means I hit next. And notice there's another page to this
catalog. So what I need to figure out is how can I use Python and
possibly some sort of looping system in order to keep going through
each of these pages and keep doing the web scraping necessary
because it's not all just existing on one page, as we previously saw with
Wikipedia articles. So the first thing to do is figure out what sort of you
RL procedure is happening. When I go from one page to the next and if
I actually copy and paste the you are out so I can see what it looks like
in a pace that as a stBOring here. Notice that it's books to scrape, dot
com slash catalog slash page dash and then the number inserted there.
So that means it looks like a good idea would be to loop and insert a
string version of a number. And in this case, I know it goes all the way
to 50. Later on in your exercises, you'll have to think of how to use a
while loop for when you don't know the last page number. OK. So we

already know that something we have to do is we're gonna have to go
throughout these pages and possibly fill in that number. So note here, it
looks like page three follows that same pattern. So page three. Page
two, et cetera. One thing we have to check is the home page. So let's
go ahead and make sure that this works with page one. So going to
come back to the home page here and then going to fill out that three or
four one. And that, in fact, does bring us back to the first results. One
through 20. So it looks like we're good there. Which means I just need
to figure out how I can make this flexible so I can fill in this number with
a string. Well, something I can do is just use the DOT format method.
Lots of different ways you could solve for this. But what I'm going to do
is I'm just gonna have a base. You are all going to copy and paste this
string and then instead of a number, I'm going to fill this in with curly
braces. And what's nice about this is then I can say base you URL, dot
format and then whatever I want to insert into that format will show up.
So I can say it's go to page 20. I run that and it will automatically fill in
20. So that means if I'm looping something such as a numbers, I can
say page number is equal to page twelve. Then I can just passin. That
page, no. And it will work. OK. So, again, we have this base, you, Earl.
And now I figure out a way to conveniently go to any particular page or
as you can imagine, I could loop over some range of pages since I
know it goes from pages one to 50. OK. So we figured out that problem
of this base, your URL, and then how to continue grabbing elements
from it. Next thing I need to do is figure out how to scrape every page in
that catalog Usenet loop and then figure out what tag and class
represents the star rating. So we'll come over here to products and
provide. The easiest way to do this is begin inspecting these actual
stars. So it's maybe a little tricky because these could be images.

Let's go in and check this out. I'm going to inspect these icon stars. And
notice here on the inspect, it looks like I have icon, star, icon, star, icon,
star, icon, star, icon, star. So everything is rated out of five stars. So I
have this little list here of five class icon stars. And if I take a look at
another one going to inspect this second star that it looks to appear the
exact same list. So what I can't do is somehow figure out if a star is kind
of filled in or not. That's a little trickier. But what's nice is there's a class
above this which actually actually gives the rating. So this is star rating
one class. And if I take a look at this three star book, inspect that again.
This is star rating three. And recall, our goal is to grab every book title
of a star rating of two. So scroll down here. And see a two star rated
book, Starving Hearts, and going to inspect this. And it looks like the
class I'm looking for is called Star Dash Reading, too. So this is great. I
already now know what the class call I'm looking for is. The other thing
to keep in mind is that I'm not just looking for the two star reading, I'm
looking for the associated title, and it looks like all of this is contained
within a product class. So if I highlight product underscore pod, then I
have this little PA that's holding all this information for this particular
book. Looks like it's holding the price, whether it's in stock, the image of
the book as well as the title. So probably what I want to do is just grab
this entire little product pod for everything on that Web page and then

filter out based off this star rating to class. So let's begin by grabbing
everything on just the first page that contains this product, underscore
pod class. Now that we know what class we're looking for, let's go
ahead and create a request and grab that particular class from the
soup.

We'll come back here. I'm going to say, ah, yes. Is equal to requests.
Don't get. And let's just do it from the first page. So we'll say based
Yoro. And I'm going to format in one that can be an integer or a string.
It's the work. There's a request. Let's turn it into a soup objects. We'll
say B.S. for beautiful soup. Pass on the text from that request and then.
The engine we used to decode this. And if we take a look at our soup,
looks like everything's there. And let's select. That class call, which if
we take a look. It was. Products underscore pod. And the stock, the
notes that it said. Class equals product pod. We run this. And let's take
a look at the length of this. So going to say length of soup, that select
product pod, and it equals 20. Now we have to ask ourselves, does that
make sense? Well, if you take a look back at the Web site, it said it's
showing results one through 20, which means it does confirm that most
likely each of those product pods went with one of those books. You

have a little bit of checking just to make sure, but we're pretty much on
target that each of those little product pods has information.

PYTHON WEB SCRAPING - BOOK
EXAMPLES PART TWO
we figured out that we were most interested in selecting this class
called product pot.

So really what I need to do is figure out what python code is going to be
necessary to grab a title if the actual class is associated with a two star
rating. Because recall, our goal is get the title of every book with a two
star rating. And now I essentially have a list of this product pod. So let's
go ahead and set this up as a list. So we'll say products is equal to suit
that select product pod. And from this point on, there's kind of a million
different ways you could do this. So this is just one example of how you
could do this. What I'm going to do next is say products zero. And let's
just set this up as an example, because if we can get this working, for
one example, then we should be able to continue exploring this.

So here we have this example object. So I take a look at this example,
has an article class. Looks like it has this class star rating three. And
recall, the one we're going to be looking for. Is star rating, too. So the
two things I need to know is this particular class call, whether or not it's
star rating two or something else. And the second thing I need to know
is this title, which the title is going to be here, A Light in the Attic for that
first book. Let's begin by trying to answer the question. Is this rated two
stars or not? There's two different ways you can do this. There's
actually probably more than two ways. But I'll show you two in this
lecture. One is kind of a quick and dirty way, which may not always
work. Depending on the situation. And the second one is using beautiful
soups, select call to actually find this particular class call. So let me
show you the quick and dirty way first. So we have this example has all
the information here.

What it could do is convert this to a string. Which then makes this into
kind of squashed down string with Python. And you'll notice there's this
class called classes equal to star rating three. So something I could do
is because this is a string, I can simply just check. Is star rating. Two in
string example I run, that happens to be false. Now, recall, this first
book was rated three stars. So let's confirm that a star rating, three in
string example. And that happens to be true. So this kind of really quick
and dirty way to check if something is present in that particular
example. So this is one way of figuring out whether or not something is
rated to stars or something else because it will just simply return a
boolean. So that's kind of the quick and dirty way, depending on your
Web site and your application. And what question you're actually trying
to answer, this sort of method may not be available to you. So now it's
kind of go through a more official tactic,

which is specifically trying to find what this particular classes is
checking. Is this class present? So I know that the class I'm looking for
is called star rating, too.

So what I can do since this example is that specialized, beautiful, super
tag object, I can say example select and now I can select classes from
this. So I could select that star rating class. It's also a star rating. Three.

Run this. And notice here that there's a space because of that. I need to
actually fill that in with a dot. And now I should see the correct result. So
keep in mind, if you're selecting a class call, there happens to be a
space in it. You should be using this dot in order to fill out that space.
So now here I can see that there is something return for that particular
class element. If I were to try to search for something that was
incorrect, such as star rating to run that, then I get back an empty list.
So something I could do is just check whether or not I get an empty list
when I ask to select star rating to from that particular item or product.
So again, two different ways I could do this. One is kind of the quick
and dirty string. Check, check. If the star that's rating to string is within
the string version of example. The second version is using beautiful
soup where I can actually check, pay, select whatever particular class
I'm looking for and check to see if it's present. So then I can just simply
do something like check if an empty list is equal to this, because I know
if it's going to be empty, then it's not rated to stars. Okay, so now that
we have those systems in place, I know how to check if this particular
product is rated to stars. Next, what I need to do is actually figure out
how to grab the title of the book. So let's imagine that this returns. True.
And I'm ready to actually select for something that's two stars,
depending on how I ran this. I need to grab the title. So let's run the
example again and look for where the actual title is. The title may be
present in multiple parts. You'll notice here that there's an alternative
link inside this image that is just the title of the book. But let's look for
something more official. It looks like the official posting of the title is
actually here in title is equal to a Light in the Attic. And that is held
within this tag. So what I'm looking for here are these open enclosing
tag notes to try to find where this actual information is. So looks like I
have a light in the attic as a title part of this, a element which is
essentially a linking element.

So what I can do is say example. Select. Eh, and here I get back these
references, and the one I'm looking for is actually the second link
reference. This first one is the image of the book. The second one looks
like it's the title. And if we go back to the product page here. Notice that
both this image and there's a link here will actually lead me to the book
page. So that's essentially why there's two links. One is that image and
one is the title of the book. Notice that the title parameter is the full title
of the book. The text that's actually shown looks to be cut off. So I don't
want to operate on this text. Instead, I want to operate on this title
parameter. So that means for each product I'm going to grab the
second link index is one because at index zero, that's the actual image
index one is going to be the title of the book. And I'm not looking for the
text in between these tags. Instead, I'm looking for the title. And as we
previously mentioned, I can grab this if we take a look at this type of
object. It's still that specialized B.S. for element tagged, which means I
can grab those parameters as if it was a dictionary call. So I can ask for
a title. And here I get a light in the attic. So let's just go ahead and kind
of mark this down as our notes. So we already know that we can check
if something is two stars, either through a string, call that in something
or through example, select whatever that reading happens to be. And I
know I can use exampled select. A. Grabbed the second item. And then

grab title from that tag. To grab the book title, so I have the two checks
that I need in order to grab a book title if it's two stars. Now, all I need to
do is give this a shot by combining these ideas that we've talked about
with a for loop to loop through all the pages by inserting this format four
pages, one through 50. So let's set that loop up. Shouldn't be too hard.

We're gonna do here is, say, my two star titles. Is equal to an empty list
to begin with. And then for N in range, one up tube and on including 50
one, because I want pages one through 50. My scrape, Yoro, is going
to be equal to that base, you, Earl. And then I'm going to insert that
particular number. I'm going to make a request. So we'll say requests
that get that scrape you are El. They will say soup is equal to B.S. for.
Beautiful soup. Make sure I spell that right. Passing the text. And then
use Alex Amelle as my engine there. And then recall, my list of books is
going to be off that page. Select. Product. Underscore pod. So recall
this books is the same as that list of products I had here. So I'm just
calling it books. Inside this loop. So this books contains all those
products. And now I need to filter out through those books. So here's a
list of books, which is those element tags for all the books. And I want
to say for book in books, I need a check for two things. I want to check.
If it's two stars, different ways I can do this, but kind of the more official

way it would be. If I grab that book and attempt to select. The star
rating class. Start reading, too. And if that returns an empty list,
meaning the length is one. Then or excuse me, the length is zero. If it's
an empty list, then I know star rating two is not there. So let me explain
this one more time here. What I'm doing is for every book that's
returned inside, souped up, select that product pod, I'm going to
attempt to select star rating to as we did kind of up here. Here we're
selecting star rating three. And then if I were to select star rating two, I
get back an empty list. So if the list is not empty, four star rating two,
that means I do have a two star rating book. So what I'm going to do is
check the length of that list and make sure it's not empty. That's one
way I could have done this. The alternative way was to do that string
check. I could have said if. Star reading to. In. The string version of that
particular book. So that's the same as that string example. So this is
one way to do the check. This is another way to do the check,
depending on your situation. You may find one better than the other.
OK. So if the length of that selection is not equal to zero, then boom.
We have a two star rated book, which means the next thing I need to
do is actually grab that book title. And we already know how to do this.
We'll say book title is equal to. And recall, we did this through this
example that select a one title. The only thing I need to do is when I
copy and paste this code is this example is now called book. So we're
gonna replace that with book. And then our two star titles. I will append
that book title. There we go. Let's go ahead and run this and we get
some sort of error. Go ahead and make sure and copy and paste our
code or run our unedited notebook first. If you get some sort of no
response error, they should just double check your Internet connection
and make sure you don't have a firewall blocking you. This site is
designed to be scraped. So it's highly unlikely that the site itself is going
to be blocking you. Other sites, if you try to run this sort of thing, may
block you. If you're making too many repeated requests. So keep that
in mind. All right. So that finished running. Go ahead and just do a very
brief overview of everything we did. We went ahead and said four N in
range, one through fifty one, because I know there's 50 pages. I'm
going to scrape that particular page. Make a request. Turn it into a
soup. Look for all the product pods or essentially the books in that

soup. And then for each of those books, I'm going to check if it's related
to stars. By checking to see if something's actually return. When I ask
for book select star rating to it happens to be true. I grabbed that book
title and I pendent to my list. And so

we're going to say to start titles, we run this and now we have a list of
all the two starter books across all the pages. All right. So you should
now have the tools necessary to scrape kind of any major Web site that
interests you. And keep in mind, the more complex the Web site, the
harder it will be to scrape. You should always ask for permission. You
should also keep in mind that not every Web site lends itself this easily
to Web scraping. Lots of sites nowadays proactively attempt to block
people scraping, especially if they feel that the information on the Web
site is proprietary in some way. OK. So with this new skill set or we're
going to do is set you loose on some exercises.

PYTHON WEB SCRAPING EXERCISE OVERVIEW
we're just going to give a brief overview of the exercise questions and
what they're asking for. And then in the next series of lectures, we'll go
ahead and work through some examples, solutions. Let's get started.

OK. So here I am on there, the web scraping exercise notebook. It's
called the Web scraping exercise. And essentially, we just have a list of
tasks for you to complete. So first thing to do is import any libraries you
think you'll need. And then the second thing is to use the request library
and beautiful soup to connect to, quote, start to scrape dot com ticket,
the HST e-mail text from the home page.

So if you click on that link, it'll take you this quotes to scrape. It was
essentially the other to scrape site. So we looked at books scraping
that site and the previous lectures and now we can see that we have
some quotes this great. So essentially the site a couple of things to
know here. There's quotes, the scrape. There's a quote the person who
said the quote and then tags for each quote, such as Change, Deep
Thoughts, etc.. And then there's the top 10 tags over here on the right
hand side across the entire site. So you can scroll down here and see
that you can click next. And that brings you to the next list of quotes by
some authors. And you can also click on about and that takes you to an
about description. For those authors who click quotes, that's great, but
takes you back to the home page. And if you click on one of these tags,
which is inspirational, it shows you and it quote with the text
inspirational. And then you can always sit next to keep going for
whatever pages of those tags for inspirational are.

Coming back to the exercise, this is what it should look like. Essentially,
we just want you to grab that text. This is just from the home page. That
first page. Then we want you to get the names of all the authors on the
first page. So a quick little hands here. Notice that I'm using a set, not a
list. Next is to create a list. This is specifically a python list of all the
quotes on the first page. So I want you to create a list that looks
something like this. Next, we want you to inspect the site and then use
beautiful soup to extract the top 10 tags from the requests text. So
essentially, what we want you to do is if you notice on the home page,
we have these top 10 tags. We want to use Python to figure out how to
grab what these 10 words are. So eventually you should get something
that it can either be a list or a string or just print it out. But we want
those actual tags. After that, we have the final task and this final task is
kind of a larger one. But basically you'll notice that there's more than
one page and the subsequent pages look something like this.

Let me zoom in so you can read this as well. They have quotes to
scrape, dot com slash and then page slash the page number. So we
want you to use what you already know about for loops, string
activation and everything you've learned through the project to go
ahead and loop through all the pages. And we want you to get the
unique authors. But now on the entire Web site, the first question was to
get the unique authors on the home page. But now create a set of the
unique authors on the entire Web site. Now, keep in mind, there's lots
of ways to achieve this. But we want you to do is trying to make your
code robust enough that it would work, regardless of knowing how
many pages there were beforehand. Now, as a hint, we want you to
know that there's actually only 10 pages on this Web site. So if you
come to quote's to scrape forward, slash 10 and then try to hit next.
There's no next button there. And then if you try to go to a page that's
larger than that, such as slash one hundred, you'll notice they'll say no
quotes found. So that's kind of a big hint on how you can try to solve
that problem. So if you want, you can just use a for loop that goes from
page one to ten, but really try to challenge yourself because in a typical
situation, you won't know how many pages of quotes there are. So see
if you can figure out how to make your code robust enough in order. It's
for it to work, regardless if you knew how many pages there were. Last

thing I keep mine is there's many, many different types of solutions for a
lot of these things.

PYTHON WEB SCRAPING EXERCISE SOLUTIONS
we're going to work through some examples, solutions for the Web
scraping exercises.

Let's get started. OK, so first things first. We wanted to import any
libraries we think we needed, and hopefully you're able to figure out that
it's going to be the libraries we are working with, which is import
requests and import B.S. for next. We want to use the requests library
and beautiful soup to connect to quotes to scrape. Dot com. I'll go
ahead and open that in a new tab just in case. I need to reference it
later. But you should be able to then just make a request by saying
something like results or rez is equal to requests. That gets. And then
we'll say, Passan, that you are all lips. Make sure we actually copy this
first. So I'm going to just copy this and then paste in as a string. So we
run that.

It makes the request and we can then view the text. And this is
essentially the same document that we had here below. All right. Now,
the first real task is to get the names of all the authors on the first page.
So as I mention in the overview. Notice that this is actually a set, not a
list. And that's because if you look at to scraped dot com, there could
actually be repeat authors. So that means we don't actually just want to
go through and grab every author's name and just add it to a list,
because Albert Einstein is here twice. So we don't want to list Albert
Einstein twice. That way I can take advantage of a set in order to not
even worry about adding duplicates to a set because a set is just
unique items. So what I'm going to do here is I'm first going to create a
soup using B.S. for. Beautiful soup. Pacien rest text and then L x M.L..
And now I have this soup. And what I need to do is figure out from the
soup what is the correct class call or tag call in order to grab those
authors. So one way to do it is by scrolling through the soup and trying
to figure out if you see Albert Einstein. What class call he has. And
you'll notice here that there's actually a connection here, classical to
author. So that may be a good place to start in Lotus, Jake. J.K.
Rowling as well, classes author. Or you come to quotes the scrape and
then.

Right. Click on this name here, inspect. And then you can expect this
yourself. And it looks like this does actually have class equal to author.
Let's go ahead and use that and see if it works.

We'll say souped up select. And since it's a class, we'll say dot. Author,
go ahead and run that. And it looks like it's working. We have Albert

Einstein, J.K. Rowling, Albert Einstein, Marilyn Monroe, etc.. Now, I just
want the unique authors.

So what I'm going to do is in order to get this set list or excuse me, this
set, what I want to do, say authors, is equal to an empty set. And then
I'm going to say for name in soup. That select author. Go ahead and
say, authors add. And the name is this entire thing here. What I really
just want is the text in between the text. So we saw in the lectures that I
can grab that with name that text. So I run that and then I can get back
the authors that are on the first page. Next task is to create a list of all
the quotes on the first page. So some early, we already have our soup
created. What I need to do is figure out what the actual class or tag call
is going to come back to the Web site, going to. Right. Click on these
quotes, hit, inspect, and you'll notice that it looks like the class call is
text. So maybe this is the class call we can use. Often you have to
experiment. So let's go ahead and try it and see if it works for us. We'll
say soupe thought. Select. And we'll say Dot, because it's class call,
dot text. We run that and it looks like these are all the quotes on the
page. So we have a day of thought. Sunshine is like, you know, night at
the bottom. Funny quote by Steve Martin. And then the first quote, The
world as we have created it and we see here at the world is we've

created it. OK, perfect. So that means I can simply do sort of same
loop. So we'll do the following. We'll create a list for the quotes. So
quotes is equal to an empty list. And then for name and soup, that
select text or sees me for quote, it's gotten changed that for quote in
supercut, select text, say quotes and I'm going to appends and this is
now a list. The actual text there. And now when I call quotes, I get back
a list of all the quotes. Perfect. OK. Next, we want to inspect the site
and use beautiful soup to extract those top 10 tags. Lots different ways
you can do this. Main way, though, is that we need to figure out what
the actual tag or class call for those top 10 taxes. So I'm going to right.
Click on one of these hit inspect and you'll notice that there's this class
tag.

But if you search a little deeper, you'll notice that these tags, if I inspect
them as well, also have that class tag. So what I need to do is figure out
what class the top 10 tags have that these tags do not. So if you just
say tag, you get every tag on this page. That's what make this a little
tricky. So I'm going to inspect this again and see if I can find something
that is a little more detailed and you'll notice that appear. We have a
span which is tag that item. And if I were to inspect the original tags
again, I actually don't see tag that item anywhere. So let's go ahead

and give tag that item, that class call a try since that looks to be only
appearing in the top 10 tags. So hop back over to my Web scraping
notebook and I'll say soupe select. And I don't just want to use 10
because all the tags on the page had that. But instead I'll use tag item.
Run that. And it looks like it's ten of them. So let's go in and check the
length. And it's ten, which probably means we're matching up. And if
you were to compare the words, we get back the whatever friendship,
friends, truth, et cetera, those are the top 10 tags. Love, inspirational,
friendship, friends, etc.. So what I need to do is just figure out either you
can append this to a list or you can just print them out. Does it really
matter?

So we'll say for item in soup dot select tag item. Go ahead and say print
item that text and you run that and you get back these results if you
want it, because save this to Allison. Just printed out the list. Main thing
you have to figure out is that it just wasn't tag. It was tag that item as
the main trick.

OK. So we have those. And finally, your task on the last one is notice
there's more than one page, so there's subsequent pages. And what
you need to do is use what you know about four loops or while loops
and string concatenation to loop through all this, to get all the unique
authors on the Web site. So similar to what we did up here, grabbing all
these authors, except I need to do it for all the pages. And we want you
to do is try to make it robust enough so that it would work regardless of
how many pages there were. It's all for show you how to do it using a
for loop where you knew there was ten pages, because that's kind of
the easier way to do it. And that's more similar to what we did in the
exercises. So I'll show you that first. Keep in mind many different ways
you can figure this out. I'm going to just create a base you are able to
work with. So also you URLs equal to. And then let's go ahead and
grab this here. I'll say it's equal to H. TDP quotes to scrape dot coms.
Last page. Copy that. I'm going to stick that into a string. And so there's
our base, you, Earl. And what we can do now, say y'all plus. And then
concatenate it with kind of any number we want and then we'll
concatenate it at the end of that number if you want, you can also use
that format or really any sort of string interpolation to stick a number in
there.

So now we're going to do is simply say authors is equal to set. And then
for page in range, and I know there's 10 pages will say the page, you
are all. Is equal to your URL, plus the string version of that particular
page. I can't just add an integer to a string. I have to convert it first to a
string in order to perform that concatenation. Then I'll make the request
for that page. So we'll say requests. Get the information off that page,
Yoro. And then we'll say soup is equal to B.S. for. Beautiful soup. Rest
text. Alex, I'm l just as we have before, and then I'm actually just going
to copy and paste what we had up here for Name and Soup. That's like
author authors, the ad name text, because we're doing the exact same
thing, except now we're just doing it for ten pages. So this was just for
the home page. We're gonna set this all up for all ten pages. We'll go
ahead and run this. And then once it's done running, we'll check on
what authors looks like. And keep in mind, depending on your Internet
connection, that may take a little bit of time to go through 10 pages. But
notice here now I have all the authors. So I'm Alan Monroe, Mother
Teresa, etc.. So these are all the authors on all 10 pages. This is kind of
the easy solution because this assumes that, you know how many
pages there are. Realistically, however, you're probably not going to
know ahead of time how many pages there are. So you have to figure
out is what happens once you reach a page that doesn't have any

quotes on it. And an easy way to do that is to come back to the Web
site. And just if you keep getting next, request a page that you know is
outside the range.

So just, for instance, fill in a bunch of nines here and you know, there's
not going to be nine billion quotes here. And you can see that there's no
quotes found when it hits a page that is outside its range. So that's a
very interesting fact to know. Well, we could do is just keep looping
through pages over and over again until we hit something that says no
quotes found in the text.

So what I mean by that is this go ahead and make a couple new cells to
work with here. I'm going to say. My page, your URL is equal to that,
your URL plus string version. And let me just put in just a bunch of
nines there. So I know this page shouldn't have any quotes on it to
make a request on it. OSA requests. The page you URL. Let's convert
it into a soup. B.S. for. Beautiful soup. And then we'll pass in rest text
and Alex M.L.. And now if we check out that soup, this is for a page you
are. That shouldn't have any sort of quote. So there's not nine billion
quotes or whatever. You scroll down here. And notice we have no
quotes found. So what I can do is simply the following. I know that
result. That text is essentially a giant strain. And so if there's no quotes
on that particular page,

I can simply do a string check of. No quotes found exclamation point,
which is the message shown once there's no more quotes left. So if I
run this, I get back. True. And now I have a boolean condition I can
check for. To keep running my loop.

So let's go ahead and set up a loop. We're gonna do the following. We'll
save page. Still valid. Is equal to true. And we'll change this to false
depending on the result of no quotes found. We'll say Authors' is equal
to an empty set. So reset it and we'll start on page equals one. And
we'll say while Paige still valid, we're gonna keep doing what we did
before. So we will reset the page, your URL is equal to your URL plus
string. Of page. So this is going to concatenate that new page. And
then what I'm going to do is at the end of this, while you say page is
equal to page plus one. So it's important to keep basically going up that
page counter. So we start off at one get that you are all going to do
some more code here. The next page is to do some code again, three,
etc.. Next, we'll go ahead and obtain the requests. And so we'll say
requests don't get. Page your URL. Now, you may think the next step is
to start turning this into a soup. And checking if the authors are there.
But keep in mind, we have to check if this is a valid page because we
don't know yet if we hit. No quotes found. So I'll have a simple if
statement here. I'll say if no quotes found. In Rezko text. Go ahead and
just break out of this. Or I could say page Dobelle is equal to false,
depending on how you actually want to break out of this while loop. But
essentially what I'm saying here is we're gonna reach a page number
that's high enough where the string no quotes found will be in the
resulting texts. And if that happens, break out of this while because
we're done. If that does not happen, then we'll just continue. We'll say
soupe is equal to B.S. for. Beautiful soup, just as we did before. Text
Alex MRL and then we'll run the exact same code as before. For the
authors, which was this little snippet of four name and super select
author authors don't add. So we go ahead and paste that here. And
then once that's done, we go to the next page. Keep in mind lots
different ways you could have done this, but this is just one valid way.
So I'm going to run this and make sure that when I call authors, it
matches the authors I had here on the manual for a loop. So we'll come
here, run authors again. And recall, we reset authors. So the fact that it
has all the authors here means that this loop worked, OK? So that's it
for the exercises. Hopefully you're able to figure out how to code web
scraping applications so that they follow along more like this second
part where they're more robust to unknown conditions of a Web site

versus the first one, which basically requires you to figure out how many
pages they're worth to begin with. Which, for a very large Web site,
may be difficult to impossible.

PROGRAM TO CHECK WHETHER
A NUMBER IS POSITIVE OR
NEGATIVE OR ZERO IN PYTHON
Gold will check if the number given by the user is a positive negative or
a zero. So. The user is asked to enter the number while prompt.

You see that with the help of this comment. I am telling you that the
user will enter a digit a value into this program. This prompt the user to
enter the number. So this line prompts you to enter and input into this
program. You see that number is equal to input input. Enter number. So
enter any number. And this is a call to check whether the number is a

positive, negative or a zero. The input number is stored in a valuable
number. And then we check this using, if else, conditions. So you see
that here we are checking the number in the score. If number is smaller
than zero. So what should this program do? This program should print.
The enter number is a negative. LTV or ayliffe, if number is greater than
zero. Then this program will print. Print the enter number is positive.
ELDs. You see that? Aleph number is equal to zero if the number is
equal to zero. Then this program will print. Number is zero. Otherwise,
it will print. That input is not a number. We will execute this code. We
executed. So this proves that enter. No. What we write here in this
portion. We'll be short here.

So in this prompt, we enter in negative numbers, say minus 10 and
press enter. So you see that the program shows that the enter number
is a negative number, minus 10 is a negative number. We will execute
this program code with positive integer. So we execute it again. So you
see that the circle is going round round until we enter an input, until
user enters and input. So this program will not be shifted to the next
step. So you see that we enter a positive integer, say 100 and
presenter. This program shows that this enter number is a positive.

This is our second in second condition. The enter number is a positive.
So we will check this program code with the help of zero. We will enter
zero into this program input. You see that we have entered zero and
press enter. So you see that number is a zero. So this program was to
check whether a given number is.

ADD SUBTRACT MULTIPLY OR
DIVIDE TWO INTEGERS NUMBERS
This is the Biton program to perform addition, subtraction, multiplication
and division, awful to numbers.

We will enter the first number. We will take the input in the form of US
number. Then we will take the input of second number. Then we will
print enter. Which operation would you like to perform? We will also use

a will from the user to enter that which calculation he wants to perform
on these numbers. The user will have to choose from these options. So
the result would be equal to zero before the calculations. We have
specified it here. And then you see that if siete is equal to plus. That
means twice as equal to this symbol. Then if the user enters this
symbol, then the choice would be equal to this. And the result would be
equal to that result would be equal to number one plus number two.
This plus operation would be performed addition operation would be
performed on these numbers. Elif, if this symbol is not done by the user
and the user, enter this negative sign in elif confusion, then we will
divide the number two from number one. If the user does not enter plus
minus sign, the user wants to multiply both numbers, then the condition
will shift to this line of code and the result would be equal to number
one, multiplied by number two. We will find the product of body
numbers. And if you want to find de division of those numbers, you can
find with these lines, these lines as print input corrector is not
recognized. If the user enters the other symbol, other symbol than this
positive plus sign negative and minus sign and is multiplication and
division symbol, the computer code is Python program code will say
that it can not recognize this symbol. And finally, the result would be
printed.

So here we will execute this code. So you see here, I will survive, don't
enter first. No. So we will anthropos no say we are going to enter the
number 10. And then it will all say to ask us to enter second number,
say 20.

So enter which operation would you like to perform? So we will have to
choose between these symbols. So you see that we have specified

here that the two eyes can be or need these symbols. So I will press.
See, I want to. Sorry, DIY do these numbers and simply. We will first to
add them. So you see the hair there. Ten plus 20 is equal to 30. We will
as you see it again and give number 10, then number 20. Then we will
give the choice of Devean. So you see here that the answer is equal to
zero point five 10 divided by 20 is equal to zero point five. So we will
execute it again. Ten second ambriz 20. And we will now perform the
operation. All for product multiplication. So you see here that 10
multiplied by 27 to 200. And then finally, we are going to subtract these
numbers. So first number is a say 10. Second number is 20. We are
going to perform the minus sign. And you see there, the answer is
equal to minus 10. The answer is equal to minus 10. We are going to
enter first number. Then second number. Then we will perform
mindless operation. And then you see that the answer is a hundred
minus 50 is equal to 50. So this vital program was to find these, to
perform the addition, subtraction, multiplication and division on two
numbers prompted by the user to enter those numbers.

VOWEL OR CONSONANT PYTHON
PROGRAM

This is the program to check Wallal or a. Consonant. So we will take
user input with the help of keyboard. We will give a character as input
to this program and see whether it is a wobble or a consonant. So you
know that a I o u r walls and other alphabets are called continent. So
you see that in this line we will give a character input. You see there,
see it for character. And we are giving input to it with the prompt. So the
user will enter an input into this program. The user will enter an
alphabet. And this program will return its output, whether it is a will or
not. So you see that we are prompting the program that enteric rector.

If you want to change something, enter an. Alphabet. So this program
will ask the user to enter an alphabet. You see that here, enter an
alphabet. So. We want to change it again.

And to a good actor. So let's check. It will prompt the user to enter a
character. So we give a character, C. S. And press enter.

You see that this shows that F is not available. We will play this
program again. We will execute it again. And we will give small A's
input. And check it. So you see that it is a wobble. So, dear students.
This is the prompt. And here we are giving the coalition if character is
equal to Capital A.. All character is equal to Smally. All character is
equal to capital E or character is equal to small E or traktor is equal to
capital I. Our character is equal to small. I character is equal to capital
or small or or capital. You small you then it will print it as it will.
Otherwise it will print director as a continent. So you see that we have
given a here in these two lines. And then we said that print character is
available. Else in other condition, if character is not available, what to
do. This program will print. Character is a continent not available. So
you see that we have given the condition as capitally and smally capital
E and Somali. So you know that capital A.. And small a board have
different STW values in American standard gold. So similarly, capital E
and small E have different values. Capital. He has a different value.
Small E has a different value. No. So if we change discord. You see
there to re remove this part of code.

And execute it and we will enter small e and check. What is the output.
So you see that we are going to enter capital A., which is in the
condition and we will press enter. Sorry. We are here. So it brings.
Capital E is a wall. So we will give it input as small E. You see here we
are giving it will be a center. So you'll see that this is that easy
continent. Small E is a continent. So what's the matter? We have
changed the condition. So this small E is exempted from this condition.
This condition will not take some all as well, whether it will treat it as a
continent. So let's experiment again. We are going to change this thing.
You say that we are going to remove this part.

OK. So we will run this cold and give capital you as input, you'll see that
we are giving the input capital you. You see that you is a continent.
Capital you is a continent. It is nautical wobble. While we know that e i o
u r wobbles. While this program is showing that capital you is a
continent because this capital you is not in this condition. So you see in
this program that with the help of this condition, we can check whether
a character is.

CELCIUS TO FARENHEIT PYTHON
CODE _ FAHRENHEIT TO CELSIUS
PYTHON
this is the program to convert Fahrenheit to Celsius temperature.

So we will first convert Celsius centigrade to Fahrenheit. So we know
that the formula to convert Celsius into Fahrenheit is here. Fahrenheit is
equal to Celsius multiplied by nine or five. And we add 32 in the desert.
And similarly, formula to calculate Celsius from Fahrenheit is that first
we deduct 32 from Fahrenheit. And then we multiply it with the help of
five over nine. And we will get the cell system breacher. So here, do you
see that? We have written code Celsius is equal to flawed. We have
used faluting point here as we know that the computer may be in point.
So we are using flawed. And we are going to hear and tell the
temperature in Celsius. And you see, this is the formula here. And what
is it? This is the print statement. But into Celsius is important height.
And this is this will bring it Celsius into foreign aid. So what is meant by
this? Perhaps you have seen this for the first time. So I will tell you that

Biton three point six introduce this. This is the literal string
interpretation, also known as F String. So what is the purpose of this F
string or this little string interpretation? So it helps us in representing
values. It is a new form specification in Biton language.

So I will store it in the desert. So here, enter temperature in Celsius. We
know that our body temperature is a 37 centigrade that is equal to
ninety eight point six Fahrenheit. So we will enter these 37 centigrade
Celsius. So here you see that thirty seven point zero zero Celsius is
equal to ninety eight point six zero Fahrenheit.

So we are going to take this value and we will execute it. Call this
discord and we'll get this value. So you see here that ninety eight point
six Fahrenheit is equal to thirty seven point zero zero Celsius, so both
are cross checked. We have verified this. So I will liberate this. What is
the meaning of this?

So I will change this with point to with point. Terry and executed. Again.
And 30 salmon. So you see here, there thirty seven point three zero or
three of twenty seven point zero zero zero Celsius, is it ninety eight
point six zero zero? So it shows for our result to three points.

We will change it to point to one and execute it again. Thirty seven
here. And you see their partisan point zero into a single point, a single

digit after one point ninety eight point six is here. So this is the proposal.
Offer this, sir. F supreme. We will agree to this code again and we will
check. What is 100 centigrade equal to Fahrenheit? So 100 centigrade
is equal to two two L foreign height. We will execute it again and we will
check.

EXPONENTIATION (POWER OF A
NUMBER) IN PYTHON USING
ANONYMOUS FUNCTION
we will display the powers of two using anonymous function or
anonymous lamda function. So what is the lamda function? Lamda
function is a function that is different from a predefined function in case
of defining a function.

We define a function with a name such as if we want to calculate the
CQ ball or a cube scare off a number, and then we will define first to the
function as defined cube or defined scarer or defined square root. Then
we will pass a value to that function and after execution we will also
need to return the result from where the function was called. Using the
return key word we will use return key word to return the result from that
function

while using lambda function. Lambda definition doesn't include a return
statement. So it doesn't doesn't need a written statement. It always
contains an expression which is returned. We can also put a lambda
definition anywhere a function is as is expected. So the lambda
functions can also be used with other built-In functions, such as you
say, reduce map or here hearing gives. We are using math function
building. That is a building function. So we will continue this program
called Here. We see that this is the command and the these are the
terms to which we will treat. I mean, that we will go ten times. We will
outrate 10 times. So if you want to take input from the user for the
times, we can also uncommented discord. We will remove this hash
sign and then it will take the number of guns from the user. It will not
follow this line of code, whether it will take the term from the user. So
the user will be asked to. Well, how many turns then do will give the
input that he wants to proceed to five to five times Danton's, 20 tons
whatsoever. So use of anonymous function here in this line of code. We
are using an anonymous function lamda function. So here you see that
the result would be stored in after executing after the application of this
lambda function. Here you see that list to map. It will display the list.
And here we are going to use a lambda function.

Then we will print the total terms. Are the total number of tons here. For
I in range terms of here, we will outrage. We will follow a loop by this
line and then we will print this message in the these quotation marks.
So I will execute this code to see the result output. So you see here that
the total thumbs are. So this is the output that would be printed here.
The total terms are is equal to terms here. Here you see that we have
given ten times

if we specify the total number of terms as six and execute it again. So
here you see that the total terms are equal to six.

That we have specified ad displays. So this goal will go six times. But
we know that it will start at zero police. We know you two, that we will
start at zero and we will go until five. So these two terms are six terms.

So you see here that the first line is to these two power zero is equal to
one to raise the power. The one is equal to two. And the fifth line to
raise the power forward is equal to 16. And this sixth line or system that
is equal to raise the power. Five is equal to 32. So we want to take the
input from the. User. Then you will specify how many times to enter. So
you see here that this prompt asks how many times it will specified that
we are going to trade through seven tons.

So here you see that the total number of items are salmon. Tracy Pava,
zero is one and it will go until six. As we know that, we store from zero.
So we will go until six. If we specify total number of items as salmon. If
you specify total number of items as eleven, then we will go from zero
to 10 values. So if I want to know abou t the powers of three, so I will
remove two from here and enter the two in this lambda function and the
arrow. I will also change the here. I will include three in the place of two.
So I will also specify here in this command, Terry and I will execute
discord. Again. And you'll see that it is asking, how many times are you
against it, pacify that? Four, six tons. So here you see there the total
tons are ticks. Previous to poverty, zero is equal to one. Three days to
power. One is equal to three. Three years to poverty is equal to nine.

And similarly, TV is the power. Five is equal to two. Forty three. So we
can specify anything here in this lamda function and we can also
specify the terms through which we want to create. This is the for loop
that will go until.

WORKING WITH IMAGES WITH
PYTHON
So in this lecture, we've been exploring how to work off these images of
Python. And we're going to be using the pillow library for this, which is a
fork of the PLL library, which is the python imaging library. And the pool
library is really nice with his fork because he has a lot of easy to use
function calls. So a lot of functionality is just a simple method call. So
we're going to do is go ahead and install this additional library. So to
install a pool library, simply open up your command line or command
prompt or terminal. If you're a Mac OS or Ubuntu user or Linux user
and then just type PIP install pillow directly at your command line, you
can find the official documentation for it. That pillow that read the docs
that I. Oh, let's open up a notebook and get started. All right. Here I am
at my Jupiter notebook. Before we get started, I want to recommend
that you actually start a notebook in the same folder that we're working
with. So under NSD working with Images folder, you'll notice we have
our three notebooks and we're going to be working with throughout this
section. I started a new one called Just Untitled for Now by hitting New
Python notebook. But the reason I recommend this is because there's a
lot of PMG and JPEG files, essentially image files that were going to be
working with. So if you don't have if you don't want to worry about
passing in the entire file path because you do want to get a file, not
found error. Just go ahead and start the notebook in the exact same
location underneath this working image folder. Otherwise, you'll need to
provide the full file path for these specific files that we'll be working with.
And the lecture notebook that goes along,

what we're working with here is overview of working with images. So
two final notes is you should have installed pillow by now, as mentioned
previously, if you have not. Go ahead and just run PIP, install pillow at
your command line. And the second thing is sometimes when you're
working with large images, the Juber notebook may complain that your
data rate is exceeded. Essentially, it doesn't want to keep sending so
much so much information out to your browser because it's afraid that
something's wrong.
So the default data rate limit may be too low for some of the images
we're working with. If you get this error of IO pub data rate exceeded.
Don't worry, it's just a warning. All you need to do is go ahead and shut
down your notebook and restarted at your command line, command
prompt or terminal by running Jupiter or notebook. And then we add
what's known as a flag. And essentially this fly just says that take their
notebook application and set the data rate limit to something much
higher, which is in this case, one times ten to the power of 10. So
essentially maxing out that data rate limit and then it shouldn't be any
issue with you showing very large images in your notebook. So we'll be
working with some images that are large enough to really be desktop
background images.

And luckily, the notebook will kind of resize these automatically for us,
but it will still display quite large images itself. So just wants you to be
aware that in case you happen to get this data rate exceeded error,

you can also just Google search IO pub data rate exceeded and it'll link
you to a stack overflow, explaining this in more detail. But for now, let's

hop back to this untitled notebook that we're working with and we can
show you how to open images with Python. So. Because we're using
the pillow library recall. It's a fork from the P. L library. So even though
you install it as pillow, you actually import it with P i. L. So from p l in all
caps. We'll import image. So the image object here class. And then
we're going to do is say image dot open. And this repass in the file path.
So if I do shift tab here, it's F.P. which stands for File Path. And we're
gonna do here is I'm going to work with the file example that J. Pen,
which recall is located here under working with images. It's right here.
Example of JPEG. And we'll sign this.

I'm going to sign this to the variable Mac. And something to notice here
is the type of file. This is this is a specialized jpeg image file from p i. L.
So that means there's gonna be various properties, attributes and
methods, calls that we can do this. Now, if you're running this on a
Jupiter notebook. If you simply type Mac Jupiter notebook is actually
smart enough to display the image itself. So it should be just a singular
Macintosh computer, kind of one of the older models. And then against
a white background. If you're running this as a script or in some other
I.D., such as PI charm, you will probably need to do Mac Dot show and
run that. So Jupiter notebook. You just need to type in the variable.

Other environments you may need to type that show open and close
parentheses in order to see the images. So keep that in mind. Okay.
Now let's see what attributes this has.

There's image information such as the size and the size is reported
back with width and height. And then it'll also tell you the file name. We
technically already know it, but we can call for file name as an attribute.
We'll tell you it's called the example that J. Peg. And if you want some
more specific information about its format, you can do format,
description. And I'll tell you exactly the international standard of J. Peg it
is. OK, so we know how to open a file now. Let's go ahead and perform
some operations on it. We're gonna go and show you how to crop the
image. Cropping is just grabbing a subsection of the image. And the
way we can do that is by calling the crop method off of our variable,
storing the actual image. We can say, Mac, the crop. And then you'll
notice that it expects a box, which is a four item tuple, defining the left,
upper right and lower pixel coordinates. This is a little confusing at first.
So let's quickly jump to an example of what those coordinates actually
represent.

Let's imagine that we just had a single blue rectangle as our image.
Then what we can do is that the top left corner of this image as zero
zero, and then we can make the x axis go along horizontally and on the
vertical axis. We can call that Y. So basically now the first two
coordinates in that tuple of four are going to be your starting X and
you're starting Y, whereas zero zero is measured from the top left
corner of the image. The next two are W and H for width and height.
And those are also coordinates. So you would pick the additional two
coordinates of with height. And essentially from these four items, the
starting X and Y. And then the width and height coordinates of the
actual pixels themselves. Then you can end up creating a rectangle
and crop out that image. So let's see this in practice. Now by jumping
back to the notebook. So off of this, we will say. Zero, comma zero. So
we'll start at the very top corner. And then we can say one hundred one
hundred for these starting coordinates of that with in height to be one
hundred one hundred. So when we run that, we basically get the top left
corner of that Mach picture. If we scroll back up, that's essentially this
corner up here in the top left. So the Mac image isn't really a useful
demonstration of cropping. So we have another image for you.

Called PENCIL's. So we will say equals to image. Open. And we will
open pencils, J. Peg, in a particular look at what pencils is. It's a very
large image of some colored pencils on the left hand side. Everything
else is gray. Let's attempt to grab some of the top pencils from the
corner. In order to do this, we need to know the size of the image. We'll
say pencils size. We see it's nineteen fifty pixels by thirteen hundred
pixels. So what we're going to do is if we just wanted, for instance,
these top few colored pencils, maybe only up to this orange color
pencil. So the top three, we're going to start off at the top corner. So
we'll say X is zero and Y is zero. And then the width from there. Let's go
ahead and grab about 10 percent in the Y direction. So we'll say that
the width. Or actually, this is about a third, so let's say 30 percent in the
X direction and 10 percent in the Y direction. So that means the with. Is
going to be nineteen fifty divided by three, so we're essentially grabbing
30 percent of the width here and we'll grab about 10 percent of this
height to say H is equal to thirteen hundred, divided by ten. Then we
will say pencil's crop and then we'll pass on our tuple X Y. W h. And
here you can see we're able to successfully grab those three. Now let's
imagine wanted to grab pencils from the bottom. So we wanted to just
grab these three pencils right here. Or maybe these four. In that case,
we'll say X starts at zero, but now Y is going to start all the way. So

starting at zero, Y is going to start all the way down here. Maybe just a
little bit off of the heights or the heights. Thirteen hundred. So let's go
ahead and say that now if we just want the bottom. This is for bottom
pencils. We'll start X zero, Y is going to be equal to eleven hundred. So
we're starting X zero Y all the way down here. Eleven hundred. And
then we're going to go all the way to the bottom for this height. So now
we'll say the height just goes to thirteen hundred and then the width is
going to be the same. Nineteen fifty divided by three. So we want about
30 percent of that with coming off of that. So we do this again. And then
if we do the same crop now, we get those bottom colored pencils. So,
again, keep in mind that these are coordinates. It's not exactly a
measurement of width and height, which is why H is equal to thirteen
hundred here instead of some smaller number. So it's essentially a start
finish and then kind of start finish as well. So let's go back to the Mac
photo and see if we can just grab the computer itself. So if I say, Mac, I
have the computer here.

Let's see it size. So Mac size is nineteen ninety three by twelve fifty
seven. So about the halfway point, we want to grab half halfway here
and then a little bit off of it so we can define halfway as equal to
nineteen ninety three divided by two. And then we'll say that our X

position that we're going to start off at is half way minus two hundred
pixels and that the width that we're going to end that is halfway way
plus two hundred pixels. And then we'll say something like wise. A
hundred and you can kind of just guess and check for these numbers.
These are essentially just lucky guesses. Except H because that's all
the way to the end. And let's try this. We'll see it. Mack thought Krupp.
X, y, w, h. And then here we can see that we were able to successfully
grab the computer image. Now let's discuss copying and pasting
images if we want to create a copy. Well, we can do is reassign that
crop. We can say computer is equal to map crop X, y, w, h. And they
can call the paste method off of this, and then I provide the actual
image. This case, it's computer and then the where the top left corner is
going to go. And that's going to be a tuple of just two coordinates. So
we'll go ahead and put it in the top left corner of the original Mac and
then check out the Mac. Looks like now we are able to copy and paste
this to the top left corner. And you can do this multiple times if you want
one further in. You can find this further. And so it can say seven, nine,
six or something like that. Run this again. And now we paste it. Another
piece of that, Mac. So keep in mind, this is personally affecting the
variable, but it's not permanently affecting the actual image itself. This
is all just happening in memory. You can also use the resize method to
resize an image, so to show you what I mean by that. If we say Mac
signs, we right now have nineteen ninety three by twelve fifty seven. If
we wanted to make it much smaller or stretch and squeeze it, we can
say Mac the resize and you can just choose whatever size you want
here. For instance, if I want to stretch it out or squeeze it, I can say
make it three thousand pixels by five hundred pixels and it will woops.
Let's make sure we pass this in as a tuple. There we go. And it will
stretch and squeeze to whatever sizes you want, so you can make it
twice as big, half as big. That's really up to you. You just set the new
size you want. You can also rotate images. And that's just done with the
rotate method. So we can say make that rotate. And you can rotate by
90 degrees. And then you can see here that we're able to rotate our
image by 90 degrees to finish off our discussion and working off
images. Let's go ahead and take a look at transparency. Here we can
see that a lot of images have a red, green, blue, A or RGV be a system

and that stands for a red, green, blue, alpha. And all the values of red,
green, blue and alpha can go from zero to two hundred fifty five. If the
alpha value is zero, then the image is completely transparent. If it's two
hundred fifty five and the image is completely opaque.

Let's explore this idea of transparency by opening up to images that we
have for you. So these are in your blue mission folders. We can say
image the open. We have a red color jpeg. So take a look at it. It's just
a red square. And we also have a blue jay page for you, which is going
to be able to image. Open and we will open up that blue color PMG.
And now we can see we have a blue there. So if you want to reset the
Alpha on one of these, you can say put Alpha. And then pass on some
integer value from zero to two hundred fifty five. So if you pass in zero,
it means it's completely transparent. So now I only see white because
the background is white. If I reset the Alpha to be 255, completely
opaque and then run this again, then I actually see the blue. If I choose
somewhere between has to be an integer. So,

for example, 128, then I get back this sort of lighter blue. Here we can
see that some white has done extensive, this blue. And to give an idea
of what that looks like of Fred, let's say red, put Alpha to about 128 and
check out what red looks like now.

Now it looks even a little more pink. Now you're probably wondering,
how can I actually mix these two together? This blue and this red to get
something like purple? Well, you can do that with the paste
functionality, which essentially Paice one image on top of another,
pasting one image on top of another when the top image is completely
opaque. Well, essentially, just hide the image underneath. But since
we've added transparency with this put Alpha, we will actually be able
to see basically half of the bottom image and half of the top image. Let's
go ahead and do that. If you say blue paste and you ship tab here, it
basically takes the current image object that you want to paste on top
D-Box, which essentially how you want to line this up if you want to light
it up to the center, to the top left. So essentially the same kind of X Y
mapping that we saw earlier. And then the mask and the mask should
essentially be the same as the image. If you want more details on this.
You can check out the entire Doch string. But essentially the way to
remember this is what is the image you want? So the image I want to
put on top of blue is red. How do I want to align it based off that top left?
So we'll say box is equal to zero zero, essentially align it with the top left
corner alignment and the box parameter become important. If you have
two different size images, but in our case, red and blue are the same.
So we'll just set it at zero zero and then mask. It's going to be the same
as this image, which is red. So we have images equal to red box lined
up on the top left corner and then Mesko to red. Go ahead and run this.
And then check out what blue looks like. This is all happening in place
and we get something that essentially should look purplish. Okay. So
we just got back an image that looks more purple, which means
transparency, masking can actually be kind of more complex. So we've
shown here is a really simple example. You can check out the read the
Docs pillow documentation link that we discussed earlier. But for most
use cases, just knowing your images and then where you want to play
some should be enough, depending on what the exact situation you're
trying to achieve is. All right. Finally, let's show you how to save this
image. Imagine you really like this new kind of purplish object. Then you
simply say blue save and then choose the full file path. Or if you want to
save it at this location, just whatever you want to call the image.

So in this case, we'll call it Purple Panji and keep mine. You could also
do something like see users, et cetera. So wherever you want to save
it, you can pass that full file path and then I'm going to save it as purple
Panji. Let's go ahead and make sure that worked. I'll say purple is
equal to image open. And let's open up that new file, Panji. Check out
Purple. And there it is. Keep in mind that running save like this will
immediately overwrite whatever file is called Purple Dot Panji. It'll create
the new file. If it doesn't exist yet. But if Purple Panji already exists, then
saving it with this file path will actually cause an override.

PYTHON IMAGE EXERCISES –
OVERVIEW
It's time to test your skills with an exercise. So this lecture will just give
an overview of what the general exercise is. This one's a bit more like a
puzzle and it's more open ended. So we won't give you too much
guidance. But if you get stuck or get lost, But for now, let's do a little bit
of an exploration of that image exercise overview notebook. I'm going to
go to it now.

All right. Here's the image. Exercise notebook. So notice in the folder.
Working with images, which is the same folder this notebook is located
in. There's two images we're going to be working with. One is called
word matrix, Panji. Another one is called Mask that Panji.

So these are located right here working off images. There's right here
word matrix. And then mask. So these are the two we'll be working
with. And the word matrix is a Panji image file that essentially looks like
this.

It looks like a spreadsheet of words. And then the mask image file looks
like this.

So what we want you to figure out is essentially how can you work with
these two images to attempt to reveal what is essentially a hidden
message in this spreadsheet?

A couple of things you got to figure out are how to stack these images
on top of each other, whether you need to work with transparency in

order to see through the images, as well as maybe resizing the images.
It looks like these images currently are not the same size. So, again,
this is a little bit more of a puzzle. It's open ended. So I don't want to
guide you if steps to give you too much information. Instead, really let
yourself explore and try to figure things out on your own. As if this was a
real world puzzle situation. OK. So, again, you have these two images.
There's a secret message that you will be able to reveal if you can
figure out how to connect these two images together.

PYTHON IMAGE EXERCISES –
SOLUTION
Well, we're going to go through the solution for the image exercise
puzzle.

Recall that we essentially gave you these two images and left it up to
you to figure out how to reveal the secret message.

I'm going to just delete these cells and then start off by importing both
images. So I will say from PLL import. Image. And now let's actually
open up those images first through the words, which is image dot open.

And since I'm located in the same folder as that Panji file, I'll simply say
word matrix that Panji, you should be able to just tab autocomplete this.
And then the next one I'll do is the mask file. So I will say MASC is
equal to image the open. And this one is Mask PMG. And I can check
them out. Here are the words. And then here is the mask. So if I try to
just directly paste the mask on top of the words, it won't work. And let
me show you why.

Because even if I just say words that paste mask with the box at 00.
One is they're not the same size. So it didn't really reveal everything.
And the other one is that words is completely opaque. There's no
transparency. So that means there's two things I first thing to do. I need
to resize one of these to fit the other. It probably makes the most sense
to resize the mask because I'll probably get some errors. Well, not
really errors, but it might blur the words if I tried to shrink them too
small. So it makes more sense to enlarge the mask to the size of the
word matrix. Then the second thing I need to do is actually add
transparency to the mask in order to see through it, to see what words
are being highlighted in these white boxes. So let's go ahead and do
that first, because I accidentally kind of transformed the words.

Let's come back here and re-import both of them to make sure where
it's working and a mask is working. Perfect. Let's go ahead then and
resize mask to the size of words. To do this or simply check what size
words is.

So check word size. It's ten, fifteen by five. Fifty nine. So I will take my
mask and set it equal to the resized version of 10-15. Five, five, nine.
And now my mask size is the same as the words. Next, I need to add
transparency.
So a mask that put Alpha and really can put this kind of it's up to

you. How much Alpha you want to put in. But I found 200 was a value
that worked for me. So if I take a look at MASC now, you should notice
it looks a little grayer. So this should be enough alpha for me to see the
words through it. So let's try that pasting again. I'll say words. Paste the
mask. Line up at the top left corner mask again an alley. Check out the
words. We run that. And here's the result. So you should have been
able to see great work with images. You are the best. So those are the
highlighted words.

PROGRAM TO CHECK WHETHER
A CHARACTER IS ALPHABET OR
NOT IN PYTHON
This program called Jex, rather, a key one connector lies in the range
of Lorqess and uppercase alphabets.

So you see that we are taking user input. We have commented that we
will take user input with the help of this line of code. You see that we
are taking character as input. We will enter a character and then we will
check if the input is an alphabet or not. So this is our condition. If.
Character is greater than or equal to small A.. And character is less
than or equal to someone. So you see that there is a condition. And
there is. And between them. So we know that when both these
statements are true, then the output would be true. In the case, awful.

And if one statement is false. If I. The statement is false. In both
conditions, then the result would be false. So if character is greater than
equal to some all air and character isn't. Less than equal to some all
disease or character is equal to greater than capital. A. Whether the
collector is a capital A. or greater, then means that it is B, C, D, E, F,
and corrective is less than zie. Means Y, X or equal to Z. If Connecter is
less than and equal to Capital Z, then this program will print. Director is
an alphabet. Else it will bring that character is not an alphabet.

So we will run this program. You see that it prompts to enter a
character. We are giving it says small A.. So it shows that small it is an
alphabet. No. We will give it to small Z as input. And check, you see
that small is an alphabet. We will give no B as input. You see, they're
small. B is an alphabet. No, we will give y small y as input and check.
You see that small Y is an alphabet. No, we will check this program
code with the help of capital characters. So you'll see that we have
given capital. And it returns their capital. It is an alphabet. We will give
Capital Z as input and check. So you see their capital D an alphabet.
Similarly, we will give B capital B as input. We enter it and see that
Capital B's and Alphabet.

So this program will return small ABC and Capital ABC. Any character
as an alphabet? No, we give it to value one. So you see that one is not
an alphabet. We execute this program again and give it a special
character. You see that? We give it at rate sign or you see that. Percent
or we give it. Say a dollar sign and execute it. So this says that dollar
sign is not an alphabet, although it is similar to capital less. But it is a
different character. It is a special character. Dollar Sign is a special
character.

So this program will return at rates sign. Exclamation mark or any
special character as it not an alphabet. So you see the output here. So
this program was about taking user input of a connector and.

LARGEST AMONG THREE
NUMBERS IN PYTHON

So we are taking input from the user with the help of prompt. So this is
the prompt here, input command. So with this input function. So with
the help of this, you see here, this is the first line of code. No one is
equal to into input. Enter first number. Then the second line shows that
number two is in input. And the second number, number three is
entered her number. So these three lines tell the user to enter the three
different numbers to check the largest among three numbers. Then we
will apply the conditions on these three numbers to check which is the
largest among these three values. So this is the bill. This is a block that
shows the conditions. And in the end, we will print the largest number
among the number one. Number two. And number three, is it that
number? That would be the result. So here you see that we will
elaborate is these conditions if number one is greater than equal to
number two and number one is greater than equal to number three. So
number one, the third largest number is equal to number one. And then
we will check number two against this parameter. I live or else if
number two is greater than equal to number one and we're using and
condition here, that if both of our conditions become true, then the result
will be true. Otherwise, it would be false. If not now for condition in this
in-between the in this and who does not fulfill this will return false. And it
will falsify the condition and shift the control to other. So here you see

that number two is greater than equal to number one. And number two,
it is greater than equal to number three. Then the largest number is
number two. And else we have checked here, you see that we have
checked first number. We have checked. Second number here and
here. We are checking that as if number one is greater than number
two and number three here. And if number two is greater than number
one and number three, then answer is number two is greater as only
one number is remain. That is number three. So the largest number
would be number three if both these conditions, number one and
number two, don't fit this model.

So we will execute this. So you see here that it says that enter foster
number. This prompt shows that we must enter first number. We will
enter, say, 10. Second number is 20. And the third number is 30. So
you see here that the largest number among 10, 20 and 30 is a 30
here. So you see here that we are going to check this, that the largest
number is the 30. So this program takes input numbers from the user.
One by one. It accepts. Number one first. The number two. The number
three. And then it injects with the help of conditions that we.

HOW TO FIND LENGTH OF
STRING IN PYTHON WITHOUT
USING LEN _ WITH LENGTH
FUNCTION
This students, this program code is about counting the length of a
string.

Here we will enter the string and then count the length of that string. So
we will elaborate this with the two methods. The first method is without
using land function with the help of loop. And this second example is
without any loop and with the help of awful led function. So we will
execute the first method. So in the first method, we are using loop for
loop. So here you see that user input is string. This is the command.
Then string is equal to input. We are going to take input here. Then
you'll see that the counter is equal to zero. So what this means. So this
means that we are using controvert able to count the connector in the
string. That is zero. So we have not entered it yet. For Ethen String
here, the body of the loop starts countries equal to Contra plus one. So

this loop executes for these values countries equal to counter plus one.
So until the end of the string is found. This loop will execute. And when
the string and comes near this loop will terminate. And here you see
that print length of the input string is counter. We are using gonta
valuable here.

We will execute it. So it will ask us to enter a string. We enter by tonn.
So you see there. It has value of six. The length of the string is equal to
six. And

we will execute it again and see that Java, the example of Java. So the
length of Java is G. A reader is that is equal to four. No. We will execute
the code with other example. Other method. So you see here. There
this is the same line. Sorry. This is the same line of code. We are taking
input. But in this example we are using the land function to find the
length of these string here. Then we will bring the length of that string
with the help of this.

So we execute it. So it is asking us to enter a stream. We enter hash.
Function. So here you see their dilemma is equal to thirteen, one, two,
three, four, five, six, seven, eight, one, two, three, four. And this is the
empty space that is also counted. Eight plus four plus one is equal to
13. So the length of this screen is equal to 13. Me execute it again and
see. Alfa Romeo. So the lamp is equal to a lemon. Five alphabets here.
Five alphabets here. And this is the empty space that is also counted in
programming languages. So this was the code to count the length of a
given string. We did this with these two methods. The first method was
without using land function with the help of loop.

HOW TO REVERSE A STRING IN
PYTHON
We will reverse a string with this help off with the help of this bitin
program.

So here you see that we have defined it function, function to reverse a
string defined D.F.. The words of a string. And in this comment you will
see that s in to this list, i.e. colon g colon key. And you see here double
colon's. So here you see that start and step in the list. So I will
elaborate all this so you can understand it. Well, here you see that there
are two columns. So this means the slice awful here. This means the
slice of S slice of S from i.e. here. This is the store you see here. That
the store. Here we are going to slice this. Sequence. So here this is the
store. This is the end. And this is the element with which we will jump.
So here you see that slice of S from I to G with step key here. We will
take the jump ball four gate values. Or if you don't use the i n g when I n
g are absent. The whole sequence is assumed. So we will assume the
entire sequence. And so this means that every gate element, every this
element. What we will write here. We will jump by value. I hope you
understand this. This is a start. This is the end of sequence. And this is
a step or jump that we specify. So here you see that string is equal to
string. And here you see nothing in the form of I n g. So it means
nothing for the first argument. Nothing for the second argument. And
jumped by minus one. So here we will get every item in reverse. So

after this we will return the string value. So this is the driver program to
test above functions. We've give the string welcome to buy time to this
program and then we reverse this string with the help of this statement.
Then we print the result to output. That is the string in reverse. Here
you here. We will bring this string.

We execute it and see the result output. You see that here. The worst
thing is. And all at the y p space or T space. E m or c l e w. So if you
reverse it, you will see that this is the string. Welcome to Biton.

we will execute it again. So you see there, So I will elaborate this thing
again so you can understand the step. Well, this is a sequence. So in
this sequence, this first item is the start of the sequence. The second is
the end. And you see the first estar. The second is the end. And the
third one is the step by which we will jump. So we will jump this by gate
element. We will jump here by gate element. Here we are jumping in.
So if we remove this minus sign and execute this program again, we
will see that the theme stream will be displayed as output you see here.
So you see there. let's experiment again. Two, so it will jump by two
and give us the result. Here you see. There you see that the ad is
missing, then I'd then ask, is it missing? So then I is missing and as
miss as is here, then here empty space is missing. Then this is D, then
X is missing here. And then he is here. Then the. We see that this
empty space is missing. We is here and I is missing here. D here and
then E is missing here and or is here. Then in the lecture e d and are
missing. So this is jumping by two to element second Elmeri. It is
jumping by second element. So you saw the how the cord runs.
Basically this program was to take a string and then there was this
string buttar. I did some experiments on this program called.

SORT A STRING
ALPHABETICALLY PYTHON
This is the Python program to sort alphabetically the words from a
string provided by the user.

This is a multi line comment. I have commented this. So here we are
taking the input of string. Hello. But if we want to give the input by the
user, we will. Remove this comment and this will take the input, but no,
we will test this. OK, so break down the string into a list of words. So
this applet function will divide the strings into a list of four words and
then with the help of thought function, we will sort the words. And then
we will display all the words alphabetically. So we saw that with this
applique method method, we can work this thing into a list of words and
then we change them by sorting. And we saw them with the help. Awful
this function sort function. And we saw them in lexicographical order.

So I will execute this program. So I scrawled on it. Here we see their
distorted words. So these capital letters are in the beginning and the
word starting with capital letters are at the upper police in desalting
while the words with similar letters are at a lower position here. So. And
if you want to take the input from the user. We take this.

So you see here their responses enter a string. We will copy this string
simply. And put our displays. And we will press enter. So obviously,
see, they're the same result is here. So we can change this to test other
string yellowbird. How? He's going on with Somalia letter. Joining. Join
us. Please, please. Sorry.

I will have to copy this as we are going to the prompt. So here you see
that going. Hello. Is please us. Word how. Join on, please. So here we
see that this pleased with capital P is adding Publius and displeased
with some allor B is Eddie. Lord, please. So in sorting uppercase letters
are a2 a preposition while lowercase words are at the lower. Please. So
this program was about desalting awful a given string alphabetically or
lexicographical.

CREATE OR DECLARE EMPTY
LIST PYTHON 3
So we will do this with the help offer two different examples.

So these are the block off. This is a block of gold here. And this is the
other example you see here.

I have written both these examples here so we can easily save time. So
you see here that this is a pattern program to declare empty list. We
have committed this in multiple lines, multiple lines. And here we are
going to clear a listing empty list to just simply typing is equal to these
scared brackets. So as we know, that Lisa are in the form all four
square brackets. So there is a little bit of difference between you stand
this chapter and we specify this with the help of these these Galip
records and shared records. And we see that here. But into values, all
physical to aid, then we are going to bring the type of this list. And then
finally, we will bring this size to offer this list.

We will run this code. And here you see that value of this list is here.
Dyball for this list isn't. So this. Is it these two here we have the pacifier.
This and here, this is the size of your empty list.

So here we will include Spoors two, three. So here you see that value
of a. So in this list, this is not an empty list. We have specified two
values into it. The first value is two. And second value is three. The first
value is the Adès zero pointer. And the second value is. And the point
to offer one. We know that list starts from zero. And in case of four, if it
has three elements. Two, three, four. If it has three elements, then we
know that this two is at the place of zero. This is the place of these
three is one and the place of these four. Easy naughtily. This is not if
places nor three that there is place, is it zero one and two is the place of
these four. Is it equal to do so? If you want to access this four, then we
will have to specify number two in our program called. So we can reach
this element. So if we want to access the of of first element, then we will
have to specify zero. And and. We are going to reverse the this.

We will specify here minus one. So we will run our second code. This
has a different method. So you see here that we have specified. Here,
there. This is the list you see here. That is the first example we had
used to secure barricades to find a way to create an empty list. And
here we have used Berent pieces, but we have specified here that we
are going to create a list. We are declaring a list. So I am going to

execute this. So this piece of code will tell us that the values of a are
that and the type is listed and the size of this list is a zero that there is
no element. This is the empty list. So empty list to have this size offer
equal to.

WORKING WITH CSV FILES IN
PYTHON
CSB stands for comma separated variables, and it's a very common
output for spreadsheet programs and examples, CSP file would look
something like this usually at the top. You have the actual names of the
columns separated by commas. So here we can see some sort of
employee spreadsheet where we have the name of the employee, the
number of hours they work, and then maybe their hourly rate. And then
each subsequent row represents a data point, such as David, who
works 20 hours at a fifteen dollar power rate. And then Claire and so
on. Note that all the columns are separated by that comma. And you
can technically separate it by other things, like a tab or a horizontal bar
or various other punctuation points like semicolons and only deal. If this
will see that, we can actually specify what that separator actually is.
They should know that while it's possible to export Excel files and
Google spreadsheets to dot CSP files, it only exports the information.
So that is to say things like formulas of an excel or images or general
functions like macros. Those actually can't be within a CFC file. So
simply put, the DOT see as we file only contains the raw data from the
spreadsheet. In this lecture, we're gonna be working with the builtin
CSP module for Python, which will allow us to grab columns, rows and
values from that CSC file, as well as write information to add that CSP
file. So our main goals here is just be able to extract information and
then write information. And technically in between those steps, you can
do whatever you want with the information within a Python script. Now,
keep in mind, this is a very popular space for outside libraries that don't
come builtin with Python, which you may want to explore. If you're using
a particular program. So I just want to tell you a couple of other libraries
to consider. One of my favorites is called Pandas. And this is technically

a full data analysis library and it can work with almost any tabular data
type. Not just things like CSP file. It also works with things like SQL
files, directly off Excel files and so much more. It can also run
visualizations and data analysis. It's one of my personal favorites.
However, it is a much larger library than just something like the CSP
module. So we teach it and various data science projects here and you
can check those out if you're interested in it. The reason we don't cover
it here is because it's such a huge library with so many facets to it. It
would just take an entirely new project to really cover it in detail.
However, it is one of my favorite Python libraries. Another library to
consider is called Open Pie Excel. And this one is actually designed
specifically for Excel files. So if you find yourself being work, in fact, sell
a lot or you're an Excel power user, but you want to add in some python
functionality. Open Pie Excel actually retains a lot of Excel specific
functionality, things like supporting Excel formulas within the library.
You can also check out Python Dash Excel dot org, which actually
tracks various other Excel based Python libraries. And there's also the
Google Seat's Python API. If you find yourself using Google
spreadsheets a lot and you would like to have a direct Python interface
for it. You can use this Google Sheets Python API. And keep in mind,
this now then allows you to directly make changes to the spreadsheets
that are hosted online. So you're actually running a script locally that will
reach out through the Internet, through the API call and then edit the
sheets that are hosted on your Google Drive. Now, the backdrop of that
is that this is technically a more complex syntax than what you're going
to see here. And that's also because it's available in many
programming languages. It's not just a Python specific API. It's
available in many programming languages. So if you find yourself using
Google sheets a lot, you can check out the Python API. They actually
have really good documentation online. Simply Google search, Google
Sheets, Python API and the first link should take you there. OK, so
even though there's lots of options here, the common factor really
between all of these spreadsheet programs is that they should always
be able to export to adopt CSP file essentially the raw data inside the
spreadsheet. Let's go ahead and explore Python's built in capabilities
with the CSB module. It's up over to Jupiter notebook. All right.

Here I am inside Jupiter as a quick note. I highly recommend that you
open up your new notebook to follow along inside of the PDX and
spreadsheets folder. Because if you scroll down here, we have the
lecture notebooks. But we also have the CSP files. We're going to be
working with. And if you don't want to worry about having to provide a
full file path through them, you can simply do like I just did and open up
a new in this case, untitled notebook. In the same location.

All right. If you ever have any questions of weird Jupiter, no book is
actually located. You can always type. There'll be these in a cell. Run it
and it will report back to you when you're actually located on your
computer. So let's begin by showing you how to read in ACSU file.
We're actually going to show you a very common encoding error first.
So we will actually open this technically in the wrong way. So the first
thing we're going to do is import CSB and then we're going to do is we
have a couple of steps here. We first just open the file, just as you
would have any other file. Then the next step is to call CSB dot reader
on it. And then is to try to reformat it. Into a python object, typically the
list of lists. So let's go ahead and try this and then we'll show you what
may happen to you. Four in encoding error. OK, so first thing. Open the
file. We do this just like any other file. So I will say data is equal to open.
And we'll be working with example that CSP, which is located in this
same PDAF and spreadsheets folder. It's right here. Example, that's
ESV If you're working somewhere else, then you need to provide the full
file path, which essentially attaching all of this in front of example.
That's easy. OK. So open the file. Nothing new there.

Now we're going to do is try to convert it into CSB data. By saying CSB
data is equal to CSB, Reidar, and we pass in that data and then we will
try to reformat it into a python object, lists of lists. So that means I'm
going to say data lines is equal to. And I'm going to attempt to call list
on CSB data. And you should notice an error here and the error, which
is a super common error when you're working with various CSP files,
text files or paedophiles. Is this Unicode decode error and essentially
just says, hey, this character mapping codec, I don't understand it. I
can't decode it. And essentially what that means is there's different
encodings that a file can have. And what the encoding is, is basically
able to read or not read different types of special characters. So the
actual special character that's missing this particular file read up is the
at Symbol. So this particular CSP file actually contains emails that has
this at Symbol. And so the default encoding doesn't work. And you may
experience the same sort of encoding problems if you're dealing with
files that are written in another language. For example, if you're dealing
with a Spanish written file and it has special accents over certain
characters, you may need to use an encoding like a Latin encoding.
And typically, you can easily Google search for the correct encodings
depending on what the file is. So what we're gonna do here is we'll
come back and we'll say this is equal to open example. That's ESV But

I'm going to add in an encoding argument and say encoding is equal to
UTF Dash eight. And again, you can easily search online for different
encodings that may be useful to you, depending on what kind of files
you're trying to open in what language those files are in. So we'd add in
this UTF eight encoding, which essentially telling it what characters it
can read. And then if we run these lines again, we don't get an error. So
if you get this sort of Unicode decoder error, you can start looking up
the different kinds of encodings. And it's specifically helpful if you
already know what special characters are in your actual doxie as we
file. I knew there were emails here. So that means I know there's an at
symbol which is causing the error, which means I need to use UTF
Dash eight encoding and after I recommend this one as a good starting
point, especially if you're files in English.

OK, so what is Dateline's? Let's take a look at it. We will say data lines
and it looks like it's a list of lists. So the very first item are the actual
column names, I.D., first name, last name, email, gender, IP address,
city. And then the second item is going to be an actual data row. So we
have Joseph and then Zanta, Allouni or excuse me, Zand Illini. And
then we have simple machines to Oregon. Keep in mind, all this
information is fake and made up. OK, so what we're gonna do here is

we're going to show you how you can kind of loop through this to
actually read in some of the data information. So we know that the very
first item in this list,

we check out zero here. Those are the actual column names. So
typically CSC data, the very first row are going to be the column names.
If you want to know how many rows there actually are, you can check
the length. Of data lines. And I know there's actually a thousand rows
plus one row that is the column information. So there's 1000 data
points. So one of these these rows right here is very first one, which is
the column names technically not a data point.

And what we could do as well is say for line in data lines and we can
say starting from the beginning, go all the way up to, let's say, row
number five. Go ahead and print the line. And I want to zoom out here
just a little bit so we can see this formatted nicely. And we should be
able to see something like this. And if I zoom out a little more, I can see
now the rows formatted nicely. So what can I do if this. Well, I now
know that I can essentially extract any Roe I want,

for example, if I want to wanted Roe number ten, I simply need to zoom
back in here. To see row number 10, I simply need to say Dateline's.
And then you have to kind of figure out what number is correct here.
Recall that zero is going to be the column names. So that means if I
were to provide 10, it actually works out nicely because zero indexing
starts off at zero in Python, which means that very first item
corresponds to the column header. So that index one is actually your
very first data point. So then so on. Index ten is actually the tenth data
point. All right. So I know how to extract a row. What if I wanted to
extract a single value? Well, then I simply say, what do I want? And
then here, notice this is a list. So I can maybe grab this person's email.
So that's zero. One, two, three. And now I can grab the email of this
particular person. Let's imagine that. I want an entire column. So, for
example, let's say I want to just all the e-mails in every single row. How
can I do that? Well, I know that set index three, so I could simply say.
My list of all emails. Physical to an empty list so far. And then I'll go for
every line and data lines. Or you could take it for a subset.

Recall that at this point you should be starting at 1:00. Since you don't
actually want to grab that e-mail column name. And let's go out to row
fifteen here. We could go all the way to the end. We'll simply say all
emails append. And then we'll say line index three. So all we're saying
here is go through every row and make sure you start at one. If you
want, you can go all the way to the end to grab everything. And then
we'll say all emails, a pen and every line. Recall index three is the email.
So if you run this, you should notice. Now, all emails is just this giant list
of all the emails inside that data set. Now, you notice that, let's say for
one of these lines, let's go ahead and grab one.

So we'll say. Data lines just grab 10 again. You'll notice that right now
the first name and last name are separated. Let's imagine we wanted a
list of the full names because we want to maybe automate an email to
them. And we want to address them by their full name. Well, that's
actually pretty easy to do. All you do is very similar, say full names,
empty list. And then when we iterate, we just add in a little bit of logic.
We say for line and data lines starting at 1:00. Let's say go all the way
to the end. We can say full names and we're going to a pen. And this
where you can do the logic.

So I know that index one is the first name. This index zero is an I.D. and
then I'm going to simply concatenate it with, let's say. Line two.
However, this would leave no space between the first name and last
name. So let's go ahead and concatenate it one more time in between
with an empty space, just so there's a space between the first name
and the last name. You run that and now you have. A list of the full
names. So now you can see a simple index saying you can pretty much
grab any information you want. So we're going to do now is review how
you can write to a CSP file.

So the way we're going to do this is we're going to say file underscore
to underscore. Output is equal to open. And there's where you can
decide what the name of your CSC file is going to be. So let's go ahead
and call this to save file that CSB. And you should note that the way
we're gonna set it up here is this will overwrite any existing file with the
same name. And you can always change your mode depending on
what you want to do here. So in this case, I'm going to say comma
mode is equal to W, which is right mode. And then this will also
overwrite any existing CSG file, the same name. And then the last thing
we have to do is mean to specify that new line is an empty string. Note
there's no space here. It's just one quote followed by another quote.
Then we're going to hit enter here and then we're going to say CSB
underscore writer is equal to CSB. The writer, essentially opposite of
CSB thought reader. And we call file to output. And then we have to
specify the delimiter that we want. Delimiter is just another word for
what is a separator, what is actually separating one column from
another. And you can say it's a comma. Keep in mind, this can
technically be anything you want it to be. It's also really common to
have semicolons as a separator. And it's even common to have what's
sometimes known as a T. S V file or tab separated, which you can
denote with backslash T for a tab. We will keep it as comma. The last

thing to know is CSB writer is essentially the sister to CSB reader. And
if you're opening a C as we file that has a different separator than a
comma. You could have also specified the delimiter parameter when
we called up here CSP dot reader. And you can check out the online
documentation for the other arguments you can pass on to CSB. OK,
so we're going to do is write this file to Output Delimiter. We go ahead
and run this. And then there's different ways we can do this. So, for
example, I can write a single row so I can say C as V writer. Dot. Right,
row. And they just passed in a single row of items like A, B, C. Or what
I could do is write multiple rows so I could say CSB writer Dot right,
Rose. And then just takes in a list of lists and keep mine.

This time it has to actually match up with the rows that are already
there. So if there's three columns already, the next entries should also
have just three values. So I'll say one, two, three. And then let's say
four, five, six. Notice, these are strings that are being written here and
you keep writing rows that way. So you can imagine that if I really
wanted to, I could make adjustments to the data lines here. And then
eventually just say CSB writer that right. Rose Dateline's. And you can
check out the different modes from before. So if you wanted to append
to a file, you can do that as well. If you want to just read a file, then

that's just mode are as we saw above, but all the modes. So we
previously discussed of opening text files with Python apply here. So
we're just doing an overwrite. So we're writing ABC. Those are my
column names. And then here's my data. One, two, three is one row.
Then four, five, six. And we have to remember that we need to actually
close the file. So you don't close the file through CSP writer. That's just
writing to the file to close file. You actually Graham file to output again.
And then you go ahead and close it in now, you should be able to come
over here and see you have to save file that C as V as created. Now,
let's imagine that. I've already worked with this file, and instead of
overwriting it, I just want to add Neuros to it. As I mention, this all works
of just editing the mode.

So only to do here is say F. Is equal to open, call that same file to save
file that CSB and then the mode we're going to have here is a for a pen,
which essentially means I don't want to overwrite this file. I just want to
append to it. So we'll say new line is equal to empty string again and
we'll say CSB writer. Is equal to CSB dot writer F. So we have this
writer object and then I can write Neuros to it. So I simply need to say
writer. Let's go ahead and write a single row. Let's just have this be
one, one, one. Or one, two, three, again, doesn't really matter here. And

then you should get an output here, essentially telling you. The number
of characters written, so recall that we're not just writing one, two,
three, but we're also writing commas for them as well as a new line.
And then finally, when you're done with this file, you can close it as
before. OK. So that's the basics of working of CSB file. Technically,
there's usually just three things you do if a CSP file you read in the
information and then you do whatever you want with it as a second part.
And then once you're done, you can either write that information back
or just save it somewhere within your Python script as a python object.
So you open and read a C, we file SEP to do whatever you want with
the information of Python set three.

WORKING WITH PDF FILES IN
PYTHON
PDAF stands for portable document format, and it was developed by
Adobe in the nineteen nineties, which is probably why when you think
of PDAF you think of Adobes PDAF Reader or another Adobe program.
Now the most important thing to keep in mind is that while PDX share
the same extension dot pdaf and can be viewed in multiple PDAF
readers, many PDA apps are not machine readable through Python.
Since PDX mainly encapsulate and then display a fixed layout, flat
document, there is sometimes no machine readable standard format.
Unlike CSB files, which pretty much once you have a CSP file in place,
Python can easily read it. So unfortunately, that means that a PDA.
That was, for instance, simply scanned is highly unlikely to be readable
by Python. Additions to P.D.A, such as images, tables, format
adjustments, or even things like simple font changes, can also render a
PDAF unreadable by Python. Now, there are many paid PDAF
programs outside of Python that can read and extract from these
specialized files. But we're going to be focusing on free open source
software such as the extremely popular PI PDAF to library. Now, we've
made sure that the paedophiles included in this coarse material are
readable by Pi PDAF too. Unfortunately, we can't offer assistance for
your own personal paedophiles if they are not readable by pipe, too. So

basically, if you have your own paedophile and you try to follow along
what we've done here, and for some reason it shows up as empty texts,
like there's nothing in the PDAF file when you know there's something
in there that basically means that typedef two will not be able to read
your file, unfortunately. And there really isn't much we can do on our
end to help out. OK, so let's see what we can do with paedophiles in
Python. Remember your first going to need to install pipe PDAF to your
command line with PIP install pipe PDAF two. And note the
capitalization here. OK, let's head over to Jupiter notebook. All right.
Here I am at the Jupiter notebook. A couple of things I wanted to point
out is, again, we recommend that you open up this new notebook in the
same folder, PDX and spreadsheets, so you can actively grab this
PDAF documents we're gonna be working with.

So we'll come back to the notebook. And the second thing I want to
mention is the lecture notebook that goes along with this called Working
of Paedophiles has a link in the very top to other Python libraries that
you may be interested in. If you find yourself working of PBS a lot. So
that link basically has a survey of tools that allow you to do things like
read from specialized PDA files. So if you ever have problems with
Piper, you have to you may want to explore these other libraries. Keep

in mind in general, we can only read from PDA files. There are some
specialized libraries that can attempt to write to paedophiles, but I can
often result in errors. So in this lecture, we're just going to be focusing
on radion from PDA files,

possibly adding pages to PDA files and then really working off the text
from a PDA file. So let's go ahead and get started. First thing to do is
make sure you've already installed Pae PDAF two if you haven't. Just
go to your command line and type PIP install capital P Y Capital PDAF
two. So already ran that my command line. So I haven't installed.

Which means I should be able to import it now. Pipe PDAF two. And
there it is just as before the CSF reader. What we're gonna do is we're
gonna open using normal python. The PDF file and then we're gonna
do is attach a reader object to it. So I will say F is equal to open and the
file we're working with is called Working Business Proposal Dot PDAF.
And the second thing you have to note here is kind of like we're working
off image files before we had to read and write the binary code. In this
case, we have to have the Mode B Arbi for read binary since this is not
just a normal DOT text file. Next, in order to make sure we can actually
work with this, we say PDAF Reader and then we call the PI PDAF to
library and call PDAF File Reader. And then we're gonna pass an F
there. And if that worked correctly, we should be able to view how many
pages this PDA file had by calling the NUM pages attribute. And so
there's five pages in this PDA file. Let's grab the first page by saying
page one is equal to our PDAF reader object. And then the method
here is get page. And then you just pass in the indexed position of the
page you want. So if you want the first page, that's indexed zero. Then
if you want the text on that page,

we say page one text is equal to you, grab that page one object and
you call, extract, text. Run that. And now you should have the text as a
python strain. And this is where you can do things like perform a regular
expression, search for a particular pattern. So, again, the steps are to
read in the file with Arbie as your mode UPDF file a reader on that file,
confirm the number of pages. And then check if it worked by saying get
page extract text and then view the text. Keep in mind, even if you see
the number of pages is correct for certain paedophiles such as a
scanned paedophile or something that's too blurry in order to extract
the text. This number of pages will still work, but when you extract the
text, you'll just get an empty string. So if you're getting an empty string,
it means your PDA file is not convert or is not compatible with PI PDAF
two. And you may want to check out some of those other libraries that
we link to inside of the lecture notebook. Once you're done with working
off the text, you'll go ahead and close this off.

So as you can imagine, we could have easily created a for loop for the
range in number of pages to extract all the text from every page by
simply just having this be a variable call instead of hardcoded zero.
Now, let's talk about adding to paedophiles. Well, we can technically
write to a paedophile. We can only write another PDAF page. We can't
go into the middle of a page in a paedophile and write text to it with PI
PDAF to some paid programs allow you to do that. But I haven't seen
anything in open source python that allows you to do that consistently.
And it really just has to do with the complexity behind the PDAF format
if you plan on reading and writing to a file. It should probably not be in a
PDAF format. It should be in something like a text document or even a
word document. PDX in general are not designed to be easily editable.
So we're going to do here is we're gonna show you how to add pages
to PDAF. So let's go ahead and open up that file again. Just as we did
before, we're going to say working business proposal, that P.D.A. I just
just have to autocomplete there. Open it Winfried binary and then
assign the P.D.A. Friedler, just as we did before. So PDAF reader. And
then let's make sure we call it off by PDAF, so pi pdaf to PDAF File
Reader. There we go. So we're reading it just before. I'll grab the first
page. Equal to PDAF Reader Kepp Page zero. OK. So nothing
changed before. Right now, I have this document working business

proposal, and I'm only interested in the first page. So I got it. So maybe
I have a colleague or co-worker that says, hey, can you
programmatically grab all the first pages off the PDAF or maybe all the
last pages off the PDAF? Because that has certain information that I'm
looking for and I don't need the entire PDAF. So we could do is
programmatically do that by then writing this to a new file. And to do
this, I create a writer object. We'll say P.D.A. Underscore writer. It's a
pie pdaf, too. And in this case, we'll say P.D.A file writer. And this
creates a writer object.

And then we add pages to this writer object. So we say PDAF writer at
Page and the page, we should add should already be a specialized file
type. So what I mean by that is if I were to insert a cell below here, let's
check the type of first page. It should be a PDAF page object in order to
be added as a PDAF writer. It shouldn't just be a raw python string. So
what we will do here is we'll go ahead and type in first page, since I
know that's a correct page object and I could keep adding pages. But
for some reason, let's say only one of the first page. And now what I
need to do is open up a new file and then write to it. So we will create
an object called PDAF output. And you could have done this before this
had to be in this exact order, but I'll open up some new file so we'll say

some brand new. Doc, Doc, pdaf, and we'll open it now with Right
Binary. Keep in mind this will overwrite the current existing paedophile
if you have something called that and then we say PDAF writer. That
right. And we say PDAF underscore output and then we can close off
the file. OK. So what actually happened here? Notice that we read the
file just before

we got a specific page object, then in order to write to a new file. We
went ahead and created P.D.A file writer. We add pages as many as
we want to this writer object. Then we open some new file using
standard python with write binary. And then we use the PDAF writer to
write to that. And then we can close them off. So knows I have f close.
And then I will say PDAF output and I will close that one as well. And
now both the file I read and the file I wrote to are closed. So let's finish
off this lecture by just working through a simple example.

Let's imagine I wanted to grab all the texts that exists within a
paedophile. I can do that with a simple for loop. Just to reiterate the
steps again using standard python. I open up that PDA file. We've read
binary and then what I'm going to do is have a place holder. I will make
this place holder a list where the index of the list will correspond to the
page number. So essentially I'll have one really large string per position
in this list. Then we create our reader object with PI. PDAF to make
sure you have the capitalization, correct? We create a in this case, a
reader object pass in the file we opened and then we'll say for NUM in
range. PDAF reader number of pages. So recall, that's an integer that's
returned, then I will say page is equal to PDAF reader. I will get that
page at that particular number position and then I will say PDAF text.
Go ahead and append the extract, the text, which I can get by saying,
get that page object and extract the text. On that page. So if we run this
and went ahead and worked,

so then I should be able to say PDAF text and I get this long list where
each item in that list is the corresponding text. So this is the text on the
first page. Here's a text on the second page and so on. You see these
backslash ends. Those are just new lines. Which means if I really
wanted to, I could just print out the string instead of returning it, which
will actually show you kind of where those new lines stand. And I'm
really zoomed in here, so it might look a little strange, but it should look
something like this. You can see the paragraphs and new lines. All
right. So that's an example of working with PDAF and reading and
writing to PDX.

PDFS AND SPREADSHEETS
PYTHON PUZZLE EXERCISE
We're going to have an overview of the PDAF and see S.V. Puzzle
exercise in the next lecture. We'll go through the solutions.

Let's check out the notebook. All right. Here I am in Jupiter. If you
notice, under PDX and spreadsheets, there's a file called PDX
Spreadsheets Puzzle that's are working with in the next lecture. We'll
go over the solutions.

Open up PDA apps and spreadsheets, puzzle exercise. And again,
since this is the puzzle, we're not going to give you too many hints. But
basically you have two tasks here. One is you need to use Python to
extract the Google Drive link from the CSP file. And we gave you a hint
that it's actually located along the diagonal from top left to bottom right.
And where you can find the CSB file is if you look under PDAF and
spreadsheets.

There's a folder called Exercise Files. If you open up that folder, you'll
see ACSU file. So what you have to do is you have to figure out how to
open up this CSP file with Python. So you'll do that here in their task
one and along a diagonal. Figure out how to use a python loop or
something similar to extract it. And it should take you to this Google
Drive link, then go to that Google Drive link and download the PDAF
document from Google Drive. In case you can't access Google Drive.
We already downloaded for you in this PDF file here. So then your task,
too, is to figure out how to find a hidden phone number within this PDAF
documents. And keep in mind, we also are not going to tell you what
the correct formatting of that phone number is. So you have to use
regular expressions along with what you've learned about PDA apps
and scanning the text to figure out where that phone number is.

PDFS AND SPREADSHEETS
PYTHON PUZZLE EXERCISE –
SOLUTIONS
we're gonna go through an example solution for the PDAF and CSP file
puzzle exercise question. Let's head over to a Jupiter notebook. OK.

Here I am inside of the Jupiter notebook. And let's start with the first
task. Just going to zoom in here. We can see it a little better.

And the first task is to grab the Google Drive link from the CSB file and
we get the hint that it's located along the diagonal. So how do we do
this? Well, we first have to open this up. So we'll say data is equal to

open. And recall, it's underneath the exercise files. And it's called Find
the link that CSB. And eventually you'll discover they should have
encoding equal to UTF Dash eight. Because of the possible different
symbols here. And this should be a national equal sign. There we go.
And next, we're going to say a CSB data is equal to see US v. dot
reader on that data. And to make sure we can use CSP that reader, I
should import CSG. So we'll go ahead and run. That looks like it
worked.

Let's go ahead and check out the data lines. By saying list the CSB
data. And confirmed that that worked. And it looks like we have the list
of lists. So what do we need to actually grab here? It's a long diagonal
from the top left to the bottom right. So if we think about this. It means
that the first letter is the first item in the first row. Then the second letter
of the link should be the second item in the second row and so on.
Which means I can easily solve this by doing something like the
following, because if I take a look at Dateline's zero. Actually want item
zero? If I take a look at Dateline's. One, I should want item one from
this, and then two, I want item two. So notice it's starting to spell HTP.

So let's create a simple for loop that should be able to solve this for us.
I'll start off by doing this as a empty string and then I will just
concatenate to that string.

So then I will say for row number, comma data in. And here's the trick
I'm going to use enumerate. On data lines. I will say my link string. And

then I will take the current link string and simply concatenate it with
data. At that road number, so recall data itself is going to be the row
row number is the current number of the row we're on. So this will
essentially say row zero, row number zero, row to row numbers two
and so on which side want to use as indexing here. So if we run this, I
should then be able to see the full link as a stream. OK. And the reason
we're able to do this is because it's specifically the diagonal is from the
top left to the bottom right of the CSP file. And you'll notice that it's a
kind of a square see as we file. There are as many columns as there
are rows. And it's specifically designed that way because it's a puzzle.
So if you go to this link, you should then be able to download the PDA
file. We also already download it for you, just in case you weren't able to
download it yourself. So we're going to do here. Is staffed by importing
Pi pdaf to. And then we'll say F is equal to open underneath. Exercise
files are going to open. Find the phone number that PEF. We've read
binary. And then we'll say PDAF is equal to May call pie PDAF, too.
And

since I just want to read this will save PDAF Reader. On that file, the
check, the number of pages. So the number of pages it has.
Remember, that's an attribute is 17 pages. So somewhere on these

pages is text that I eventually want to do a regular express and search
on because I need to find the phone number. And we didn't give you a
hint that this is what the phone number should look like. But we didn't
actually tell you what the actual formatting was. So note, there are
different ways of formatting a phone number. So I actually don't know if
the phone number is going to have, for instance, dashes or if it's going
to have periods between it or if there's going to be parentheses here in
this fashion. So what I need to do is first figure out what the actual
format of the number is. And then what I can do is start trying to figure
out how to actually grab it with regular expressions. Something I do
know, though, is that regardless of how this is actually formatted, it's
highly likely that there's gonna be three digits in a row somewhere. So I
should probably start searching for three digits in a row and then the
remaining text after that. And that way I can begin to discover how this
is actually formatted. So, again, it's come an unlimited amount of ways
when you're dealing with regular expressions that you can search for
this. But what I'm going to do is start off by inputting regular
expressions and we'll say pattern is equal to. And let's start off with just
a very simple pattern of three digits in a row. So we run that and now
let's grab all the text within this document. So we'll say.All text. Is equal
to and what I'll have here is just a string, and eventually it's gonna be a
giant string of hollow text and we'll say for N in range PDAF. NUM
pages. Say page is equal to PDAF, get page at that number. Say, page
text. Is equal to page that. Extract, text. And then what I'm going to do is
say. All text is equal to the current all text, and I'll add an empty
spaceand then all concatenate page text itself. So what does that do?

Well, if I run this, it's going to take a little bit of time. But now I have a
giant string with all the text here. And that means I can't begin to
actually use regular expression search. And if I wanted to, I could
search the pages in this loop over and over again. It's really up to you
how you can basically perform this task. So let's start actually looking
for a pattern within all text. And if you take a look at the lecture
notebook that goes along with this, we actually have a hint link that
takes you to this stack overflow page that asks, how can I find all the
matches to a regular expression in Python? Unfortunately, if we try
something like search, that only brings up the very first match. So if I
research for my pattern of three numbers and I want to search all the
text notice, I'll just get back one match and it's actually zero zero zero,
which given what we actually know is not the correct number. Which
means I need to find multiple matches because I don't know if there's
maybe page numbers here that are three in a row or some other
reference that could be messing this up. So how do we find all the
matches? We have two methods.

Find all, which will only return the matching strings and then find itor,
which will return over the match objects. So let's go ahead and check
that out. If I were to say find all. For my three numbers, I can begin to
see that later on in the text, my three numbers start appearing five five
five oh three in the first three digits of the last part of that phone
number. But what I really want to do is figure out how can I get to
something like five or five and then figure out what's the remaining text.
So to do that, we're gonna do the following. We'll say find itor.

And we'll say for match in. R e find itor since this an iteration is going to
return these match objects, we'll go ahead and just say. Print out. My
match. And if we run that, then we can begin to see the actual locations
of these. So let's go ahead and grab the location of five or five. So I'm
gonna run this again so I can see all text. And

let's start at that index location. And let's say we'll go up to that index
location plus let's say 20 more characters. So you run that and you can
begin to see five five five oh three four four five five. And if you want a
little bit more context, we can go ahead and maybe grab a little bit
before that to a little bit after run that we can begin to see something. It
says like phone number is. And so on.

REMOVE PUNCTUATION MARKS
FROM STRING PYTHON
In this cold, we will remove punctuation marks from a given stream. So
what are the punctuation marks?

These are the punctuation marks that are used in a string, in
paragraphs, in sentences, in simple English with the help of them. We
can easily understand the meaning of a given sentence or paragraph.
We know it. So in this program, we have defined deep intuition marks
that are generally used in English. So here we see that. What are these
marks? So you see that at the very same ampersand as terrorists and
call semicolons. Hyphens, brackets. Curly brackets. So these are deep
intuition marks. And we will remove these marks from a given string
with the help of this program. So here we see that we have defined first
punctuation marks. Then we will define a string in this program code.
But if we want to ask the user to enter the string manually with the help
of keyboard, we can also specify it by removing this command. We will
change it. We will remove this hash sign and this will be converted into
a code to ask the user to enter the string on which the operations will be
performed. But now we will perform action on the given string. So here
we see that these lines, what are the meaning of these lines? No
punctuation is equal to. So this is the empty string here. So we will
display the string without punctuation. We will outrate to over the
provider string using a forward loop here. We see that this is the far
loop that will find the punctuation character in the list in the string. And
then it will check whether it is for on the given list to or not. If it is given

in this punctuation list, then it will not display this. So in the next step,
we have an empty string here. We see that this is the empty string to
which we add or concatenate corrector character if it is not one to ated
or if it is not in these ponga punctuation marks the list. So this is the list
that contains contusion marks in here. We will add those words into the
string that are not punctuated. And in the end, after the outer regions
with the help of these. This luper. So we will display no punctuation is
equal to no punctuation plus. Correct. We will continue to add new
characters and words in this empty string. So we will clean up the string
that contains the punctuation marks.

And after all. Finally, we will get the string here. So you see that this
was our original string. It contained these exclamation marks, comma,
this dash dashes and. Full stops, et cetera. So here you see that. Hello.
He said this and rent a V. So and

if we want to ask the user. To enter the. Spring, so we can also do it
with the help of this prompt. This is the prompt to ask to use it to enter
the stream. So we can enter the string of autumn. So you see here that.
We have deemed it a little bit. Hello. He said this and when we. Along
with me. Me. Please.

So I will execute it again. By entering this string into this program. So
here you see that, hello? He said this and went away. Come along with
me, please. So here you see there. Dessert is here, as in this simple
English. We know that a new sentence store so often the full stop. But
here we see that me and pleas are joined together and there is no gap
between them because it seems that they are a single word while in
simple English. This full stop differentiates the previous sentence from
the next sentence. And it makes us to understand the meaning. Awful.
The sentences is easily. So we can easily understand what this
sentence is saying or what the meaning of that particular paragraph.
But if we remove the punctuation, then it would be difficult to understand
what is going on here. So this program was to remove punctuation
marks from a given string. So we did this with two methods.

HOW TO FIND THE LARGEST
NUMBER IN A LIST PYTHON
USING LIST APPEND METHOD
This rules in this program code. We will find the largest number of
element in the list.

This is the empty list to the user will enter the total number of elements
in the list that he wants to enter. So he will specify it first and then he
will enter each element one by one. So then after two, we will run a loop
that will append to all the values in a list until he lost, her element is
appended in a list. Then we will find this with the help all for maximum
function, that which is the largest element in this. So you see that
creating empty list. We are creating an empty list. User enters the
number of elements. Then count is equal to integer input holmium
numbers. This will prompt the user to enter. How many numbers? He
wants to enter in the program code. Outraging till count to append all
input elements in the list. So if user enters first element, then second
and third element, then this for loop will append to all the elements in
the list. Then this maximum function will disability logistic element in the
list.

So we will execute it and see what happens. So it is asking the user to
enter the total number of elements in the list. So we will enter there and
we are going to enter four elements in at least two. So we will specify
here that we want to enter four elements in a list. So you see here that it
also enter first number, reinterred one. Then we enter two, then we
intercept five, then 10. So it has four elements. First element is one two,
second element five is the third element and 10 is the fourth element.
And this list contains four elements in it. So we press enter. So you see
there they're allowed just the element of the list, is it?

Then we will execute it again. So you see here, we will give input as
three. We are going to enter three elements. First element is two.
Second is four. And the third element is a C. Patti. Third element is 3D.
So you see here that DeFore is the largest element in the list you see
here that this list contains three elements two, four and three. And the
largest element in the list is the four. So. This procedure, this program
was about finding the largest number of element in the list. With the
help of empty list and the user is prompted to enter the total number of
elements in the list, then user enters the elements of the list. And this
maximum.

PYTHON HOW TO FIND THE
LARGEST NUMBER IN A LIST
WITHOUT MAX
the Python program to find the largest number in the list.

So here there is a list given. So this list contains the numbers five
seventy nine ninety nine, sixteen thirty five hundred and eighty nine. It
contains samon number of elements. It is given in this program called
We Will Sort the given list. Allah. Yes. This all function sort at least in
ascending order. This will sort the list. We will get this five value. Add
this left side. Then the lower value that is sixteen. That will be here at its
second place. Then thirty five at third place. Then we will see that.
Seventy nine at four police. Eighty nine at the fifth place and the ninety
nine add six place. And then hundred Adisa. Seven police. So we will
check the largest number in the given list. With the help. Awful list.
Sorting function. And then with the help. All for sorting. We will find the
largest number. Awful element. So you see here that this is our given
list. We have given it in this code. Then here we are going to display the
last element of the list as we know that in ascending order, lower

element or lower number. Is at the left side. And it increases when we
go at the right side of the list or of the sequence. When we go added
outside of the sequence, the numbers increase as we know that. Now,
minus is at the left side. And then minus five. Minus four. Minus three.
Minus two. Minus one. Then zero. The region. Then one, two, three,
four, five, six. And so on. And the largest number to infinity. So you see
here that we are going to put in the largest number in the list. Oh, okay.
I will tell you here that. What is this. Like, yes. Minus one list. Minus
one. So you see here that if we specify this with the zero. So it means
that at least two. You see here that Eighty-Nine is at first believes so in
this. This place is called zero or this is at zero pointer. This is one. This
is two. This is three. And this is four. This is five. And this is six. So if we
want to access it, this hundred, we will specify in the listed as one. So it
will show the output as one if we want to specify in the list as one. So if
we want to access the second element in the list, we will not. Sorry, we
are if we are going to specify the third element in the list. We will supply
specify it with the giving the parameter value of two in the list. We will
specify here it will with like yes. Two. So forget this for the moment. I
am just explaining this. So that you can understand this concept. So if
you specify this with zero, that means we are accessing the first
element of the list. So if you want to specify the minimum, not minimum
number or the sum are less than number in the listed. Then we will
include zero in discord. But. If you want to specify the largest element in
discord, we will put the value minus one here, as in the case of and
then we move from right to left. When we move from here to here, from
right to left. So this fight, this element, this five has a value of minus
one. So this seventy nine has value offer minus two. And this ninety
nine has value of minus three. This 16 has value. Awful. Minus four.

So if we want to access the largest element in the list. Sorry I will
elaborate it. I must elaborate it to here with the help of comment. I will
command this. That. You see there, we are going to arrange the list.
We got this five here and put here. Then we get to the second number.
That is 16. We entered it. Then the third number that is largest larger is
thirty five. Then seventy nine. Then eighty nine. And then ninety nine.
And then hundred. And we remove it. And you see here that we have
sorted this list in the list in ascending. Order. So we have sorted
delisting ascending order, you see here that five is at Lord, please.
Hundred is at the higher place. So we want to access the asset. We
want to reach this element that is the law just in this case. So we will
specify here as minus one if you want to specify the minimum value. So
we will have to specify year zero. So in this case, we will assess this
element that is five. But in this program code, we will include minus one.
We will execute this code. So you see here that the largest number in
the list is hundred.

So let's suppose we remove this hundred. And we execute this scored
again. So you see here that the largest element is a 99. So we change
this. We do. We duplicate devalued 99, we have duplicated 99 in this
listing and we will execute this program again. So you see here that the
largest element in the list is the 99. So it ignores the duplicate value and
just shows us a single reserved largest number in the list. Is it 99? So
this program called Walls to find the largest number in the list with the
help, awful sorting list. And in our second example, we will use
maximum function. And in our third example, we will use the use up one
to enter the total number of elements in a list. And you will enter the
number of elements in the list.

PYTHON HOW TO FIND THE
BIGGEST NUMBER IN A LIST MAX
FUNCTION
this Python program is the second example to find the largest number
in the given list using maximum method.

So this is the list given to this Python program. This contains six
number of elements. The first element is nine. The second one is
hundred. And the third element is fifteen. And the last two element is
five. So this program will find the largest number that is handed in this
case. Here you'll see that we have commented that maximum mattilda
tons. The largest element of the list. Here we are going to put it, the
largest number of the list is.

So this will bring the largest number. We will execute this program and
see what happens. So you see here the largest number of the list is a
hundred. So let's force of each change it to read the. Oh. We are going
to change this with 500. We are going to do an experiment. We write an
added value that is five hundred and execute it again.
So you see here that the result is the largest number of the list is 500.
So we will perform another experiment to give you further knowledge.
We are going to change this with four hundred fifty point five. And here
we are going to change it with five, ten point one.

We will execute it again. So you see here that the answer is five
hundred ten point one. That is the largest number of the least as we
know that in Biton numbers out of teletypes, the first type is integer
type. The second is floating point. That is in points as we have
experimented here in the form of flawed. And the third is complex form
that is in the form of a plus J form. So numbers are represented in
Python in three forms. So I be presented this. I experimented this with
different numbers. First we tested discord with integers. Then we tested
it with the floating point.

SMALLEST NUMBER IN A LIST
PYTHON USING LIST APPEND
AND FOR LOOP
So in this example, code will find the smallest number in the user
provided list.

So user is all set to enter the number of elements to put in a list to
whatever he wants. So you didn't specify the total number of elements
in the list? That would be four, five, six, whatever. Then user enters the
elements one by one, and each input element is appended to the list
using a Pandu method. So there append to make a list that is specified
by the user. Then at the end of the program, the smallest element of the
list is displayed by the minimum function.

So we will run this program. We will execute it and see. What it shows.
So you see that. How many numbers? So how many numbers? It asks
you there, how many are numbers to enter? The user enters three
numbers in the list. The user wants to enter three numbers. So he gives
three as input. Then you see that. Enter number first number, so I put
the first number as one. A.S. No. So that would be five, six.
Whatsoever. The turn number three is ten. So there are three elements
in the list. Number one element is one. Second element is five. And the
third element is the ten. So we will enter it. And you see here, that is
some are left to element of the list, the the one. So we created a list of
all four, three elements in. One, five and 10, and we found the smallest
element of the list to really help awful minimum function. So a minimum
function is here. We found it with the help of minimum function. So you
see here that creating an empty list, this is a command to the user is
creating a list. The list is empty first, then the user enters the number of
elements to put in the list. So we put the numbers that were equal to
three.

We can also change it. We will run it again. And you'll see that we are
going to enter five numbers. We will execute it again. And see we put
two for first value five. Second value six. Third value samman four to
value and the lost value would be eight. So you see that the smallest
element of the list is for. So this list contained five elements, four, five,
six, seven, eight, and some are left to Element is four. So we can also
find the largest to. But we will replace this subminimum function with the
maximum function and the whole program will respond similarly. But it
will return the maximum element, three, the largest element in the list.
So in this program, we specified a list. We ask the user to enter the
number of elements that he wants to enter into list. Then the user enter
the total number of elements that we wish to enter. Then he gave the
input to all four of those elements. And this program gave the output of
this a more lasting number. So we use three examples.

SENDING EMAILS WITH PYTHON
we're going to explore sending emails with Python. To send emails with
Python. We actually have to go through a lot of steps. We have to
connect to what's known as an e-mail server, confirm that connection,
setup up a communication protocol, log into your actual e-mail account
and then send the message. Now, fortunately, the built in s.m T.P Lib
library that's already in Python makes these steps just really simple
function calls. So essentially, just making sure that you call the function
from the s.m T.P Lib library in the correct order. So I might be
wondering what is s.m T.P? Well, each major email provider has her
own simple mail transfer protocol server and it's essentially a domain
name that you connect to when you're trying to access your email
programmatically. And since G Mail is the most popular email hosting
service at this time, we're gonna do is walk you through how to connect
to G Mail. So we'll be using that G mail domain name. So we'll go over
this process vagy mail account. Now, something the special of G.M. is
for G.M. users because of security, things that have to do that are built
into a G.M. account. You're going to need to generate what's known as
an app password instead of your normal password. And this is
essentially not the password you use to log in onto your email from just
any computer. Instead, what's going to happen is will create a
specialized app password. And that's basically telling G.M., hey, you
have a special application somewhere out there in the world and it's
going to connect to your Gmail account through this separate
password. That way, in case this application gets compromised,
somehow that password that you originally used is not compromised.
So you're able to create a special password just for your Python script.
And it also lets [REMOVED] know that, hey, you're specifically
authorizing this other application. Our Python script to actually access
your account. OK. So let's explore this entire process.

We'll begin by importing the S empty IP. That's a simple mail transfer
protocol library. So s.m TDP Lib. And then what we're going to do is
create an s.m T.P object for a server and you can look at the table in
the corresponding notebook for your server domain name. But we'll be
using Gmail as our server. So we'll say s m t.p object. Is equal to M t.P
Lib. And we'll call s.m T.P function off of this, and then we'll provide the
actual domain server which is s.m t.p dot G.M. dot com. And then for
G.M., we can also provide a port. No. So we'll try five, eight, seven. If
for some reason the number five, eight, seven doesn't work and when
you try using this and running this, you get back some sort of error.
Something else you can try. Is using the port number four six five. If that
also doesn't work, you can try not passing in any number for the port.
No. Keep in mind, if you have a firewall or antivirus that may prevent
your Python script from trying to reach out and connect over the
Internet. The next step we need to do is run an e h. L o method
command, which greets the server and establishes the connection.
This method calls should be done directly after creating the object. So
make sure you follow these steps. Exactly. Calling it after. Other
methods will basically result in errors and connecting later on. So right
after you create the object, the very next line should be running this
E.H., L.O.. So we'll say grab our object and run E.H. Yellow, which

essentially greets the server. And when you run this, you should see
some sort of code that starts with 250. And this basically says that we
had a successful connection. Now, when using the Port five, eight,
seven. This means you're using t ellas encryption. So basically all email
as you send it is encrypted. That way people can't read your emails
without being the actual recipient. And in order to actually initiate this
sort of encryption, we're going to grab our object again.

S.M T.P object. And then we'll call the method starts T.L. s. If you
ended up using the port four, six, five, you can basically skip the step
because that means you're using SSL. OK. You should've gone to code
to 20 and it says, Ray, it's a start. T. Ellis, now it's time to set up the email and the passwords. Keep in mind that you should never save the
rostering of your password or e-mail in a script, because basically that
means that anyone that sees the script will be able to then see your email and password. Instead, what you should do is try using the input
function to get that information. If you don't want your password to be
visible when you're typing it in, you can also use the built-In get pass
library that will hide your password as you type it in. To further explain
what we mean by this, let's imagine we use the input function to save a
password. So we'll say, what is your password? And let's say we're

going to save this to some variable called password. If we were to run
this, if I were to type my password here, that would be visible to the to
the user. So what if I type here? Someone's going to be able to see it if
they're watching my computer. Now, a better way of doing this is say
import get pass. And then once you've done that, we'll say password is
equal to and you'll run get past that get pass. And you should be saving
this to a variable. And then we can provide. Password, please. And
then if we run this and we start typing something, you'll notice that it's
invisible. And you can type a really long password here. And even after
you run it, it won't really indicate how long your password was. So this
is a secure way to pass on information for people that are viewing your
computer. That rectally. So just in case that happens, you should be
using the get pass instead of just a simple input. It really depends on
how secure you want your script to be or your notebook to be. But we
should never do is just save your password as a variable directly. So
you should never just do something like this password and then say,
you know, password one, two, three. That's pretty insecure and pretty
dangerous. So you may end up losing your password that way. OK,
now let's go over a second step. And this is specifically for G.M. users
where we need to generate an app password instead of our normal
email password. And this also requires enabling two step
authentication. So there's a link in the notebook that you can follow as
far as the instructions set up, two step factor authentication as well as
the app password.

So let's go to that link right now. So if you go to that link, it will take you
to sign it using app passwords and it will say right here if you use two
step verification. So click on that two step verification link. And we need
to turn on two step verification. So this is actually quite simple. Just go
to the two step verification page here. You might have to sign into your
Google account, select, get started and then follow the step by step
process. So if you click here on two step verification.

They'll say, protect your account with two step verification. And I
actually recommend this doing any doing this anyways, even if you
don't intend to use python free e-mail because it's just safer for your
email address. So click get started once you've signed in. You should
see something that looks like this and that basically sets up your phone
number as the second factor of authentication. So you're going to need
to do this if you want to be able to send and receive emails with Python
on a G mail account. So you'll go ahead and type in the phone number
that you want to use and they'll confirm you with either a text message
or a phone call. And you'll go through those steps and then you'll have
to step verification. Ready to go if you already have two step verification
that you won't actually see this pop up. Instead, it'll just take you to your
security's page and Gmail. And that basically indicates that you're
actually ready to go. You already had to step verification. So you can
confirm that if you've ever received some sort of security code on your
phone from G.M. So that's setting up two step verification. Once you've
done that, we'll be able to setup our app password. So let's go back to
that link. And this is the link to sign and using app passwords. So we'll
scroll down here and we're going to now generate an app password.
We'll open this and we'll click this app passwords page. And there's
some instructions here on how to generate them. Go ahead, click on

out passwords. If you get this result here, it means that you have not
setup two factor authentication and you need to go back and do that.
So let's go ahead and show you what it looks like when you have set up
two factor authentication with two step verification authorized. You'll
have this app passwords page. You'll go ahead and select an app. In
this case, we want to use our mail app. So that's the app we want to
interact with. Then we can select the device. We will select our custom
name. And this will just be something like Script Python or really
whatever you want to call it.

Just something memorable so you can understand why you generated
this app password then hit generate. And it will generate an app,
passwd, for you. So you will copy this. And save it somewhere on your
computer, because that's the password are going to be using for our
actual log in,

so we'll come back here to our notebook and let's actually set up our email so we'll show you how to use get past just to remind you. We'll say
get passed. Get pass. E mail, we will say password is equal to get
pass. Don't get pass. Password. And then finally, we will say s.m T.P.
Object we'll call the Log-in method from that email and password. So
we're going to run this. So go ahead and type in your email address. In
this case, I'm typing in a G.M. address. And the next thing I'm going to
do is I'm going to paste in that app password. So, again, this is not your
normal Gmail password. This is the app password. So once you've
done that, you should see a code indicating that it was accepted. Now
we're able to send email. Keep in mind, if you stop right here, walk
away from your computer for a few hours and then come back, you
may be disconnected just because it took so long. So keep so keep
that in mind. You're going to want to if you're in the notebook setting, do
all your sending of your email immediately after logging in. Otherwise,
you may get disconnected and you'll have to regenerate. Another app
password so we can basically send an email.

We're going to need a couple of things, we'll need a from address. So
we need to indicate where the actual e-mails coming from. This is going
just to be your email again. So we'll say from address is equal to my
email. We need a two address. And that's going to be the email
address that you want to send it to. That's the e-mail of your recipient. I
will send myself an email here and then the subject line. So we'll have
that being input. So enter the subject line. And then we'll have the
actual body or message. We can also have that be input and through
the body message. And then the way the message is constructed is
asked to be subject colon space. Then the actual subject itself and then
a new line. And that indicates that the subject has stopped. And then
you paste in the rest of the message because the way the sexual
function is going to work is it's going to accept one giant string to
indicate both the subject and the message body. And in order to
differentiate between the subject and the message, it needs this sort of
format. Subject. Colon space than the actual subject title. And then a
new line. And then the rest of your message. So once you've done that,
you'll say s.m T.P object. You'll call the send the male method off of
this. And then you'll passant you're from address. Your to address, so
the others are sending, too. And then the actual string message. So I'm
sending right now an address for myself to myself. I recommend you

just do the same that we can quickly check it once you log in. But let's
run this. We'll enter the subject line and let's just enter subject. New
test, python, whatever really you want. And then enter the body
message. Hello. This is a test. Or again, whatever you want to send.
Run that. And right now it's sending it. If you get back an empty
dictionary, that means the sending was successful. So you should get
something like this back if you're getting an error. It's most likely having
to do with either your connection up here or your actual email and
password combination. Once you've been able to do that, you'll want to
quit and close your session. So you will say SMK, t.P. Object dot quit,
and that will now close my connection. Let's log in using our browser to
see if we received the message. And then later on we'll see how we
could do that same sort of functionality with Python. So I'm going to
now go to my e-mail inbox. And in my email inbox I can see sent zero
minutes ago is a message from myself. So blind carbon.

RECEIVING EMAILS WITH PYTHON
we're going to discuss receiving e-mails with Python, and when we talk
about receiving really what we're talking about is being able to explore
your inbox with Python. To be received e-mails of Python, we can use
the built in I map lib and email libraries in Python. So it's actually two
separate libraries names. That's a map lab is one library. And then
there's actually an e-mail library just called email in Python. And what
the eye map lib library alost to do is use its special syntax for searching
your inbox. And this is essentially the same kind of things you can
search for by going to just a normal computer and search your inbox.

So what I mean by that is if you take a look at this table and this table is
inside the lecture notebook, you essentially have special syntax
keywords and then a corresponding definition for them. So what this
allows to do is search for specific things from your e-mail folder. So, for
example, if you were just to use a keyword, all that would attempt to
return all the messages from your e-mail folder or your e-mail inbox.
And there are usually size limits of this. So if you want to change them,
you can begin actually editing the attributes to the map library. And
usually it's one hundred is going to be the limit. However, you can't
change that to really any number you want, but you should be careful
with all because that's just grabbing everything. Usually, however,
you're going to be filtering things by things like dates. So you can say
get all the messages before they are on a date or sense a date or do
things like retrieval messages from a particular user or email address or
all the messages that went to an email address using the two keyword.
And then you can also check things based off who is CCD, who is blind
carbon copy. Or you can do things like check for the subject, the body
text or whether you're not, you've answered it. Have seen it. Deleted it
or not. Deleted it. And so on. So lots of keywords here. Basically, all the
things you would expect to be able to filter by. Now, before beginning
this discussion, what I would like you to do is go ahead and send

yourself a test e-mail with a very unique subject line that doesn't
actually correspond to any other e-mail in your inbox. So just basically
choose a random color, maybe a random animal or something.
Something very unique that, you know, would only be returned by this
particular e-mail, because we're going to do is use this as a test e-mail
in order to retrieve it with Python. So we want to make sure this works.
So don't send yourself just a generic e-mail. Otherwise, we'll probably
grab too many. So let's begin exploring checking received e-mails of
Python. Let's hop to a notebook. The

first thing we're going to do is import the I IMAP. Lib Library that's built
into Python and we'll create an instance of it. And you can call this
variable whatever you want, but a lot of times people call it a capital M
and we'll say I map lib and then call a map for S. S L, and then we'll
pass in the I'm map server for a G mail, which is a map that G.M. dot
com. And then we need to grab our password and e-mail. So to do that,
you can either use input or get pass. We'll say that our. E-mail is equal
to. Get pass, get pass. Email, and then we'll also grab our actual
password for the e-mail. Get pass, get pass. And remember, for G.M.
users, this is your app password. So let's run this. We'll go ahead, enter
your e-mail for whatever you happen to be using. And then you can also

put in your password in this case, I'm putting in the app password. Let's
now connect, we can say. That log in. And Passant, email and
password. Run that. And you should be able to log in and you should
see some sort of authenticated success message there.

Once you've done that, you'll be able to type in and that list as a
method. Run that and you can see everything that you can check in
your particular email. Typically, you'll be checking your inbox beacon all
to see. You can check personal receipts sent trash things, label to
travel or work drafts, important sent mail, spam, start trash. So there's
lots of different options, different flags that G.M. or other e-mail
providers have for you.

We're going to select the most common one, which is your inbox.
Meaning we'll say m select and we'll passant inbox. Run that and then it
should say, OK, and some sort of connection, no to your inbox. Your
number will likely be different than mine here. And then now that we've
connected to our mail, we're going to be able to search for it using the
specialized syntax of a map. Now, the next step after we've logged in is
to actually search our inbox. And this is the sort of syntax you can use
to specify what messages you're looking for. In our case, we will
attempt to search for that e-mail that we just sent earlier. That was a
subject line, new test Python.

So we say type and data to basically doing tuple unpacking, because
the actual search function that we call is going to return a tuple and you
passan none as the first argument. And then the second argument is
the actual string that uses this sort of code. So you can say, for
instance, before and then format a date such as zero one November
2000. And this will essentially search our email and return back
everything sent before zero one November 2000. Or you could do on a
certain date or since a certain date. You can do from a certain string.
So, for example, you could say from. User at exampled dot com. And
maybe you didn't know who the actual user was at this example. Dot
com. Do the thing. You could say it's just from example. And it will
search for all the email addresses from and see if the string example is
in there. The other thing you can do that we're going to be doing is
search by subject. So notice how these keywords are capitalized. We'll
say subject. And then inside of this string, we'll have another substring.
And this will be the actual string. We're checking for. So the subject line
that we passed in last time was new test python. So that's what are
going to be searching here. Notice how it's a string inside of a string.
And let's run this. And see what we get, if you select type, it should say,
OK. And if you have data, it should have some sort of number. If you
don't have any sort of number returned here, it means it didn't find any

messages. If you have multiple numbers here and a list, that means it
found more than one message that relates to whatever search term you
are looking for. So this unique I.D. is the I.D. that references the actual
email. We don't have the e-mail itself yet to do that. We now need to
fetch the actual data.

So if we take a look at the first item in this list, it's this unique I.D. So we
will say I.D. is equal to also e-mail I.D.. E-mail I.D. is equal to that item
in the list, and then we'll say results. E-mail underscore data is equal to
M.. And then we end up fetching that particular e-mail I.D.. And then for
a second argument, we need a pass in a protocol and the perfect call
for that as a string with parentheses are F, C, eight to two. Now that
we've actually fetch the e-mail data, we can take a look at this e-mail
data. And it's basically going to be a bit of a sloppy mess. There's lots
of information here, the emails. But if you take a look down here, we
can see that we have the subject and we actually have the message we
sent. Hello. This is a test and and is all within a list within some tuples.
So we just want to grab the actual message itself. So we're going to do
is index for it. We'll type out raw email is equal to email data and its
indexed position. You may need to play around for this. But in our case,
it's at zero one. So that's the raw email itself. And we want the raw

email stream. We'll type out raw e-mail string is equal to this raw email,
and we're going to need to decode it. And the reason for that is
because there may be symbols such as the at symbol, which is
confusing the python sometimes. So we want to clarify that we're going
to decode it if UTF Dash eight encoding. And then once we've done
that, we can use the built in e-mail library to help pass that string. We
will import. Email. And this email library helps grab the actual message
from a stream, and the syntax is still a bit strange, but it looks like this.
You say e-mail message. And then from the email that we just
imported, we'll type out message from in this case or driving the
message from a string. And then we pass that raw e-mail string that we
just created. And then once you've done that, we need to do the
following. The actual e-mail message object here, if we take a look at it,
it's this iterator and what we need to do is say for. Every part in the
email message, the walk, so you can kind of walk through this email
message, object if part dot get content type. Is equal to. Text forward
slash plane. Then body is equal to parts dot get. Payload. And say
Decode is equal to true. And then prince the body. Now, this is quite
complicated, but the reason this is complicated is because we're
basically going from that rostering e-mail message and trying to get rid
of all the other information that came in through the e-mail data. There's
lots of different ways you could decide to look through the subject.
Once you have the sexual e-mail data yourself, it's optional to use this
e-mail library. Sometimes people feel that it's more of a hassle to use
this e-mail library and rather make their own custom scrip to grab the email data. And if you're dealing with e-mails that look the same every
time, maybe it's from some API service. It might make sense to not use
a sexual e-mail library that's built in. But if you do want to use this email library that's built in. Once you have the raw e-mail string from your
actual e-mail data, after you've decoded it, he type out e-mail message
from string. And then you say for part an e-mail message walk if the
part get content type, which basically asks, hey, what is the content
type of the part. And if it's equal to text four, slash plain meaning, it's
plain text. You grab the payload of that part, decoding it, and then that's
the actual variable that we want to see. So if we print this out, we
should be able to see the actual body of the message, which is, hello,

this is a test and this B indicates that it's a bite string just because the
way we read in that e-mail data. Keep in mind this sort of content type
check, text forward slash plain, that's if you only expect just plain text.
Well, you could also do is maybe expect text slash H.T. Amelle. And
that's really common. If someone has provided a link inside of the
email. So if you expect another link to be in the email that was sent to
you, you may want to check for text forward slash h t mail instead of
text forward slash plain. OK. That's it for the basics of checking your
received email with Python. Let's quickly go over all the steps. All you
have to do is import a map lib, make the connection to your map server.
So it's a map that G.M. dot com or I'm up that Yahoo dot com,
depending on what your actual domain provider is. Then grab your
email and password, log in. You can see a list of options, but typically
you'll be searching your inbox and then using the special syntax code.
You search for whatever you're looking for, whether it's particular
subject, whether it's particular email and it's from a date that it was sent
on. You get back the type and data and the data recall is just a list of
actual email I.D. Once you have the email I.D., you need to fetch them.
And here are fetching a singular email I.D. and we pass in this protocol
for fetching it. And then we have the email data and it's kind of up to
you what you want to do at that point, because it's a bit of a mess.

PRINT THE SMALLEST NUMBER
IN A LIST PYTHON USING LIST
SORT
This prudence in this program code, we will find the smallest number in
the given list. We will perform this with different methods. So in this
block of code, we will use sort function.

So here we are using saw function Desart function, source the list in the
ascending order so we can get the smallest number of the sorted list by
choosing its first element. So we know that if we saw the list in
ascending order, then the Somalo element will be at the side left side
and the higher element with the higher value will be at the right side of
the list. So. Dear friends, we will share it, this program. This is the
Python program to find some left no in a list. So it is a given list of
numbers. You see that this is the list of numbers it contains. These
items. Eighty nine hundred thirty five. Sixteen ninety nine. Seventy nine
and five. So this list has two, four, six, seven elements. So first, we will
sort it in ascending order, sorting the given list like yes list. So sort
function. Source the list in ascending order. So this is the function to
sort the list. This will sort the list in ascending order. So then we will sort
the list. Then we will apply the function here. You see that list. And it's a
minimum element that is zero. So in the list, the first element is zero. I
mean, at zero, please. Second element is at one place. So you see that
we are going to run this called.

You will run this. It will take some time. So you see that the smallest
number in the list is five. So. You see here that five, it is on my left
number in the list. So this program is about finding this on my left
number in a list. So if we, uh, if we changes some number with five and
see what happens. So you see that it will return the same result. Save
me. Change this with six. Six would be the lowest number. So we
execute it. So we have these duplicate values. So it is returning six as
on third. So it was an experiment, a little bit of experiment. So let's
suppose we include a floating point of forward, fully floating point, sorry,
in this say, five point five. And instead of these six, I include five point
four.

So we will execute this program and see what happens. So surely it will
show us that 5.5, five point four is the minimums. Some are less
number in the list. So this program is about the US number. So
numbers in Python include integer floating point and complex number.
So you see here that some are last number in the list is five point four.
So you see here that five point four is minium. Then some are less.
Then all these. So this method was about finding the smallest number
in the list to read. Sorting function and with the help of for lease zero.
So it finds these are my last number.

HOW TO FIND THE SMALLEST
NUMBER IN A LIST PYTHON
USING MIN FUNCTION
we will use minimum function instead of sorting function to find
someone somewhat less number in the given list.

So we see that this is the list of numbers. And here we have used
minimum function to find this number less number in the given list. So
the main minimum method to turn my list, smallest element, two of the
list.

We will execute it and you'll see that it returns five as the minimum
number in this given list. So we can also replace these with the five.
And check it again, as we did in the first example. You'll see that the
answer is five. We can also change it to 30 with the floating point five
point four. And here we will replace three with one point three. So let's
see what happens. We will execute it. So you see that one point three?
Is this someone left? No. Off the list. That is one point three. And that is
found by this function, minimum function. So this is the second example
to find the some are less number in the GIMA list. I and I, you haven't
elaborated this with the second example. So you can understand this
ward well. So I will elaborate this with third example.

SUM OF ALL DIGITS IN A NUMBER
PYTHON
In this Python program, we will find the sum of all the digits of an input
number. So we will enter a number.

So first we are going to show the result is equal to zero. And the
statement will hold the number. Then it will calculate the sum with the
help of from loop. So this here, while outrage through all the digits to
offer input number. Why number is greater than zero. So this is the
body of loop. Then we will print the sum of all digits as a result. So we
will execute this. We that we are going to add one hundred and twenty
three. So you see here that it airs these numbers, three plus two plus
one is equal to six.

So we will execute this program again and we will add five fifty five. So
the result is five plus five plus five is equal to fifteen. So the basic
purpose of this program code is to find the sum of all the digits of an
input to no say five five five is equal to five plus five plus the five. Or
one, two, three, four is is equal to one plus two plus three plus four. So
that would be equal to four plus three samon plus two nine plus 10.

So we executed and we will enter one, two, three, four. And here you
see there's some of all the digits of one, two, three, four are equal to 10.
So the body of a while, Neuville execute two. It will outrate through all
the digits to offer.

SUM OF N NATURAL NUMBERS IN
PYTHON USING WHILE LOOP
This is a program to calculate the sum of any natural numbers. So and
this program denotes up to which number you want to calculate the
sum.

For example, if any is equal to six, then the sum all forces natural
numbers will be presented here. So these are the comments, multi-line
comments. We have initiated them with the hash sign. Here you see
that number is equal to in input and to the value of N. Here we will enter
the numbers for which we are going to find these so far and some how
you see that hold is able to num it will hold the number until V.V. will
visit our final sum. So some is equal to zero. Initially the sum is equal to
zero. It is stored zero in this. What are you able if number is less than
zero. So this is a condition if number is less than equal to zero. Print
enter a whole positive number. So this program will also use it to enter
the will positive number if they enter number is less than or equal to
zero. As here, the body of why loop will start while the NUM number is
greater than zero. Sum is equal to some plus numbers of what is meant
by this. So let's pause. We are starting from six. So six. Six plus five. So
here we see that six plus five is equal to a lemon then. I will commend
this. This is necessity. Eleven. Then this. Eleven plus four is equal to
fifteen. Then this fifteen. Plus three is equal to 30 days, equal to 18. 18
plus. Two will be equal to 20. Then 20 plus one would be equal to 21.
So you see here that. This is equal to this one. And what is the purpose
of this number? Is equal to number minus one. So here you see that the
first number was six. Then we entered a number lower than that

number. That was five. You see here that number minus one. Then the
number is here. That is four. Then the lower number number minus one
is three. Then we will enter two. And then we will enter one. So the
purpose of this statement is to enter here. That number that goes in
lower value. Five, four, three, two, one. And the original sum. This is the
original sum. Alarming here. And the number is here four. That is due to
the result of this statement. Then this sum is equal to this sum. Eleven
plus five. This statement. Fifteen. So that is yet. Fifteen plus three. You
see here that this statement will return. Number is equal to number
minus one. Previously the number was four. No it is the number minus
one. That is equal to four minus visible to three. And here we are going
to add 15 plus three. This statement will run this and then we will
execute this line. That will give us three. Minus one is equal to two. And
then we will again add this.

We will as you the statement, so similarly the body of law will execute
until we will reach the lost number. Then this will bring you some of the
first national numbers. So we executed and see what happens. We
enter six and you see here that some of six natural numbers is 21. You

see here that we have added the manual manually and we are going to
enter five here and check. So this is 15.

And in the case of three, that would be equal to three plus two plus one.
So you see here the three plus two plus one is equal to 660 is the
output. Some of the first national numbers is equal to six. So as we
know, there are two national numbers include numbers from the one
two, so on while whole numbers include zero. So here we have
specified that our condition, if number is less than equal to zero, then
three whole positive number. So we will execute this program with
these and input all four zero. So you see here that it says that entry a
positive number. Some are forced to zero Nessel numbers. Is it zero?
So we can not find the sum in case we entered this zero sum would be
equal to zero. So in it, this is a program to find the sum of foster and
national numbers and can be any number. It may be it may be, say, 50.
So we find the sum of first 15 national numbers. So this school, this
program can be renamed with with the title. There is finding some
awful.

NUMBERS DIVISIBLE BY OTHER
NUMBERS
In this program, we will find the numbers, DIY, Zippel by and other
number and then display it.

We will take a list of numbers in the list, my list. We are going to enter
some numbers here that are in the form of a list. These are the
elements of list, these 26 36. These are the elements of my list. Then
we will use anonymous function to filter. We will use lambda function
and filter the. No. With the help of this, we will filter the reserves. Then
after that, we will display the result with the help of this line. We will print
reserve print numbers day visible by 12:00 or and we will display the
results here.

We are going to execute this program. So you see here that the output
numbers, DIY ziebell by 12 are to well. Twenty four, forty eight and
thirty six. You see that the arrangement is same as in the list. We have
all sorted in ascending or descending order. We will have to use
another function. Thar or outthought function to thwart these. But we
are not using it here. So if you want to check, call. Some other thing we
will specify here. Let's suppose we want to specify 13. We want to see
that if we're any number in the list is DIY Izabel by 13 or not. We will
execute this called. So previously, we have found that all the numbers
divisively by Velvel shown here. Here you see that number advisable
by. Here I am, not jundi input. This is the same. While we are displaying
the numbers that are divisively by 13.

So I will also have to change year 13 so that we can see the output
here a13. I will execute it again. So here you see the number DIY Zable
by 13 are 65, 39, 52 and 26. So in this list, two off one, two, three, four,
five, six, seven, eight, nine elements. We have found four numbers that
are divisively by 13. So we have found this with the help of anonymous
lambda function. So anonymous means that the function is without a
name, as we know that to define keyword D.F. key word is used to
define the normal function and do. Lamda, the word is used to create
anonymous function. We see that here we are using lambda function.
So this is the anonymous function. So this function can have any
number of arguments, but only one expression which is evaluated and
returned. So, you know, about this lambda function, lambda functions
can be used with the other beaten between functions such as list, filter
and reduce map cetera. We can also use with them. So Lember
definition does not include a written statement. We know that in defining
a function, the effort if we include a written statement. So after
execution, we also need to return. The result from VRT function was
called using the return key word in case. Awful. When we define the F
defining function. Well, in case of lambda function, we don't need to
include a return keyword. So dysfunction is quite different. And it is
seem simple to use. So in this program we saw that we entered a list

too. We can also enter list with the help of prompt. As we see in our
other program calls in other examples in other with your lectures. But
here we have shown you with this help of already hardcoded this list.
We have also told you that what is the ME and what is meant by hard
coding or hardcoded so hard coded words are those hard coded things
that that have already been specified in the computer world. So we
already specify them. We can naughties them until we modify them. So
we have hardcoded these values into this program. Then we applied
lambda function only to and we figured the result with the help of this
parameter, we filter the result with the help of four Fuster. Twelve
number two. Well then we sorted the desert with the help ofa number
13.

Then let's check it again. Uh, c three. So we as a unit, again, we see
that. 13, we will also change it. Terry will execute it again. So no
divisively by three are to, well, 24.

ADVANCED NUMBERS
and welcome to the Advanced Numbers lecture. In this lecture we're
gonna go over a few more representations of numbers in Python

and then a few of the built in methods that have to do with numbers in
Python. Should be a pretty brief lecture, but an interesting one. Just
going through the Jupyter notebook, we're gonna look at hexadecimal,
representation of numbers, binary representations of numbers and
then a couple of built in functions for numbers. In case you're not
familiar with hexadecimal formatting or binary formatting,

I went ahead and linked the Wikipedia pages for both those formats,

and you can check them out, as far as the descriptions and how they
actually work here. So, I won't be teaching you what 18 hexadecimal
numbers actually are, what binary numbers actually are, you can go
ahead and read about that on the Wikipedia page yourself. I figured

these two topics are only useful if you're familiar with the computer
science topics or in your math classes and were curious on how to do
it in Python.

Quick overview on how to do them in Python, for hexadecimal
numbers, you call it, hex, built in function and it will convert numbers
into the hexadecimal representation of numbers.

For instance, if I call there, it returns the hexadecimal, a
representation of that number and let's just do another one such as,
512 and there's another representation of it. If you're interested in
binary representation in numbers, you can use the bin function and
that will return the binary representation of some numbers. For
instance, we just go for some classics, just 128s or 512, you can see
those in the binary representations of those numbers, if you're familiar
with binary representation.

Okay, now let's go over some more common built-in functions, so we
know that we can call to the power using two asterisks, but there's also
a function for that, so you can code, pow and it will do the same thing.
If you put in three arguments, such as this, what will happen is, the
third argument will be treated as mod, so with two arguments, it's the
equivalent of x to the power of y, x and y are your first and second,
respectively. But with three arguments, it's equivalent to x to the
power of y, mod z and this just has to do with some efficiency cases.
In case you're interested in why there's a whole built in function for
that.

Now, there's also an absolute value function, which is abs, which will
return the absolute value of a number that you put into it. There's also
the round function, and it'll round the number to a given precision in
decimal points, and by default, it's zero, so following it to around, let's
say 3.1, it will round it off to zero decimal points. For instance, to make
it clear, if I also put in just three, it rounds it off to zero decimal points,
or if I put in 3.9, it rounds it off to zero decimal points here, to just four.
Okay, interesting to note though, it always returns a floating point
number, which is why you're seeing that point zero there. You can
also specify how many digits you want after decimal points, so for
instance, if you had the longer representation of pi, let's say, you only
wanted to see two decimal places past the points, you can add that in
as a second argument. Okay, that's really all there is for the advanced
numbers, should have been a pretty brief and straightforward topic,
main takeaways are, there's the hex and bin functions for you, in case
you're interested in that. There's also these built in functions, abs,
round and also pow, for power and Python also has a built in math
library, which maybe useful to play around in case you're ever in need
of some more mathematical operations.

ADVANCED STRINGS
So string objects have a variety of methods we can use to save time
and add functionality.

So let's go ahead and create a string called hello world and let's
explore some different methods we can use. So let's start with
changing case. So we can change cases to upper and lower case and
there's a couple methods we can use. One of them is the capitalise
method and what the capitalise method does is it capitalises the first
word in a string. We can also use the upper method which you may
have seen before to uppercase every letter in a string, and then we
can also use the lower to lowercase every letter in a string.

There's also location and counting methods. So if I wanted to for
instance count how many O's there are in a string I can use the count
method, and I can also find them. So I can say find the first occurrence
of an O, and I'll return the index where that happens. Well there's also
formatting methods and these are a little strange and they're also not
used that often, but it still might be good to know them in case you
ever run into them.

The first one we're gonna talk about is the centre method. So let's go
ahead and check our string. It's still just hello world, since we
lowercased it again, and what the centre method does is it allows you
to place your string centred between a provided string of a certain
length. So these are pretty esoteric and I've actually never seen this
used in code but it's still a method you can use. So for instance let's
say you wanted to centre your string hello world between a bunch of
Z's and you wanted the total length of that string to be . Then this is
what it would look like. So we centred hello world between Z's and the
total length of the string is . Okay, there may not be too many use
cases for that and I've personally actually I've never used it. Another
this method that we may or may not use is the expand tabs method.
So for instance if I say hello T and that will break it to a tab, woops, let
me make sure that it's working. So this back slash T when you print it
it will be an escape character for a tab. So it will actually hello tab hi.
So this is gonna be useful if you ever find yourself parsing through all
that text data, and instead of having to print it what you can actually
do is just call the expand tabs method, and it will do the same thing.
Again, not used that often. Let's go ahead and check out some other
methods that check if the string is some sort of case.

So for instance I'm going to set a string just called hello and there's a
method called isalnum and this checks if all the characters in S are
alphanumeric, and in this case it's true, and what we can also do is
just check if they're all alphabetic. So numeric doesn't count anymore.
So we can just check is alpha and that's also true. These are actually
quite useful and I have seen them used a lot, especially if you find
yourself doing some sort of natural language processing techniques.
Another couple of ways, or a couple methods we can use is is lower
and this will return true if all case characters in S are lowercase, and if
there's at least one case character in S. We can also check is space
and it'll return true if all characters in S are white space. In this case
that's not the case, so it should return false. So is space which will
return true if all characters and that's our white space. It's false since
we have letters in there. Another method called is title. So we can
check is title and what that does, it's gonna, it'll only return true if S is
a title case string, and there's at least one character in this.

So uppercase characters may only be, may only follow uncased
characters and lowercase characters only follow cased ones. Another
method is upper, and that will return true if all the cased characters in
this are uppercase. So, is upper. This case, it's false. But if I were to
say let's say hello all uppercase and then I asked is upper on that, then
that is true. All right. One last method for checking cases is ends with.
So I could check S that ends with and let's say I wanted to verify that it
ends with O. Yeah, and this is basically the same thing as just doing
this, right? Checking if that last character in the string is equal to
something. That's, and it returns a Boolean. Okay, so now we're
gonna move on to some built in regular expression operations. So
strings have some built in methods that can resemble full on regular
expressions operations, and

one of them that's really commonly used is split, and we can use split
to split the string of a certain element and return a list of the results.
So let's check our string, which is hello, and let's say we wanted to
split the string at E. Then split will return the result in a list, so
everything before that E, and then everything after it, and remember, it
only separates at the first occurrence. Excuse me, it'll actually separate
at every occurrence of E. So just to make that clear I'll show you an
example. So if I have a string that's, looks something like this, I could
say split at I and it'll split it up at every instance of that I.

Okay, there's also partition, which is pretty similar to split but in this
case what partition does is it will have the head, the sep, and the tail.
So what I'll do is it will search for the separator which ever you feed it
in the arguments and S that string and return the part before it, the
separator itself and the part after it, and then if the separator is not
found it returns S and two empty strings. So, for instance if I said
partition of I here this one is at the first instance, instance of I, or
whatever separator you put in. So it'll give you the first part, the
separator, and then everything else that happened after it. So unlike
split which splits at every instance, partition will only do it at the first
instance, and it will also return the separator in the middle. So the
front, separator, and the back.

Okay, so that's it as far as the lecture on strings. Let's just go ahead
and do a quick review. A lot of these were Boolean checks so I know
that was kind of hard to keep track of. It's probably better just to read it
along in the Jupyter notebooks, but we went over methods for
changing case, such as capitalise, upper, and lower. We looked at
location and counting such as counts and finds.

We looked at a few esoteric formatting ones, such as centre, also
expand tabs, and then is check methods so that all of the tonnes of
methods to check if the string is in some case, such as isalnum, is
alpha, is lower, is space, is title, is upper, and ends with. And then we
looked at some built in regular expressions, such as splits and
partitions. Okay, so you should feel comfortable using the variety of
methods that are built into string objects and you should definitely feel
comfortable if you run into them when you're reading someone else's
code.

ADVANCED SETS
we'll start by going over the basic ones you already know and then dive
a little deeper. So as always, there's a jupyter notebook that has
everything we're gonna go over as well as many examples. So you
can go ahead and check that out.

So let's go ahead and look at Advanced Sets first. So in this lecture,
we'll start with some of the basics.

So we'll start with building our set s2, and then how do we add things
to a set. Well we just use the add method. So here I'm gonna add one
to my sets. And I'll add two. And remember, a set won't take any
duplicate items. It only presents them one, that's what makes it a set.
So if I were to try to add two again. I only get one, two. So we know
we can add with add.

So we can also clear or remove all the elements from a set using the
clear method. And that looks like this. So if I check my set, now it's
empty. So, another interesting method that you may not have seen yet
is copy, which returns a copy of the set. So to show you that example.
Here I have a set one, two, three. And I'm going to set a variable called
SC to a copy of that. And now SC is one, two, three. So it is a copy,
so changes to the original won't affect the copy.

So if I say s.add Here is my original. There's the copy. Okay. So,
what about a couple of more methods that you haven't seen yet such
as the difference method. So difference method is a super useful
method, and it returns the difference of two or more sets. So the
syntax looks like this. You provide your set called difference and then
the set you wanna check the difference between. So the only
difference between S2 and SC, is this four element. So it returns the
elements that are different. And so another really interested related
method is difference update, and what difference update does is the
method returns set one after removing elements from set two if you
have this sort of format here. So, I just copy and pasted this from the
jupyter notebook. So the syntax looks like this. You have set one, you

call for the difference underscore update with set. And the method
returns set after removing all the elements that were found in set.

So I'll show you an example of what this looks like. I'll create a new set,
s. Create another new set, s. This one'll have one, four, five. And now,
if I call s difference update with s. And then I'm gonna call s again. So
note what I get back, two, three. So the matching elements between s
and s was the one element here, number one. And what
difference_update did was it returned the first set after removing all the
elements found in the second one. In which case, it would've been
one, so you get back two, three. Another interesting method is the
discard method. And it removes an element from a set if it's a
member. So if the element's not a member it doesn't do anything. So,
I'll show you what I mean by that. So, let's go ahead and check out this
set. We have S2, which is one, two, three, four,

and I can discard let's say I discard the two element. And if it's in the
set, it'll get rid of it. If it's not in the set, say , nothing happens. So you
don't get an error if it's not in the set, something to keep in mind.
Okay. Now let's go ahead and learn about the intersection method,
another very useful method for sets. And what it does2, it returns the
intersection of two or more sets as a new set. And the intersection is
just the elements that are common to all the sets. So let's go ahead
and redefine s and s. So one, two, three, four, and then s is gonna be
equal to one, whoops one, two, four. Okay. And what I'm gonna do is
check for the intersection of the two.

And there's an intersection update method which we'll learn about in
just a second. So, s and s2, the elements that are common to both of
the sets is one and two. Alright. So, intersection update will update a
set with the intersection of itself and another. So if I try this method on
s. Notice s is one, two, three. But if I say s intersection update with
s2, it will actually update set one to be equal to the intersection of set
one with s. So s was one, two, three, and now it's gonna be with
intersection update, equal to, whoops2, that intersection. So now if I
check s it's one, two. So let me just break that down cause I know it's
a lot of ones and twos that I'm saying. So originally, set one was the
numbers one, two, three, and set two was the numbers one, two, four.
So the intersection, or the elements that are in common between them
are the numbers one and two, that's their intersection. And with
intersection update it basically makes the first set equal to that
intersection. So if I check it again here after the update, I just get one,
two back. Okay. So, now we're gonna check a method called
isdisjoint. So I'm gonna create a few sets to show you how it works.
So I'm gonna create three sets. s2, so it's one, two. I'll create s2,
which is one, two, four. And let's say s is equal to just five. Okay. So,
this method was gonna return true if the two sets have a null
intersection. So for instance, s is disjoint s. Is going to return false.

Which makes sense because they did have an intersection. They have
one, the elements number one and number two are in common
between the first two sets. Now, for instance, s2, and s here, don't
have any things in common. So they don't have an intersection which
means they have a null intersection. So if I was to say s isdisjoint with
s2, I should get true, because they do have a null intersection.
Another interesting method is is subset. And the method reports
whether another set contains this set. So if I look at what s equals, it's
one, two. If I look at what s equals, it's one, two, four. So you notice s
is a subset of s2,

and we can check that by asking is subset with the is subset method
and this will return true. And then basically the reverse of that is is
superset. So the method reports whether the set contains another
set. So I can reverse this and say is s is superset of s. And that's also
true, so they're just the inverse of each other. Alright. Now we're
gonna learn about a method called symmetric difference. And there is
also a symmetric update to go along with it. So, symmetric difference
will return the, symmetric difference of two sets, and what that is it's all
the elements that are exactly in one of the sets. So you can think of
this as basically the opposite of the intersection. So if we have s that's

one, two, and we have s that's one, two, four, then the elements that
are only in one of the sets is that four element, right. So I can check for
the symmetric difference. And that will return four, since that's the
element that's in exactly one of the sets. Okay. And then there's also
a update to go along with that as well. If you wanted to change s into
just the symmetric difference or four. Movin' along, I will now go over
union. So, the union method returns the union of two sets. And that's
all elements that are in either set. And that will be here in this case,
one, two, four, because one, two, and four are in either set. Okay.
And last but not least we'll go over the update method. And it updates
a set with the union of itself and others. So that means if I said
s.update s. If we check s it's now the exact same result as if we
asked the union on itself and another one, s. Okay, so you should
have an at least now a complete awareness of all the methods
available to you for a set object type. I personally think the data
structure is under-utilized by beginners. So, try to keep it mind when
you're trying to do comparisons or looking for unique values. The data
structure itself is extremely useful,

and let's just take a brief overview of everything we learned as far as
methods. So, we know about the add method which adds elements to

a set. The clear method which removes all elements from a set. The
copy method returns the copy of a set.

The difference returns the difference of two or more sets, has that
syntax.

Remember there's a lot of update methods which will change the first
set in that method.

The discard which removes an element from a set if it's a member. If
the element's not a member it doesn't do anything, so it won't throw up
an error. Intersection returns the intersection of two or more sets2,
which is just the elements that are in common to all of the sets. Also
has an update method. Isdisjoint returns true if they have a null
intersection, so they don't share any elements.

Issubset reports whether another set contains that set. Issuperset,
the inverse of that. Symmetric difference will return all elements that
are in exactly only one of the sets. And then you can update it as well.

ADVANCED DICTIONARIES
Unlike some of the other data structures we worked with, a lot of the
useful methods available to us in dictionaries have actually have
already been explored throughout this project.

We're just gonna touch on a few methods for dictionaries in this
lecture and also dictionary comprehensions. Let's go ahead and get
started with the live code. As always the Jupyter Notebook's available
for you if you wanna check it out as well.

Let's start by creating a very simple dictionary. We'll just have two
keys. K1 with a value of one and we'll also have K2 with a value of
two. Okay, so here's a dictionary D and what we're gonna do is use
that later on. So that's just to remind you for the syntax of a dictionary.
If you remember from the list comprehension lecture, we were able to
construct lists using list comprehension. So just like list
comprehensions, dictionary data types also support their own version
of comprehension. It's not super common to use it as much as list
comprehension, but let's go ahead and still learn the syntax for it. So
we'll start with a pair of brackets and then what you do is you define
the key and then the value in the same colon notation you would for a
normal dictionary, and then you write whatever conditions you want.
So in this case, what I'm gonna do, is say have the key be X and the
value be X squared for X in range zero up 10 to . So if you noticed
we've actually been able to create a dictionary through this dictionary
comprehension. Another question that might come up is: what if you
wanna assign keys that are not based on the values?

Well you could use zip in a manner like so: so I can say, zip, maybe
pass in a list, here I'll just write a short list so I don't have to write too
much. And then zip it, let me close off that string, with a range, let's

just do range of two here, and then we'll do [two-pole] [im-pack-ings]
so we'll say, key value value squared key, and looks like I
accidentally forgot parentheses there. And there you have it. So
again, this really isn't as common as list comprehensions. List
comprehensions you'll see all the time. Dictionary comprehensions it
becomes hard to read, especially if you're trying to assign key names
that are not based off values. So, it's good that you're aware of it but I
wouldn't have it be your go-to throughout your coding. But who knows
if it's called for and it makes sense, go for it. All right, so next up we're
just gonna review iteration over keys, values and items. So
dictionaries can be iterated using their iter methods. If you're using
Python 2 so I can say, for K in D dot iter, and you have iteritems,
itervalues, iterkeys. So here we have our iteritems. Let's just go ahead
and see what that look s like. Print, we'll say K. And notice iteritems
actually returns two poles of both the keys and the values. We can
also do just the values.

And there we have it. And we can also do just the keys. And there you
have that. You can also use view methods to view the items, keys and
values. If you're using Python 2 you can say, you can actually grab all
delete it and just say, D dot view items. That's the function, so you

have to close it off. And it'll show you this object that's a view items,
and then we can also say view keys. And then you probably guessed
already, you can say view values. And there you have that. So that's
really all the other methods that are in dictionaries. So we haven't
covered or seen throughout this project. So I wouldn't say dictionary
comprehensions are super common, and depending which Python
version you use, iteration over keys may be different for you. If you're
using Python , you won't have to worry about the generation issues.
And as far as view items, if you have a large dictionary, you're gonna
wanna be careful calling this because you may just get a huge output.

ADVANCED LISTS

So, in this series of lectures, we're gonna be diving a little deeper into
all the methods available in a list. So, these aren't officially advanced
features, just methods that you wouldn't typically encounter without
some additional exploring. So, we've actually seen quite a few of
these, append, count, extend, index, insert, pop, remove, reverse,
sort, so we may have seen a lot of these already just by using lists and
in the Methods lecture itself, but let's go ahead and go over them just
in case you need a refresher.

Okay, so let's start by making a very simple list. I'll call it l, and I'll have
one, two, three in it. You definitely should've used this method by now.
It's append, whoops. It's the append method, and of project, it just
appends an item to your list. Alright, so we discussed this also a
number of times,

the count method. So, we can use the count method, and it'll count
how many times an object occurs in your list. And, it'll actually count
whether it's in there or not, so notice how I count a , doesn't occur any
times. One occurs once in my list. So, moving along, here's one that
you may not have heard of, and, or may not have used yet. It's called
extend. So, many times people find the difference between extend and
append to be unclear. So, I'm gonna show you by means of example.
So, let's go ahead and make a list called x. It's just like y, it's, er just
like the l list, it's gonna have one, two, three. I'm going to append
another list to that. And, this list will contain four, five. And then, I'm
gonna say print x. Okay, so what happened here? So, remember
append just adds the entire element to the list, so what's it's doing here
is it's adding this and appending this list to an element in itself. Now,
what happens if you wanted to extend this list into your original list?
So, that's where extend comes in. So, now I'm gonna show you again,
but in this time we're gonna use extend. So, I'm gonna say x.extend
and pass in a list again with just two elements, four, five. Then, I'm
gonna say print x. So, notice the difference here. You're actually
adding in the entire list. So, your extend will append each element in
that iterable. And, that's the key difference there. So, again, just to
cover append is going to append elements just the entire iterable, all
the elements in it. And, what extend does is appends elements
individually from the iterable. Alright, so let's move along. Take a look
at our l list that has one, two, three in it, or one, two, three, four, excuse
me.

And, index is another method that we've probably seen already. So,
what does index do? Index will return the index of whatever element is
placed as an argument. So, let's find the index of two. And, it's one,
right? 'Cause, yeah, indexing starts at zero, zero, one, the object at
the one index is two. Something to note here is that you will get an
error if you try to index something that's not in your list. And, it'll tell
you very clearly value error is not 10 in list.

Alright, let's move along with insert. So, what does insert do? Insert
takes in two arguments. It takes in index and the object. So, this
method places the object at the index applied. So, for example, let's
just make sure we know what l looks like. L looks like one, two, three,
four. And, what I'm gonna do is in that list I'm going to insert at index
two a string called inserted. So, note the order here of the arguments.
You put in the index first and then the object you want to insert. So,
what does my list look like now? Notice how it has the inserted at the
two index. So, zero index, one index, and at the two index it's placed
this string inserted here. So, again, you put your index in first and then
the object you wanna insert second. Okay, might be useful if
throughout your code you really wanna make sure that you know the
particular index of an object. Okay, moving along, you've definitely
already seen pop,

which allows you to pop off the last element of a list. So, again, here's
the list, and I can pop. And by default, it's the last element in that list.
So, I set l pop equal to ele, and ele, you notice it was four. And again,
remember that change is permanent. It's in place on your list. Okay.
So, something else to note is that you can pass in an index into pop.
So, I could say pop zero, notice how it's one, so now l looks like this,
two, inserted, three. So, what's another method for a list that we can
use?

Remove is another method. So, the remove method removes the first
occurrence of a value. So, for example, I have my list, and let's say I
wanna rem ove that string inserted. So, I pass in the value, and it will
now remove it in place. So, I wanna show you one more example with
this, just to make sure you get the idea that it's only removing the first
instance of it. So, here you notice my list is one, two, three, four, three.
There's two threes in it. So, if I say l.remove it's only going to remove
the first instance of it. So, that's something to keep in mind with
remove. Another method we can use if I see l here is reverse, and as
you might guess, reverse just reverses your list and reverses the
indexes for them. So, note that this occurs in place, so it will affect
your list permanently. And, we can also use a sort method on our list.
And, sort will sort your list also in place. So, those are all the methods
on a list. Some of them we've covered a lot. Some of them might be
new to you. But, just go ahead and again review the Jupyter notebook.
Make sure you understand everything. So, let's just go a quick
rundown of everything we learned. So, append, you've definitely used
this method. It appends an element to the end of a list.

Count, we've discussed this as well. It'll count how many times that
object takes place in your list. Whether or not it actually occurs in your
list it won't return error.

Extend, here's the tricky one. Remember in extend appends each
element in that iterable, so it appends here four and five, not just the

list with four, five.

Index will return the index of whatever element's placed in as an
argument. But remember, it has to actually be in the list, otherwise you
get an error.

Insert takes in two arguments, first the index and then the object. So,
here we insert it at two, this word or string inserted. And, notice now
it's inserted in the set index two.

Pop, we've seen that already, allows us to pop off the last element of a
list, or we can also pass in a specific index if necessary.

Remove, the remove method removes the first occurrence of a value,
so we just saw an example of that.

Reverse, as you know reverses a list, and sort will sort your list in
place. So, both reverse and sort are in place and will affect your list
permanently.

ADVANCED PYTHON OBJECTS
ASSESSMENT TEST

So, this will actually be probably a pretty brief test. But an interesting
one. As always, just go to the advanced Python objects test.
Notebook. You can click the download link on the right. And fill it in
yourself. I'm just gonna go over the problems quickly so there's no
confusion.

First problem that you're gonna do is convert the number to binary and
hexadecimal representation. Problem two. I want you to round .
5.23222 to two decimal places. That was a lot of twos.

Okay, next moving on the the advanced strings. Here, I want you to

check if every letter in the string S is lower case. And, use the
methods you've learned in this section of the project. Problem four,
what I want you to do is check how many times does the letter W
show up in the string below. After that, advanced sets. Problem five.
I want you to find the elements in set one that are not in set two. Then,
I want you to find all the elements that are in either set for problem six.
In advanced dictionaries, problem seven. I want you to create this
dictionary right here. So, note the pattern, what's going on? And then I
want you to use dictionary comprehension to create that dictionary.

Then advanced lists, just reverse and sort the list below. Okay, that's
it and good luck. Honestly, if you're this far into the project, you may
not even feel like you need to be tested,

so if you feel that way, go ahead and feel free to skip this advanced
Python objects test.

ADVANCED PYTHON OBJECTS
TEST – SOLUTIONS
go quickly through the solutions of the Advanced Python Objects Test.

Okay, so first one you had to do is use bin and hex functions in order to
do these conversions. After that you had to use the round function, in
order to round.

Problem three I was expecting you to use the is lower method

and then similarly in problem four it was another method, first string
count and then w. Advanced sets, the methods here were difference
for problem five, and union for problem six.

Advanced dictionaries, this one might have been tough if you didn't
see the pattern. And also dictionary comprehension in general is a
little strange, but this was the solution for the dictionary
comprehension, it was just cubing all those numbers, and the key was
the number, the value was the number cubed.

INTERACT FUNCTIONALITY WITH
GUIS
So we're going to show you how to build simple graphical user
interfaces with Jupiter. And because we're going to do this exclusive
live Jupiter that's why we consider this bonus material. There are lots of
libraries out there for graphical user interfaces each with their pros and
cons. There's the built in T.K. enter which doesn't look that great but it's
built into Python. There's also solutions like pie cutesie which then if
you actually want to use it as a product there's some licensing issues
you need to deal with. But there's the open source IPA widgets and
widgets styling structure of Jupiter. So that's why we decided to use it
for this kind of bonus material section. So we're going to explore how to
build interactive elements. These are things like buttons or sliders that
you can have directly in a notebook for someone else to play around
with. You're going to want to keep the electronic books handy because
there's a lot of reference code and information there for you. So let's get
started with our very first lecture in this topic. We're going to discuss the
interactive functionality. Let's open up a super notebook.

OK. So here I am at a Jupiter notebook as a very quick note for the
notebooks that go along with this lecture that are hosted at the depot.
You actually won't be able to see the sliders that we create or any of the
interactive elements that we're going to be creating. That's because
this is just hosting the code itself. It's not actually running it. So any
viewer or get a hub will actually be able to execute the code here.
They're just showing you the code itself. So keep that in mind if you
come visit to the hub and you're wondering why you don't see sliders
here. You need to download snow pack and run it you know book in
order to actually see or view the widgets and interact with them. So
keep that in mind. And again this is all under bonus material
introduction to DUIs or gudis

So let's get started with the Interact function in order to do that we need
to say from IPA widgets import interact and you can use tab
autocomplete here interactive and also fixed and then we'll say import ISpy widgets as widgets so once we're done with those imports we're
going to create probably the most basic interactive function. So the
most basic level interact does it auto generates a user interface control
for some sort of function argument and then it calls the function with
those arguments that you can allow yourself to manipulate interactively.
So to use a track we first need to define a function that we actually want
to play around with or explore. So we're going to create the most basic
function possible which is just well it's not the most basic function
possible but it's definitely a basic one. You take an x and we're
turnback x. So a super simple function here and then we're going to call
interact and you pass and the function itself and then you set some
default value for all the arguments of the function in this case there's
one argument and then we run this we should see a slider here. So then
know how as I'm sliding I have this x value and this is my input X I have
highlighted here and this is my output x. So if I scroll around or slide
around I get to see the actual results. So let's explore this concept
further. Let's imagine I wanted to return the square of x. If I rerun my
function and rerun interact here. Now I'm returning back to square at

the bottom. So I can see here as my slider goes from negative 7 to 25
I'm just returning the square there. So I can see here how I can vary the
input and then see some corresponding output. Let's go back to that
simple function where we just return x. So we saw that we get a slider.
We we're working with integers. Let's see what happens when we
pasand booleans.

So of booleans it auto creates a checkbox which makes sense because
Blansett are true or false. So here now we automatically created the
checkbox market check for true on market for false and then

if we actually pass in a string such as Hello then I get back this auto
text box. So right now this function is just accepting X and returning X
and interact is smart enough to know what kind of feature it should
show you based on the data type is being passed. So for integers or
numbers it passes in a slider. We just saw four booleans that passes in
a check box and then for strings it passes in a little text box here. So I
can type whatever I want. You notice that this function is just returning
x. So lots of cool functionality here. Now we're going to do is instead of
passing in this function into interact we can actually do all this with a
decorator. So let's see how we can do that. I'm going to click exit here
to kind of end this I'll come back to the function.

Let's create a new function called G and G takes an X and Y and then
all it does. It just returns back a tuple of X and Y again a very simple
function. Now what we could have done is pass this function into
interact again and then provided something for x and something right.
But we can do all of this with the decorator. And if you're unfamiliar with
decorator's make sure to go back and review that decorator's lecture.
But there's a decorator called interact. And here we can pasand the
default values that we want to start off with. So I can say something like
X is equal to true and Y is equal to a floating point let's say one point
zero. And now when I run this I actually get back these options so I can
say true false. That is my output here. And then I have this slider. Now
let's imagine we actually wanted to keep one of these values fixed. We
don't want everything to be manipulated by the user. Well we could do
is pass in this parameter into the fixed function. So we would do here is
to say why is equal to fixed 1.0. Make sure my princes balance up and
then when you run this you no longer have the option to pass and why
it's been fixed at one point zero. And this also works inside the Interact
function. So if we rerun phunk here and I say x is equal to hello. And I
say fixed hello. Then when I run this I don't get the option of that text
box anymore. It just fixes this parameter to always be whatever that the
fault was.

So that's how you can use the fixed function. And so now we have the
Interact function as well as the Interact decorator. Now let's talk about
which abbreviations. Recall that when we said interact pass in our
function and then set x is equal to let's say one we get back this value
of a slider and I can go to some minimum and to see a maximum. But
notice what's happening here. I can only go to a minimum of the
negative one and to a maximum of three. And if I were to expand this to
10 Suddenly I can go to a max of 30 and a moona minimum a negative
10. So what happens is your minimum is defined by the X and your
maximum is defined by x times 3. So you may be wondering well how
do I actually change my minimum maximum and even my step size or
my starting value. Well you can do is instead of just saying equal to 10
and have it automatically

create this integer slider for you you can call widgets WIPs I.A. slider
and then you can pasan if you do shift tab here and expand this you'll
actually see the arguments pasan you can pass in a minimum
maximum step and value. So let's do that as well. Remember this is an
integer slider for step size needs to be an integer. There's also a float
slider in case you want that. But now I can say my minimum goes to
negative 100. My maximum goes to positive 100. We can create a step
size of one. And then our starting value of 0. So now I have all these
options with the integer slider and if we run this notice I'm starting at
zero. I have a step size of one and I go from negative 100 all the way to
positive 100. So these are the widgets that you can specifically call if
you want more options and the functionality of the widgets instead of
just the ones that are auto created for you now because sliders are so
commonly used with widgets there's actually ways to abbreviate all this
functionality here.

And the way you do that is by calling interact passing your function and
say x is equal to and it's very similar to a range we do you have a tuple
here where you have a min max and a step size. So I could say go from
negative 100 to 100 step size of one. And then when I run this notice
back I get back the same thing from negative 100 to 100. Or I can go
from negative 9:50 rerun this and here is negative tend to 10 step size
of 1. This is known as an abbreviation of this which is right here
because now I'm just passing in an abbreviated tuple instead of calling
integer slider. This is an integer slider.

And if we wanted this to be a floating point slider all you had to do was
specify one of these to be a float here and then if we specify the rest to
be floats as well. So say point 1 and we rerun this. Now Jupiter which is
realizes oh he wants a foot slider. So then we have the floating point
slider here. And notice now our step size is point 1 and we're going
from negative ten point zero all the way to positive 10.0 and step sizes.
Point 1 again. Using this abbreviated format. And as always you can do
this with the interactive decorator as well. So if I say at interact I could
say x is equal to a zero point zero to twenty point zero step size of 0.5
create a function let's just have this function B H and we can have
some default value like five point zero and then just return x. So then
when I call it I have the default value of five point zero. It goes down to
zero point zero all the way up to 20 steps 0.5. OK. So this is widget
abreviation again lots of different options here. Those were the
abbreviations for integers and floating point sliders. You can also have
dropdown menus and those are abbreviated as well.

Remember that if I said interact pass and my function and I said x is
equal to a string such as Hello. It just has a text box here automatically
generates a hello how are you. And it's just returning back that string. If
you pass in a list of strings as an abbreviation of a for call. It will create
a dropdown menu so it can say hello option to comma the string option
3. And now we run this. We get back this nice little dropdown menu
option to hello. Option 3 so this abbreviation of using a list of strings is a
dropdown menu. And we have a little table in the notebook so you can
reference this and I have to memorize what tuples stand for what lists
stand for but when you get used to it it's pretty straightforward. These
tuples are slider's the list with strings is going to be a dropdown menu.

And there's also when you pass in a dictionary the Mishu happens will
say interact. Our simple function say X is equal to 1 10 and then we'll
say to goes with 20. And when you run this you get back adopt them
and you want to but then the actual output is equal to the value here. So
your dropdown menu is the key and your output is the actual value. So
notice the difference here between that list and that dictionary being
passed in there. Now in addition to this interact function I Python or
Jupiter in general provides another function called interactive instead
of interact and it's useful when you want to reuse the widgets that are
already been produced or access the data that is bound to the user
interface controls. So unlike interact the return value of the function will
not be displayed automatically but you can display a value inside the
function using python that display.

So you what I mean by all this say from a python that display import
display and let's create a function here simple function f just takes an A
and B and then instead of just returning a plus b We're also going to
then call display on a plus b and this will allow us to use the interactive
function.

So I could say w equal to interactive pass an F again. And I will say is
equal to 10 B is equal to 20. And if I check what type w is notice it's
now an interactive object so the widget isn't interactive which if you look
at the documentation is a subclass of something called the box which is
just a container for other widgets. Now the children of interactive we
check out the children attribute. These are actually two integer sliders
here as well as an output. So it's basically building out a larger UI for
you using the interactive functionality. So then if you actually want to
finally see what W actually looks like

what it was defined by this interactive function you can call display on w
makes her spell that right. And then you get back both sliders so you
get 27 negative two and you get to see the sumps 27 minus to 25. And
I can see how we can use the interactive functionality to save
something as a variable and then just display the variable later on. OK
so that's really it for the interact and interactive functionality. Let's very
briefly go over everything we just covered. The main idea here is that
you're going to be able to create functions that taken some sort of input
then return some sort of output. Then if you want your user to have
some sort of interface to change the possible inputs and then see the
outputs you can use the Interact function or you can use the interactive
decorator. And then we saw how we could specify actual widgets inside
of the Interact call itself. And we saw how there is abbreviations for
them such as a tuple for a slider or the list for a dropdown menu or a
dictionary for a dropdown menu that has a connection to some key
value pairs. Then finally we saw how we could use the interactive
functionality in order to save this to a variable. So I can later display that
variable and again see the inputs and outputs. Last thing I want to note
here is when you use that in book you may have noticed that there is
this report here that the output is some sort of function. If you don't want
to see that all you have to do is have a semi-colon here and then when

you run this you will no longer see the output. And that's what's
essentially happening when you call display on the W.

GUI WIDGET BASICS
We're going to continue building off our previous understanding of
interact and interactive to begin using full widgets. Let's get started by
opening up a Jupiter notebook to begin using our widget framework.

We need to say import I pi widgets as widgets so widgets have their
own display functionality. When you say widgets make sure we spell
that right. Dots and then the actual type of widget you want. You notice
that there's tons of options here. We're going to show you a few of them
and we'll start off with the first one that we've kind of already talked
about which is the integer slider. So if I just call this by itself I get back
an integer slider with some sort of default from 0 minimum to 100
maximum and then I believe it starts at zero. There. Now right now
we're just calling the widget directly in a cell and seeing its output
below. But I want to call it or line up a bunch of widgets to call later on

when I need to do is call display on the widget that's been defined. So
what I need to do is say W is equal to this particular widget. And then
from Python does display import display and then I can display my
widget. And so now I have this variable that I can display wherever I
want an integer slyer. If you do shift tab here and expand it it will tell you
the various parameters value. Min max step that it takes. So if we want
to do multiple display calls for example if we want to display the same
widget twice the displayed instances in the front end will actually
remain in sync for each other.

So let me show you what I mean by that if I say display w again here
and I start moving them around. These are actually in sync because
they're referring to the same widget. W is just connected to a singular
integer slider. So now I can see how these widgets are connected. If I
want to close it which is what I need to do is call its close method so I
can say w. Close. And now the switch has been closed and I no longer
see it at any of the cells where it was being displayed. Now we just also
have properties. So all of the Python which is share some sort of similar
name in Scheme. And to read the value of a widget you can query its
value property. So what I want to do is reconnect that widget so say W
is equal to widgets the integer slider and then display it w and while
Dobias be displayed that means I can play around with its current
value.

So if I do w that tab here I can see that it has some variables that I can
call and one of them is the value so I can see the current value it was
that when the cell was run. No this is not going to be updated. If I start
moving it around I would have to rerun this to then check on the current
value I can reset the value though saying something like w that value is
equal to 50. And when I rerun this notice that it's connected to this
current display. So this display suddenly goes back to 50 when you
reassign that value.

So in addition to value most widgets actually share keys. So you can
call w that keys and you'll get back a list of keys here. So this is the
entire synchronized list of stateful properties. And by Stiefel properties I
mean these are the properties are connected to the State of the current
display. That way we can actually grab that property and reassign it
and it should affect the current widget display. So here I can see for
example underneath my keys I had a max value so

I could say w that Max and let's put that equal to 2000. So now when I
run this and it come back up here if I scroll all the way back up it's now
been changed to 2000. So I can grab the list the keys and then see the
stateful values here that I can play around with a lot of these we won't
really play around with the main ones like Max Min step and then other
options depending on what kind of widget you're actually playing
around with. So we can then link to similar widgets. So if you ever need
to display the same value to different ways we can do is link two
different widgets together.

Let me show what I mean by that. Let's create a that is float text which
means if I just display a I get back this text box which takes in floating
point values instead of just a normal text then I'm going to create inside
the same cell widgets and I create a float slider. And now it's display.
Let me close this off right here with the X. let's display a comma. Be
here and when we run this notice right now they're not linked. If I raise
this up and down I don't see a change change in value here. And if I
change the text box value I don't see it reflect the change here. What I
can do is link them up by saying after display my link is equal to
widgets and you can call it j s link for a javascript link and what you do
here is you say grab the name of the widget and the string key of what
you actually want to connect. In our case we want to connect the value.
So we're going to do is passing the string value here and then you pass
in a list of what else you want to connect is a tuple where it's a widget
and then the key you want to connect so value. So if I run this now and I
start moving this up and down. Notice how they're connected. So if I
type in a number here it's going to be reflected in the slider itself. So if
we get to 100 you can see how it's changing or if I slide this you'll see
how it's changing. So again you create two widgets you display them
and then you can link and it doesn't have to just be for two which is
going to be for two or more you call which is thought Jaslene. And then

you pasand tuples of the widget name. And then the key of what you
actually want to link.

So all we could do here is instead of linking value with value even
though it's a very common link we could link a max together so I could
say linked the value of a to be the max of B. And then when I rerun this
right now my value is zero. So that's the max of my slider. But if I
change my value to 1000 then suddenly my slider can go up to 1000
then if I change it back to 100 then I can only go up to 100. So this
gives you an idea of how you can link the different keys of one widget to
the different key of another widget. And it's just we just thought Jay
Eslick if you want to unlink the widgets. It's actually quite simple. You
just call my link again and then call the method unlink. Run that and
other no longer linked. If I start moving this around or if I start changing
this it doesn't actually affect the original link anymore. OK. So let's
quickly review what we just covered. We talked about widgets. We've
actually seen a lot of this in the previous lecture but we saw how we
could call display on a widget in order to see it. And then we also
noticed that we just themselves have these keys that allow us to view
their stateful properties. And again the stateful properties that term is
just to say that's a property that shows up when you view the actual

widget. So it's a state property that you can then edit or change and
then you can link widgets together using this widget that G-S link and
then passen the which itself. And then what you want to link in which
case what key you want to link such as the value or here which it be link
the Macs together. And if you ever want to unlink them you just call
unlink.

LIST OF POSSIBLE WIDGETS
So we're just going to actually run the corresponding note book that
goes along with this lecture because we're just going to show you every
possible widget that way later on. You can come back to this lecture
come back to the notebook and reference it when you're thinking of a
particular widget. So let's go through that notebook now. All right.

Here I am at the widget list notebook. It's the third notebook underneath
the bonus material introduction to goolies folder.

And if you want a complete list of all the gooey widgets available to you
just import EPA widgets as widgets and then for item. And here's the
call widgets that widget dot widget underscored type stuff items and
then you can print out item. If you just print out the item itself it'll give
you this large information in the tuple about the actual class it's in. So
just say item index that 0 and then you'll get back the actual items
themselves. See here there's checkboxes. There's the sliders we were
talking about color pickers picker's math. There's a lot of stuff here and
what we're going to do is just explore a lot of these. So first off there's
10 numeric widgets in Python.

So these are all designed to display some sort of the Merak value.
There's the integer slider. And we've also shown you all the various
parameters that can go with this. So the integer slider you can name it.
So notice here how it has test as a string. So that's description. And
you can edit that to change what text shows up here and you can also
see that it has an orientation.

And if you have the foot slider very similar thing except it's float and you
notice that it has some sort of precision precisions

So the step side can be a float. Unlike the integer we can also display
these vertically. So there's an orientation split vertically. You get this
sort of output.

There's the range slider for an integer. So this allows you to actually
grab a range. So notice here how there's two thoughts now a start and
a stop and you can see which one you have selected.

If it's filled in or the same thing for flow. Start stop. You can have a
range there. It'll display back the range.

There's integer progress so you can see here it's kind of like a loading
bar so you can have something like this technically be updating as you
are running some sort of program so you can see here as a description
loading doesn't have to be loading whatever you want. There is also a
bar style so you can replace it with the strings right here. If to see it in a
different color. So if you say success I'll change it to green.

If you say warning it will change it to orange and these colors are just
from bootstraps if you're not familiar that strap. It's this very popular
front and styling that you can use. And a lot of these keywords come
from that bootstrap library so that's into your progress. Same thing as
Flute progress you can see here it's loading.

And then there's bound to integer attacks. So the numerical text boxes
that impose some limit on the data so you can see here we have text
and then we can say 8 enter and then it would end up connecting a
flutter which you had or where function at which it was connected to.
And then we have just entered your text and floating text.

There's also boolean widgets there's basically three widgets are
designed to display a boolean value. There's the toggle button. So click
me click I'm on and off you can see here it's shaded again you can use
the sort of bootstrap codes that change the actual styling as far as color
is concerned.

So now you have green click on and off will have the checkbox which
you've seen before check on enough h. And then we have valid which
provides a read only indicator. So you can can't really interact with this.
I'll just say whether or not it's valid. So this is to show something. If it's
false they'll have an X there. And if we change this to true and run this
you'll see it has a checkmark that

we have selection widgets. So several widgets here like to select from a
list you can see

we have options as a parameter. The collator link up to are functions
save the dropdown. One two three you can also use a dictionary here

instead of a list. So one two three. And the output will correspond to the
value going of that key.

We have radio buttons that we can choose from. So pizza topping
pepperoni pineapple anchovies we have select.

So again a similar dropdown we have selection slider so you can see
here as you go. You get the different options. So not super popular but
it's there for you.

Then the next thing we have is toggle buttons. So if you run that you
could see these different buttons you can toggle slow regular fast. You
see here you have the options you can toggle on and off you can have
multiple with select multiple.

So here I can say use shift to select multiple or he can also do control
or command. Depending on your operating system we have stream
widgets we have the normal text box which allows you to type stuff out
there.

We'll set text area. So this one allows you to expand that to a larger
area.

We have label widgets which is useful if you need to build some sort of
custom description next to a controller. So here we can see we're
actually using what's known as latex. Right. Equals MC squared using
latex. If you're familiar of that you can have that option if you're not
familiar with it. It's not really a big deal just basically allows you to really
customize the text here. But as we just saw a lot of those which is
already have a description parameter for that.

Then there's HDMI. This allows you to basically just put straight HTL
here so I can see some a simple Hello World. Simple math so familiar
with a simple math you can put that in as well. Basically just allowing
you to display h m l in case you prefer writing your own rights team
here.

There's images in this case we actually don't have this image but you
would be able to connect that to an image and it would see it. Right now
I get file not found because I don't have a pin P and g file there but you
would just connect that and it would display that image for you want to
comment this out. Now that we have the button which is just again click
me click off. Very similar to the button we saw earlier.

WIDGET STYLING AND LAYOUTS
Let's open up a Jupiter notebook and get started.

First off before we continue I want to mention that there's actually quite
a bit of information in this which is styling notebook as well as
discussion on style versus layout. A lot of what we're going to talk about
here assumes some knowledge of each T.M. or CSSA as far as the
terms are concerned.

So if you're already familiar of H T.M. and C Ss a lot of these terms
such as border margin padding top left bottom flex box those We're
going to sound familiar to you if you're totally new to that. Just keep in
mind that the layout and styling is based on H.M.S. SS So you may
want to learn about those first through just some simple web tutorials or
in other project of mine on Django of development and

then come back to understand layout here fully. We are going to show
you some examples that should make sense even if you don't know
H.M.S. assess that well

we're going to get started by importing IPA widgets as widgets and
then from Python dot display import display. Then I will create my
widget slider that we've seen before. So an integer slider. And then let's
display that integer slider. So right now this is the default integer slider
display. But let's imagine that actually wanted to change the size of the
slider. I wanted to change the way it looks.

What I can do is grab w and then grab Leo off of this and if I hit tab here
you'll notice you have a bunch of traits based off of CSSA that you can't
adjust.

So forget for example you can adjust the margin to go the string auto
and calling lay out again. You could adjust the height of the slider to be

defined by a certain number of pixels like 75 pixels. And now when you
run this you'll notice that we've been able to shift this around with a
margin and the height. So the layout here basically allows you to center
the slider and then increase the height so the slider change positions on
the page immediately. And let's say it can be passed from one widget
to another widget of the same type. So I going say x is equal to widgets
dot integer slider. And let's give this a value of 15 and also give it a
description to say something like new slider and then I will display X. So
here's my new slider looks like it has default styling.

But if I wanted to change the layout to match lay all I would need to do
is say X thought lay out is equal to w that layout and then we have
centered on you slider. So before we investigate the actual style
attribute it should be noted that many widgets offer a list of predefined
styles that can be passed in as arguments or parameters during their
creation. And these are based on bootstrap terms such as primary
success in full warning and danger when I'm going to do here is already
importing the widgets.

I will call widgets dot button Slick's make sure I spell we right. We just
stop button and then I will pass the description here. Well say ordinary
button. And then we can say the button style is equal to an empty
string. So if I just do that and run that I have this ordinary button. And
we've actually seen this one before. What it could do though is give it a
style based on a bootstrap code and these codes are linked to in the
notebook. So danger is kind of this danger red but there's other things
like warning is an orange or you have info which is another color this
kind of teal color et cetera. And you can check out the various labels
over here priories success info. So now let's talk about the style
attribute. So those with the built in ones that are based off of bootstrap.
So while the laser attribute really only exposes layout related CSI
properties for top level elements the style attribute is used to expose
non layout related styling attributes.

So those are things like custom colors so I'm going to make it a couple
of your cells here so I will say BE1 is equal to widgets. The button and I
will say description and we can say something like custom color and
then I will grab one and instead of calling L'eau offer this I will call style
and then call button color and then say light green and there's a bunch
of string codes you can use here. And if I just called me one. Now I see
this custom color. And if you're interested in the list of all the style
attributes available for any particular widget so certain widgets will have
colors such as buttons other widgets or sliders are going to have button
colors.

But if we check out BE1 style keys we get to see a keys of everything
we can edit. So not a whole lot here can edit the font weight the button
color. And that's really all there is for buttons.

Now we could do as well if we had a new button such as B2 is equal to
widgets button I could set the style of BE2 to be completely equal to the

style of be one note here and then actually calling style button color. But
I'm just saying the entire style would be to match the entire style be one.
So then I called B to get back like green here. So it doesn't actually say
anything because I didn't pass in the scription. So let's say a
description is equal to knew and then when I read this I could see the
new there. So finally we'll create some other let's say slider here. I'll say
widgets integer slider. Let's give it description to be something like my
handle. And if I check what S1 looks like it's just this normal slider. But
let's go ahead and check it style will say S1 style. And if you call S1
here style dot tab you should see a bunch of options and you can then
call keys to see a list everything. So for example you can change the
handle color. So let's grab that say handle color and set that equal to
let's say blue run that and I can see that little handle is now colored blue
and pretty much any major string is going to be accepted. I should say
any common string so you can see black is accepted. It could go if light
blue. We can go of light blue and that would be accepted as well. And
as quick note.

If you come back down here to the notebook all the way down we have
some treats here you that are common for widgets such as Button color
and font weight.

Those are conferee buttons description with handle color. Those are for
all the sliders and them for the progress bars. You may want to check
the bar color or description with. There's lots of other ones that really
only have description with as in just apple tree. OK. So now should I
have an understanding of how to style widgets. Keep in mind you don't
have that much access to a lot of the styling and that's because when
you're working of Jupiter Jupiter has to be able to only color the button
here or the handle here and not affect everything else that's showing in
your browser. So it's quite a challenge for the people who are
developing IPA widgets to give you access to this sort of styling without
screwing up everything that was being rendered in your browser.

EXAMPLE OF WHAT A WIDGET
CAN DO!
And those are some pie. Matt Plaut lib and site pie and we'll show you
those. Just a second in the notebook but let's open up the notebook
and explore this example.

OK here we are at the Custom widget. This is basically going to be in
advanced example of what's possible in the custom widget to try to give
you some ideas of how you would be able to connect these widgets to
external libraries and in order to explore those external libraries we're
going to need to work with some pie map lib and site pie and you can
install all of those using condo install and then these names non-pilot
matplotlib or Sibe pie or pipin stall. Pie Pipp installment Cutlip or Pipp
install site at your command line. And if you're really interested in this
sort of thing of the more advanced aspects of Python basically you've
already finished the project by now reviewing this lecture. You can
check out the class Python for data science machine learning boot

camp if you're interested in visualization and differential equations
machine learning data science analyzing data of python and that sort of
thing. Here we're just going to show you one final Vance example of
how you would be able to use widgets with some of these more
advanced libraries and to do that we're going to be exploring the Lorenz
system of differential equations. Basically this is just a system of
equations that are connected based on the behavior of three different
parameters. And we're going to connect those two widgets to actually
modify those parameters and see how that changes the visualization in
real time.

So we have a couple of lines here. Matt plotless in line that allows us to
actually view this visualization in the notebook setting that we have or
IP widgets and I put it on display.
Here we have interactive Interactive which have already talked about
we have display in HTL which We've also already discussed and then
clear output which we discussed during milestone one project and then
we have some tools here from those external libraries. And this is really
just for visualization purposes. We have non-pilot as we downloaded

installed Type-I and then we have mapped plotted and mapped plot lib
is basically a plotting library for Python which will allow us to plot some
of this out. So then we're going to run this. And here is what we're going
to do.

And you can basically take this idea and apply it to any sort of function
that's returning anything. What we have here is a function called solve
Loren's that takes in various parameters that relate to the Lorentz
equations. And then it creates a figure. It's going to set the limits of that
figure. It has another function here that is actually going to compute the
time derivative of the Lawerence system using some math then we
choose some random starting points. We actually solve the equation
that we saw up above or that set of equations.

We choose some different colors and then we end up just plotting
everything per line. I definitely would expect you to understand any of
this because this is all pie in that plot lib this morning to show you what
is possible with Python and if you're really interested in this you can
check out the other project that's linked to that notebook so let's run
that sell. And it's going to return t and x of T and then we're going to call
the function solve.

So once it's solved it looks like this. Lotusphere it's taking parameters
angle and end.

But if we wanted to see how those different parameters actually
effected some sort of function or we would have to do is call interactive

pass that function itself and then pass in our options here. Remember
using tuples as slider's. So those are the widget abbreviations.

Then we're going to display W and when we run this we get to see all
the sliders here and we actually see how they affect the equation itself.
So for instance we can change the angle and that will make it look like
it's routine because we're changing the angle that we're plotting yet or
we can change the number of lines using and just 2 or and all the way
up to 43 and we can explore that again with the angle or with the max
time. See how that affects things change Bayda change Sigma. You
can change RHO has lots of different parameters here. The main idea
being is you just have a function that's returning something and then
you pass in whatever parameters that you want to play around with.
And this is a really advanced example of that. But we've already
worked with tons of functions that return something and taken prompts
from the user. And if you ever wanted a slider parameter or those text
checkboxes text entering etc. all those other widgets that we discussed
you would just pass them in here and then they would be connected to
whatever function and passed then. And this is kind of an advanced
example of that. Now the object returned by Interactive is actually a
widget object.

So then you can grab the result off of that and grab the arguments. So
we see here this is the arguments right now. And then we would be
able to explore those further. So you'd be able to plot out histograms of
wherever you actually were in that particular time period and then if you
edited some of the more advanced parameters Sigma changes around
and and then you rerun these again.

Notice now you have the different angles that you had on then you
could just keep going with this and make new Hister ramps to plot them
out. All right. That's it for this lecture. Really this section of the project. I
hope this helped you realize what is actually possible using gudis and
PI widgets. The main idea being that once you have a function that's
going to return something you can easily give user interaction but just
setting those parameters and then connecting them to some sort of
widget. In this case are all connected sliders. But we've already
explored the many other widgets available such as buttons checkboxes
text boxes expandable text boxes straight H.T. mail.

SWAPPING TWO NUMBERS WITH
THIRD VARIABLE

We will swab two numbers. So here in this line of gold, we are going to
take the input of number one. And in the second line, we are going to
take the input of second number. We will prompt the user to enter the
first value here and we will from the user to enter the second value with
this line of code. The user will enter the warty values and here we are
going to print the body values before scrapping. So we can see that
what their value was before scrapping and what their value becomes
after sweeping. So here print value offer number one before stepping is
number one. It will show the number one Brint value offer number two
before scrapping. It will display the number two that we are going to
input here. So here's whapping occurs of having two numbers. Using
temporary, reliable temp is equal to number one, we restore the value
of number one in the temporary 80. But are you able here in this line,
Tom Brady, what I believe is equal to number one temp is equal to
number one. So that when the value of number one is overwritten by
number two here, no one is equal to number two. Here we are
overwriting the values. Number one value is the overwritten by number
two value here in this line of code. So we have used this temporary.
What are you able. So that when the value of number one is overwritten
by this number two, we have the backup of the number one value. So
which we will later assigned to these number two. Here you see. Then

we will print the value off number one after swapping number one, it will
show the value of those who have been. And this line of code will show
the value of number two after scrapping.

We are going to execute this call. Let's execute. So is asking the user to
enter a number saying we are going to enter a number 10. First number
is ten. Our second number is a hundred. We press enter. I will minimize
it. So you see here that value of number one before mapping was ten.
And the number of number two value was hundred before scrapping.
So authors who have been the number one becomes hundred instead
of ten, which was ten before. Now it is hundred and number two
becomes ten, which was hundred before

we will execute it again with different example, say we are going to
enter the number one as 555. Number two as well to as say 23. So you
see here that our first number is 555. Second is twenty 23 after
scrapping. Number one is assigned the value of twenty three. And
number two, guess the value. Awful. Number one. That was five fifty
five. So this was the math.

SWAPPING TWO NUMBERS
WITHOUT THIRD TEMPORARY
VARIABLE
We have to that two numbers using temporary valuables. But this is the
Python program to slap two variables without using completely
variables.

So here again, we are going to take the input from the user. Number
one is will to input enter first number. Here you will enter first number.
Number two is will the input enter second number? Then we will print
both numbers before the. Then slapping two numbers without using
temporary variables. So here you see that we have simply written
number one comma. Number two is equal to number two, comma,
number one. So here in the place of number one, we have swept the
value of number two. And here in place of number two, we have sarap,
the value of number one. We have assigned the value of number one to
number two here and number two to number one here without using

temporary variables. And after that, we will print devalues all four baldie
numbers, auto swapping.

So we execute this code and we will enter the first number that these
people, one we press enter. I minimize it. So the second number is 555.
So here you see that the first number is triple one. Second number is a
triple five. And value of number one before scrapping triple one value
off number two, before slapping triple five. And after sweeping the value
off number one, value one becomes five five five. And the value awful.
Number two becomes equal to number one. So we have swept boatie
values with each other. So this was the second example.

PYTHON PROGRAM TO ADD TWO
MATRICES USING NESTED LIST
we will add two mattresses in Python.

We are using the concept of nested lists to represent a matrix. So you
see here that our first list is here. That contains three elements. One,
one, one for our convenience. We have used to. Same values as one
one one. So when we aired these mattresses, M1 and M2, then we find
it easy to calculate the sum of these mattresses. But here we see that
this is the first matrix M1. And this is the list. This is tFhe second list.
And this is the third list. These three lists are in the other list. The
mailing list. So these lists are nested lists. They are within an other list.
The mailing list in case of family. Similarly, when we see second Matrix
M2 here, you see there, the first list contains three elements. One, two,
three. The second list contains three elements, four, five, six. And the
third list contains elements, three elements, seven, eight and nine. The
first element of total list is seven. The second element of the third list,

isn't it? And the last and the third element of this third list is the nine.
Here in this case of Matrix M2. So these three lists are also in the form.
Awful nest. They are nested by the main list. So this is the basic
concept of representing mattresses with the help of four nested lists. So
you see here this, that this is the first matrix. And this is the second
matrix. We will add both of these mattresses. But here you see there
some is equal to. We have specified here, some is equal to zero zero
zero. The first list contains elements that are equal to zero zero zero. All
the elements are zero as we have not counted the sum yet. So we will
force specify that the output is it. The result is. And the sum is equal to
zero before calculation and after calculation, our result will be would be
stored here. So we have initialized all the elements of this matrix as a
zero.

And in this matrix we will store the result of some Alpha Board isn't
Matrixes and One and M2. So here you see that. What are the rules?
Rules the number of nested lists in the main list. So you see here that
what are rules here? In case of this one, this is our first rule that is equal
to first list. This is our second rule that is equal to. Second list. And this
is equal to third row. That is third row. That is equal to third list. And

these feelings are within. In other mean list. So these were the rules.
And what are the columns? Columns are the number of elements. So
you see here that columns argue number of elements in the nested
lists. So this is the column. These are the columns you see here that
they are in blue highlighted form. These are the columns. One. One,
one. First column contains elements. One one. One in vertical form.
Second column contains elements. One one. One in vertical form. And
similarly, the third column. In case of one. And in case. Offer M2. We
see here that. First column contains elements of one foreign salmon.
And second, to fight it. And the third column of The Matrix and two
contains column with elements three, six and nine adjusted elements.
So we will continue. So here we are going to outrate for I intervened to
land to and one for Jay in Reinjure Land and one zero. So here we
have specified zero dark music. We will start from our first element of
the list as we know that in this first element has appointer, value of zero
has a target value of zero. And the second element is add place one.
The third element is add place too. So if you want to access this third
element, we will have to specify two in our program code. And if we
want to target the first element, we will have to write zero in deep
Aramco's so we can accessor our foster element. So this is a technical
thing. You will have to keep in mind and here you see that some iji. So
these are the coordinates of matrices and zeros and columns. So here
you see that the M1 IJA plus M2 iji. So here we are going to add this is
the formula to our democracies. And here in the end,

we are going to display the output matrix. Here you see that four
number in some print number. Then we will print these. Some of these
two Matisses I executed discord and we see that what is the desert?
So this is the resultant of some. These are some of these two Matisses
and one and two. This is the result we tend to matrix. So here you see
that its fossil contains two, three, four as elements. Second row
contains five, six, seven. And the third and last row contains. Lastly, it
contains eight, nine and 10. So here you see that if we add one in this
one, this one in this one, we will get two. Here you see that this is two.
And if we add this one in this two, we will get three. So here three, we
will go to third list here, see if we add this one to this salmon. It will add
to eight. And similarly, we will go to the last element of the last list to last
row. So in case of one, it is one. And here nine one plus nine is equal to
ten. So the last element is equal to ten. So by this method, we counted
the addition of two mattresses using the nested list concept. I hope you
understand this program called Burty. You can not to learn this until you
practice this on your p.c. So it is better to practice practice. Well, as
practice means makes a man perfect. So you need to practice a lot to
learn more.

ADD TWO BINARY STRINGS
PYTHON USING INT AND BIN
FUNCTION
we will add to by the numbers. We will use two functions. One function
is intended function and the second is bindery function. We will use two
built-In functions, integer and binary function. So what are the use of
uses of these functions? The integer function can work the given string
into an integer number.

So let's start this program. We are giving first value as decimal value
three in the form of a binary string. So here you see there no one is
equal to zero zero zero one one. So here you see that one is stored
here. Two one plus visible, two, three. Here we are going to give a
second number. Number two, as input here, one is stored. Nothing.
While this is the place of two, four, eight and sixteen. So sixteen,
sixteen plus one is equal to 17. That's that is the string is equal to
decimal value offer 17. So in this example, we are converting the string,
which is a binary value. You see that the strings have binary value. So
we're passing the best value as to here. You see that we have written
two because this is the base of two. And as these are the binary
numbers. So we know that binding numbers have base to y decimal
numbers have base of 10. Similarly octal numbers have base of E to.
And so hexadecimal numbers have have base of 16. So here in this line
of code, we will show the result. Some is equal to by the integer number
one in the base of two plus integer. Number two in the base offer to
value two. Here you see that we will execute it. So you see that this is
the cold, awful binary numbers. And this is our answer. So that is equal
to sixteen. Eight. Here is nothing to be thought of. This bit is on that is
equal to forward. 16 plus four is equal to 20. So our answer is 17 plus
three is equal to 20. So the is when things are converted in to integer.

Here you see that we took the input as a string when strings are
converted into integer. We will add them after converting them into
integer. Then after this, the result will be converted back into the binary
number using the binary function. So we executed this program with the
help of for two functions, integer function and binary function. We
added two strings.

PYTHON PROGRAM TO CONVERT
DECIMAL TO BINARY
we will convert a decimal number to an equivalent binary number.

So this is the function to convert a decimal number to it's a coverlet
binary number. This function converts it and then prints it. So we will do
this with the help of two different methods. So this program called is our
first method. While I have written. Second example with a different
method here under there. So we will execute our first code. So this is
through a user defined function. This is a user defined function you see

here. There D.F.. That is a user defined function. Its name is a decimal
two by V and it will take an input to number. And we reserve the
covenant to buy Renumber. So we stored our lecture with the first
method. I have written the code already. So we could save time. So in
this code. Yet we see that if number is greater than one decimal two by
the number. So this is the. Here we are going to die widing them, but.
As we know there by the numbers have Bishoff to.

So. I will execute discord. So it is asking us to enter a decimal number
here you see that we have used this prompt message so it will show the
output here. Enter any decimal number. It will ask the user to enter any
number. So this circle will continue to. Go round, round until we specify
a value and press enter,

so I enter nine as an input. So here you see that it gives us the output
as one zero zero one in the form ofa binary numbers. So we know that
here value is equal to one here, two here, four and here. Eight. So the
bill to offer one and eight are on. In this case. And has the output is
equal to eight plus one is equal to nine. Low two bills are off these
zeros.

So in other example, we will return the answer in a specific format that
is binary format. So in this code we have defined and other function that
is a built in binary function. So I will execute it. Here you see that it is
asking us to enter a decimal number. So there you see that there is a
lot easier. A covenant binding number is equal to zero B. one zero zero
one. So our real number is that. And this is showing the format to here.
As we know, that binding number format, is it in the form Orford four
zero B. And then as a prefix and then as opposed to fix it is showing the
output of that specific number that is equal to one zero zero one in case
all four binaries. So we saw this with two different examples. I will
execute this code again and give the value nine as an input. So here
you see that the answer is yes, one zero zero one. And here in this
format, zero B one zero zero one. So there is a little bit of difference
between these formats and these examples.

OBJECTS AND DATA
STRUCTURES ASSESSMENT –
SOLUTIONS
we'll be going over the Objects and Data Structures assessment
solutions.

Okay, so the first question was, "write a brief description of all the
following Object types and Data Structures we've learned about." So
for the full answers, all you've gotta do is review the Jupyter notebook.
So if you go to the solutions notebook, I've put links so you can go
ahead and check out the introductions of each of those Jupyter
notebooks where described in layman's terms numbers, strings, lists,
tuples, and dictionaries.

So let's go ahead and move on to the numbers section. First thing I
wanted you to do is write an equation that uses multiplication, division,
exponent, addition, and subtraction to equal this kind of arbitrary
number. So your answer's probably different, all I did was work
backwards. But this was just so you made sure you understood what
minus, to the powers, parenthesis, division, multiplication all look like,
and how they worked. So this is what I did, and that equals a ..

Next I wanted to explain what the cell would produce, two divided by
three, and what can you do to change it so the answer's correct. So if
you notice, we have two divided by three and we have a zero there.
And remember that's because Python performs classic division for
integers, and you need to use floats to perform true division, such as
2.0 divided by three. We also discussed on how to use import from the
future module to also change that. Or you could just use Python and
you wouldn't have to worry about that.

Next, answer these three questions without typing code, then type
code to check your answer. So you can go ahead and check your own
answers here, but this was just to make sure you understood order of
operations in Python. What was the type of the result of the expression
here? The answer's gonna be a floating point number, as long as
there's one floating point number in the entire equation your result will
be a floating point number.

After that, what would you used to find a number's square root, as well
as its square? You can just use two asterisks in a row to do a power,
and then use a fraction to do a square root. There's also a math
module in Python that will allow you to do square roots and we'll talk
about that later on in the project. The string section, basically I just
wanted you to play around with indexing, so writing out commands to
grab letters from strings, making sure that you understand that
indexing starts at zero, reversing strings, again with slicing and
indexing, and then given the string, give two methods to print the letter
O. First one was just going in reverse with negative one. Second one I
just went straightforward with index of four. After that it was lists, and I
wanted you to build the list ,, two separate ways. One way is just the
standard, write out the lists in between brackets. The second way you
could have done it was by doing a list of zero and multiplying it by
three to get three of those.

After that I wanted you to reassign "hello" in this nested list to say
"goodbye." So the index to reach that item was [][], because it was a
list nested inside of a list. After that I wanted you to sort this list, and
you could've done that with a sorted function or with the method "sort."

Then for dictionaries, this was basically just keys and indexing to grab
"hello." First one was just pretty simple, you just had to do this simple
key. The second one a little trickier, had to do two keys because there
was a dictionary nested inside another dictionary. Third one, pretty
tricky, this is actually harder than I expected. It was the key, an index,
nest key, and then two indexes later to get "hello". This one was a little
crazy. It was a key, an index, a key two, index, the key "toughie" and
then two indexes to reach "hello" there. After that was "Can you sort a
dictionary? Why or why not?" No you can not sort a dictionary,
because normal dictionaries are mappings, not sequence. So they
don't remember what order you put in items in. Now later on in the
project we'll talk about something called an ordered dictionary, which
is a sub-class of dictionary in Python in a specific module called
collections, so you'll learn about a specific type of dictionary that you
actually can remember order.

Moving along with Tuples, "What's the major difference between tuples
and lists?" Hopefully you were able to answer this, which is tuples are
immutable, that's the big difference. "How do you create a tuple?"

Remember it's just parenthesis and then commas, just like a list but
instead of square brackets you're using parenthesis.

For sets, "What's unique about a set?" Remember they don't allow
duplicate items. So to use a set to find the unique values, you could
just cast that list with the set function.

For booleans, don't worry if you didn't fully understand this, there's a
whole section on comparison operators coming up next. But I just
wanted you to get kind of a sneak peek.

You can go ahead and check out these various pieces of code. They
should have been hopefully pretty straightforward if you already knew
some math notations. This is two greater than three, or two less than

or equal to two, et cetera. So you can run those cells and check your
answers. Final question was, "What is the boolean output "of the cell
block below?" Right here. So it's gonna be false, and we can check
that through indexing. So l_one, index two, zero, would have been, if
we look here, that would have been this list, first item, so that's three.
So then you're basically asking, "Is three greater "than or equal to?"
And we fill out that second list it's gonna be index two, key one, so
four. So is three greater than or equal to four? That's false. Okay,
great job on your first assessment, and I'm excited to continue on with
the project, and I'll see you at the next lecture where we talk about
Python comparison operators.

CHAINED COMPARISON
OPERATORS
So, one of the nice features of Python is this ability to chain multiple
comparisons to perform a more complex test. And you can use these
chained comparisons as a shorthand for some larger Boolean
expressions.

So, in this lecture we're gonna learn how to use chained comparison
operators, and we're gonna introduce two other important other
statements in Python, which is the and and the or statements that I
have highlighted here. So let's go ahead and jump into the live code
so I can show you show examples of chained comparison operators.

Okay, so you remember that we have just normal comparison
operators. I can say, is one less than two? That's true. Is two less
than three? Well that's also true. So what I can do is I can actually
chain these. I can say, is one less than two and, is less two less than
three? And that'll output true. So, that statement will check if one was
less than two and, if two was less than three. So, another way I
could've written that is with an and statement in Python. So I could've
said, is one less than two and, is the condition three, excuse me, two,
less than three? Also true. So, that checks, makes sure that basically
the and is used to make sure two checks have to be true in order for
that total Boolean check to be true. Let's go ahead and see another
example. So, one less than three, we know that's true.

Three greater than two, we know that's also true. So I can chain these
together, I can say one less than three, and, is three greater than two.
Oops, sorry. Greater than two. And that's true. So another way I can
write that is with the and statement. So I can say, is one less than
three and, is three greater than two? And that'll output true. So it's
important to note that Python is actually checking both instances of the
comparisons. And we can also use or to write comparisons in Python.

For example, I could say, one equal two, which we know is false.
Two, less than three, which we know is true. So what if I wanted, just
either of these things to be true? Just one or the other. That's where
the or statement comes in. So I can say, hey check if one is equal to
two, or, also check if two is greater than, excuse me, let's say it's
greater than one. So, as long as one of these statements happens to
be true, then we'll get a true, so, or means it's only checking that one
of the instances happens to be true. Because we're using the or
operator. So it needs one or the other to be true. Let's take a look at
one more example just to drive the point home. So we know one is
equal to one, and I'm gonna write or, equal to one. So it just needed
one or the other to be true. And, one equals one was true.

So, that's just it as far as chained comparison operators.

GENERATE 0 AND 50 USING
RANDIT RANDOM MODULE
This is the Python program to generate a random number in Python.

So we will use rended function. Awful random module. We are using
your rended function, offer random module to generate a random
number between a certain range. With the help of this function, we can
point a random number within a given range. So to use this function, we
will have to import random module first. We are importing random
modules here and then with this help of this random module, we will be
able to generate a random number between a certain range. So first,
we understand the syntax of this. So this is the syntax, awful random
module. So then you'd function off random module. And here we are
going to import the random module. Here we are going to print these
donated random number between the event. So here you'll see that
there are two values, X and Y. So this is the starting value X and this is
the ending value Y. So these these isn't between these values, but
these values are all inclusive. So we will include this exa and Y in this
range. So if you specify zero in this place of exit and 50 in this place of
Y, then this program will generate random number between zero and
50. So zero and 50 will be inclusive in this program called. So this
random function will generate a random number in the range of X to
white. Note that X and Y are also inclusive. So so that X is equal to

here. We will see that X is less than. Equal to the random number.
Random number. And that would be. Sorry, this is interrupting, and that
would be less than equal to Y. So this is the basic concept to offer this
range. So the range lies between. So that the lies in this line. So we will
execute this code. And you'll see that this program has generated a
random number 15. We will execute it again. And this has generated
the random number as three. So. Computer generated. Well, as
random number, then 13. Then we will execute it again. So you see
here for the two.

We will minimize the range and we are going to minimize it in between
zero and five so that we see that whether zero and five are inclusive, we
need to or not. This is to. So you see here that zero is inclusive. We will
check there to better five results. Zero is again here. So five years here,
you saw that. So zero and five all inclusive in these greens. So this
program was to generate a random number between a certain.

ADD TWO NUMBERS PROVIDED
BY THE USER PYTHON
So this race, this is all second example to add two numbers in the first
example, we had hard coded values into the program. But in the
second example, we will prompt the user to enter the two values.

So. You see that getting the values of two numbers from user value,
one is equal to flawed input. So this input means prompt. It prompts the
user to enter and input value. That is flawed in this case. We have
specified it as flawed. So in perfunctory sees value the added stream.
So to convert it into a number, we have used this for Lord. And you'll
see that in the second line value, too physical to flawed in potential
second number. So these two lines will show a prompt. In this line, this
is a comment adding the numbers. So here is a formula to add
numbers. We know there are some musical to value one plus value two
or in case of three numbers. The sum is equal to value one plus value
two plus value three. So here we are going to display the result. You
see that the comment here displaying the result. But in the some of the

input numbers is equal to some. So if we want to change this, we can
change the output, printed output.

We execute this code. You see that this is enter first number. We give it
the value as equal to one. So you see that it says enter second number.
We give it as in Portree, we enter. Second number three. So you see
that we gave it as integers, values as input one and three. This is one
as the value one. And the three is as equal to value two. But the result
is equal to four point zero. So we know that this input function can wars
result in two citrine. This receives it as values, as a string. So to convert
it into a number, we have used the float. Here you see here. So we saw
that this program can horse the given values into their thumb. This air
has them as two numbers and then print them in the output. We do and
other experiment here.

We give it to value as a one point. Salman. Press enter. We give it
value. Say one point, three second value. So you see that the output is
here. So whether you give as input. A floating point or. An integer value
as input, the result would be in floating point values, as if we have
specified it before. So these two examples were about adding them
both in Python. So we added two numbers with the help of two different
examples. The first method was through hard coded values. The values
that were specified by ourselves. And the second method was with the
help of the prompt, the user enters and tells the values into this
program code with the help of prompt. And then this program code
gives the output of those input numbers.

FINDING TRANSPOSE OF A
MATRIX IN PYTHON
These students in this program will find it on schools, often metrics with
the help of using force loop.

So as we know there, transport of memetics means interchanging of
rules and columns. So transpose of a metrics X is denoted by X dash.
Here we see that these metrics have three rows. This is the first row.
This is the second. And this is the third. So these metrics have nested
lists. So we will convert this into this format two by three metrics. This is
metrics. Three by two. And this is a matrix, awful, two by three. So in
metrics of three by two, value would be changed into matics. Awful, two
by three. So in the case of this transposes, if X is three by two, then X,
that would be two by three. In this, for example, here we are going to
outrate through these rules of the metrics with the help of for loop. Here
we see that we are outrating those and this for Loop will outrate through
the columns of The Matrix. So we see here that we have specified year
zero. That means that it will access the forced to element. And here you

see that result. J Eye is equal to exit iji. So what it means. It means that
in the case of transpose the element to add EITE position I throw. And
the jet column in X will be pleased to add G true. And eight column in X
that. Here we see that this element. We'll go here and this salmon will
go at disbelieves. And similarly, this fall will go at this place and this five
at this place and this one, this role will be in the form of this third
column in this matrix. So here. In this loop, we will store the dessert and
bring the dessert.

I will execute it. We see that. We have. Process this program. And we
see that it has two rules and three columns. The first rule contains three
elements that are twelvefold four and three. Here we see that two well,
four and three are in the form of four columns. And here you see that
seven, five, eight. This is in the form of rules. One, seven, five and eight
are in the form. Awful column in the Matrix X one x dash. They are in
the form of rules. So the Matrix X has three by two value wine matrix X
that the transpose of X has a two by three tootles and three columns.
So this program was about the finding, the transpose.

PYTHON PROGRAM TO PRINT
THE CALENDAR OF A GIVEN
MONTH AND YEAR
Guest audience, this is a program to enter the year and month. And
based on input, it calls month function, which displays the calendar of
the given month for a given year.

So this is the program to print calendar using Biton built-In function. We
will use the building function month of the calendar module to print a
calendar in Python. The function month requires two arguments to
display a calendar of a given month. So first is the year and that is in
the form awful four digits format. And the second is the month format
you see here. First is the year format and second is the month format.
So we will execute this. But before I will elaborate this, this is a program
to print calendar using Python built in function. These two lines are
multi-line comments. We are going to import the calendar module. So

next, we will enter a year in this format, four digit format. So here you
see that year is equal to input in the form of integer and third year. And
then we will enter the month in this format to be this format. Monday is
equal to any input. Enter any month. Then we will print DECL. Interpret
calendar Dortmund Yurman. This is it. This will be the calendar in the
form of month of their specific year. That will give.

So we executed. You see that. It asks us to enter a year. We will enter
2000 and twenty. So it will ask us a month. I will enter June six month.
So here you see that it has displayed the calendar enter year 2020. We
entered the year 2020. And we enter the month of June. June is six
month. Here you see the calendar all for June. So today is twenty
seventh off me.

So I will execute it again. Two thousand and twenty and monthly is
equal to my. So you see here, there the calendar all for May 2020
month is here. You can check and verify it. So this program was about
taking input year and taking input month and then displaying the
calendar of their specific month off is the best.

THE END

