Make: Electronics
Second Edition

Charles Platt

Make: Electronics
by Charles Platt Copyright © 2015 Charles Platt. All rights reserved.
Printed in Canada.
Published by Maker Media, Inc., 1160 Battery Street East, Suite 125, San
Francisco, CA 94111.
Maker Media books may be purchased for educational, business, or sales
promotional use. Online editions are also available for most titles
(http://safaribooksonline.com). For more information, contact our
corporate/institutional sales department: 800-998-9938 or
corporate@oreilly.com.
Editor: Brian Jepson
Production Editor: Nicole Shelby
Proofreader: Charles Roumeliotis
Indexer: Charles Platt
Interior Designer: David Futato
Cover Designers: Marc de Vinck and Charles Platt
Interior Photographs and Illustrations: Charles Platt
September 2015: Second Edition
December 2009: First Edition
Revision History for the Second Edition
2015-08-07: First Release
See http://oreilly.com/catalog/errata.csp?isbn=9781680450262 for release
details.
The Make logo is a registered trademark of Maker Media, Inc. Make:
Electronics, the cover image, and related trade dress are trademarks of Maker
Media, Inc.
While the publisher and the author have used good faith efforts to ensure that the
information and instructions contained in this work are accurate, the publisher
and the author disclaim all responsibility for errors or omissions, including
without limitation responsibility for damages resulting from the use of or
reliance on this work. Use of the information and instructions contained in this
work is at your own risk. If any code samples or other technology this work

contains or describes is subject to open source licenses or the intellectual
property rights of others, it is your responsibility to ensure that your use thereof
complies with such licenses and/or rights.
978-1-68045026-2
[TI]

Dedication
To readers of the first edition of Make: Electronics who contributed many ideas
and suggestions for this second edition. In particular: Jeremy Frank, Russ
Sprouse, Darral Teeples, Andrew Shaw, Brian Good, Behram Patel, Brian Smith,
Gary White, Tom Malone, Joe Everhart, Don Girvin, Marshall Magee, Albert
Qin, Vida John, Mark Jones, Chris Silva, and Warren Smith. Several of them
also volunteered to review the text for errors. Feedback from my readers
continues to be an amazing resource.
Acknowledgments
I discovered electronics with my school friends. We were nerds before the word
existed. Patrick Fagg, Hugh Levinson, Graham Rogers, and John Witty showed
me some of the possibilities.
It was Mark Frauenfelder who nudged me back into the habit of making things.
Gareth Branwyn facilitated Make: Electronics, and Brian Jepson enabled the
sequel and this new edition. They are three of the best editors I have known, and
they are also three of my favorite people. Most writers are not so fortunate.
I am also grateful to Dale Dougherty for starting something that I never
imagined could become so significant, and for welcoming me as a participant.
Russ Sprouse and Anthony Golin built and tested the circuits. Technical fact
checking was provided by Philipp Marek, Fredrik Jansson, and Steve Conklin.
Don’t blame them if there are still any errors in this book. It’s much easier for
me to make an error than it is for someone else to find it.

What’s New in the Second Edition
All of the text from the first edition of this book has been rewritten, and most of
the photographs and schematics have been replaced.
Single-bus breadboards are now used throughout (as in Make: More Electronics)
to reduce the risk of wiring errors. This change entailed rebuilding the circuits,
but I believe it was worthwhile.
Diagrams showing component placement are now used instead of photographs
of breadboarded circuits. I think the diagrams are clearer.
Internal views of breadboard connections have been redrawn to match the
revisions noted above.
New photographs of tools and supplies have been included. For small items, I
have used a ruled background to indicate the scale.
Where possible, I have substituted components that cost less. I have also reduced
the range that you need to buy.
Three experiments have been completely revised:
The Nice Dice project that used LS-series 74xx chips in the first edition now
uses 74HCxx chips, to be consistent with the rest of the book and with
modern usage.
The project using a unijunction transistor has been replaced with an astable
multivibrator circuit using two bipolar transistors.
The section on microcontrollers now recognizes that the Arduino has become
the most popular choice in the Maker community.
In addition, two projects involving workshop fabrication using ABS plastic have
been omitted, as many readers did not seem to find them useful.
All the page layouts have been changed to make them easily adaptable for
handheld devices. The formatting is controlled by a plaintext markup language,
so that future revisions will be simpler and quicker. We want the book to remain
relevant and useful for many more years to come.

--Charles Platt, 2015

Preface: How to Have Fun with
This Book
Everyone uses electronic devices, but most of us don’t really know what goes on
inside them.
You may feel that you don’t need to know. You can drive a car without
understanding the workings of an internal combustion engine, so why should
you learn about electricity and electronics?
I think there are three reasons:
By learning how technology works, you become better able to control your
world instead of being controlled by it. When you run into problems, you can
solve them instead of feeling frustrated by them.
Learning about electronics can be fun, so long as you approach the process in
the right way. It is also very affordable.
Knowledge of electronics can enhance your value as an employee, or perhaps
even lead to a whole new career.

Learning by Discovery
Most introductory guides begin by using definitions and theory to explain some
fundamental concepts. Circuits are included to demonstrate what you have been
told.
Science education in schools often follows a similar plan. I think of this as
learning by explanation.
This book works the other way around. I want you to dive right in and start
putting components together without necessarily knowing what to expect. As
you see what happens, you will figure out what’s going on. This is Learning by
Discovery, which I believe is more fun, more interesting, and more memorable.
Working on an exploratory basis, you run the risk of making mistakes. But I
don’t see this as a bad thing, because mistakes are a valuable way to learn. I

want you to burn things out and mess things up, to see for yourself the behavior
and limitations of the parts that you are dealing with. The very low voltages used
throughout this book may damage sensitive components, but will not damage
you.
The key requirement of Learning by Discovery is that it has to be hands-on. You
can derive some value from this book merely by reading it, but you will enjoy a
much more valuable experience if you perform the experiments yourself.
Fortunately, the tools and components that you need are inexpensive. Hobby
electronics should not cost significantly more than a recreation such as
needlepoint, and you don’t need a workshop. Everything can be done on a
tabletop.

Will It Be Difficult?
I assume that you’re beginning with no prior knowledge. Consequently, the first
few experiments will be extremely simple, and you won’t even use prototyping
boards or a soldering iron.
I don’t believe that the concepts will be hard to understand. Of course, if you
want to study electronics more formally and do your own circuit design, that can
be challenging. But in this book I have kept theory to a minimum, and the only
math you’ll need will be addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division. You
may also find it helpful (but not absolutely necessary) if you can move decimal
points from one position to another.

How This Book Is Organized
An introductory book can present information in two ways: in tutorials or in
reference sections. I decided to use both of these methods.
You’ll find the tutorials in sections headed as follows:
Experiments
What You Will Need
Cautions
Experiments are the heart of the book, and they have been sequenced so that the
knowledge you gain at the beginning can be applied to subsequent projects. I
suggest that you perform the experiments in numerical order, skipping as few as
possible.
You’ll find reference sections under the following headings:
Fundamentals
Theory
Background
I think the reference sections are important (otherwise, I would not have
included them), but if you’re impatient, you can dip into them at random or skip
them and come back to them later.

If Something Doesn’t Work
Usually there is only one way to build a circuit that works, while there are
hundreds of ways to make mistakes that will prevent it from working. Therefore
the odds are against you, unless you proceed in a really careful and methodical
manner.
I know how frustrating it is when components just sit there doing nothing, but if
you build a circuit that doesn’t work, please begin by following the fault-tracing
procedure that I have recommended (see “Fundamentals: Fault Tracing”). I will
do my best to answer emails from readers who run into problems, but it’s only
fair for you to try to solve your problems first.

Writer–Reader Communication
There are three situations where you and I may want to communicate with each
other.
I may want to tell you if it turns out that the book contains a mistake which
will prevent you from building a project successfully. I may also want to tell
you if a parts kit, sold in association with the book, has something wrong
with it. This is me-informing-you feedback.
You may want to tell me if you think you found an error in the book, or in a
parts kit. This is you-informing-me feedback.
You may be having trouble making something work, and you don’t know
whether I made a mistake or you made a mistake. You would like some help.
This is you-asking-me feedback.
I will explain how to deal with each of these situations.

Me Informing You
If you already registered with me in connection with Make: More Electronics,
you don’t need to register again for updates relating to Make: Electronics. But if
you have not already registered, here’s how it works.
I can’t notify you if there’s an error in the book or in a parts kit unless I have
your contact information. Therefore I am asking you to send me your email
address for the following purposes. Your email will not be used or abused for
any other purpose.
I will notify you if any significant errors are found in this book or in its
successor, Make: More Electronics, and I will provide a workaround.
I will notify you of any errors or problems relating to kits of components sold
in association with this book or in Make: More Electronics.
I will notify you if there is a completely new edition of this book, or of Make:
More Electronics, or of my other books. These notifications will be very rare.
We’ve all seen registration cards that promise to enter you for a prize drawing.
I’m going to offer you a much better deal. If you submit your email address,
which may only be used for the three purposes listed above, I will send you an
unpublished electronics project with complete construction plans as a two-page

PDF. It will be fun, it will be unique, and it will be relatively easy. You won’t be
able to get this in any other way.
The reason I am encouraging you to participate is that if an error is found, and I
have no way to tell you, and you discover it later on your own, you’re likely to
get annoyed. This will be bad for my reputation and the reputation of my work.
It is very much in my interest to avoid a situation where you have a complaint.
Simply send a blank email (or include some comments in it, if you like) to
make.electronics@gmail.com. Please put REGISTER in the subject line.

You Informing Me
If you only want to notify me of an error that you have found, it’s really better to
use the “errata” system maintained by my publisher. The publisher uses the
“errata” information to fix the error in updates of the book.
If you are sure that you found an error, please visit:
http://shop.oreilly.com/category/customer-service/faq-errata.do
The web page will tell you how to submit errata.

You Asking Me
My time is obviously limited, but if you attach a photograph of a project that
doesn’t work, I may have a suggestion. The photograph is essential.
You can use make.electronics@gmail.com for this purpose. Please put the word
HELP in the subject line.

Going Public
There are dozens of forums online where you can discuss this book and mention
any problems you are having, but please be aware of the power that you have as
a reader, and use it fairly. A single negative review can create a bigger effect than
you may realize. It can certainly outweigh half-a-dozen positive reviews.
The responses that I receive are generally very positive, but in a couple of cases
people have been annoyed over small issues such as being unable to find a part
online. I would have been happy to help these people if they had asked me.

I do read my reviews on Amazon about once each month, and will always
provide a response if necessary.
Of course, if you simply don’t like the way in which I have written this book,
you should feel free to say so.

Going Further
After you work your way through this book, you will have grasped many of the
basic principles in electronics. I like to think that if you want to know more, my
own Make: More Electronics is the ideal next step. It is slightly more difficult,
but uses the same “Learning by Discovery” method that I have used here. My
intention is that you will end up with what I consider an “intermediate”
understanding of electronics.
I am not qualified to write an “advanced” guide, and consequently I don’t expect
to create a third book with a title such as “Make: Even More Electronics.”
If you want to know more electrical theory, Practical Electronics for Inventors
by Paul Scherz is still the book that I recommend most often. You don’t have to
be an inventor to find it useful.

Safari® Books Online
Safari Books Online is an on-demand digital library that delivers expert content
in both book and video form from the world’s leading authors in technology and
business.
Technology professionals, software developers, web designers, and business and
creative professionals use Safari Books Online as their primary resource for
research, problem solving, learning, and certification training.
Safari Books Online offers a range of plans and pricing for enterprise,
government, education, and individuals.
Members have access to thousands of books, training videos, and prepublication
manuscripts in one fully searchable database from publishers like O’Reilly
Media, Prentice Hall Professional, Addison-Wesley Professional, Microsoft
Press, Sams, Que, Peachpit Press, Focal Press, Cisco Press, John Wiley & Sons,
Syngress, Morgan Kaufmann, IBM Redbooks, Packt, Adobe Press, FT Press,

Apress, Manning, New Riders, McGraw-Hill, Jones & Bartlett, Course
Technology, and hundreds more. For more information about Safari Books
Online, please visit us online.

How to Contact Us
Please address comments and questions concerning this book to the publisher:
Make:
1160 Battery Street East, Suite 125
San Francisco, CA 94111
877-306-6253 (in the United States or Canada)
707-829-0515 (international or local)
Make: unites, inspires, informs, and entertains a growing community of
resourceful people who undertake amazing projects in their backyards,
basements, and garages. Make: celebrates your right to tweak, hack, and bend
any technology to your will. The Make: audience continues to be a growing
culture and community that believes in bettering ourselves, our environment, our
educational system—our entire world. This is much more than an audience, it’s a
worldwide movement that Make: is leading—we call it the Maker Movement.
For more information about Make:, visit us online:
Make: magazine: http://makezine.com/magazine/
Maker Faire: http://makerfaire.com
Makezine.com: http://makezine.com
Maker Shed: http://makershed.com/
We have a web page for this book, where we list errata, examples, and any
additional information. You can access this page at http://bit.ly/make_elect_2e.
To comment or ask technical questions about this book, send email to
bookquestions@oreilly.com.

Chapter 1. The Basics
Chapter One of this book contains Experiments 1 through 5.
In Experiment 1, I want you to get a taste for electricity—literally! You’ll
experience electric current and discover the nature of electrical resistance, not
just in wires and components but in the world around you.
Experiments 2 through 5 will show you how to measure and understand the
pressure and flow of electricity—and finally, how to generate electricity with
everyday items on a tabletop.
Even if you have prior knowledge of electronics, I encourage you to try these
experiments before venturing into subsequent parts of the book. They’re fun, and
they clarify some basic concepts.

Necessary Items for Chapter One
Each chapter of this book begins with pictures and descriptions of the tools,
equipment, components, and supplies that will be required. After you have
learned about them, you can flip to the back of the book where your buying
options are summarized for quick reference.
To buy tools and equipment, see “Buying Tools and Equipment”.
For components, see “Components”.
For supplies, see “Supplies”.
If you prefer to get a prepackaged set of the components that you need, you
have a choice of kits. See “Kits” for more information.
I classify tools and equipment as items that should be useful indefinitely. They
range from pliers to a multimeter. Supplies, such as wire and solder, will
gradually be consumed in a variety of projects, but the quantities that I am
recommending should be sufficient for all the experiments in the book.
Components will be listed for individual projects, and will become part of those
projects.

The Multimeter

Figure 1-1. This kind of analog meter is inadequate for your purposes. You need a digital
meter.

I’m beginning my instructional overview of tools and equipment with the
multimeter, because I consider it the most essential piece of equipment. It will
tell you how much voltage exists between any two points in a circuit, or how
much current is passing through the circuit. It will help you to find a wiring
error, and can also evaluate a component to determine its electrical resistance—
or its capacitance, which is the ability to store an electrical charge.
If you’re starting with little or no knowledge, these terms may seem confusing,
and you may feel that a multimeter looks complicated and difficult to use. This is
not the case. It makes the learning process easier, because it reveals what you
cannot see.
Before I discuss which meter to buy, I can tell you what not to buy. You don’t
want an old-school meter with a needle that moves across a scale, as shown in
Figure 1-1. That is an analog meter.
You want a digital meter that displays values numerically—and to give you an
idea of the equipment available, I have selected four examples.
Figure 1-2 shows the cheapest digital meter that I could find, costing less than a

paperback novel or a six-pack of soda. It cannot measure very high resistances or
very low voltages, its accuracy is poor, and it does not measure capacitance at
all. However, if your budget is very tight, it will probably see you through the
experiments in this book.

Figure 1-2. The cheapest meter that I could find.

The meter in Figure 1-3 offers more accuracy and more features. This meter, or
one similar to it, is a good basic choice while you are learning electronics.

Figure 1-3. Any meter similar to this one is a good basic choice.

The example in Figure 1-4 is slightly more expensive but much better made.
This particular model has been discontinued, but you can find many like it,
probably costing two to three times as much as the NT brand in Figure 1-3.
Extech is a well-established company trying to maintain its standards in the face
of cut-price competitors.

Figure 1-4. A better-made meter at a somewhat higher price.

Figure 1-5 shows my personal preferred meter at the time of writing. It is
physically rugged, has all the features I could want, and measures a wide range
of values with extremely good accuracy. However, it costs more than twenty
times as much as the lowest-priced, bargain-basement product. I regard it as a
long-term investment.

Figure 1-5. A high-quality product.

How do you decide which meter to buy? Well, if you were learning to drive, you
wouldn’t necessarily need a high-priced car. Similarly, you don’t need a highpriced meter while you are learning electronics. On the other hand, the absolute
cheapest meter may have some drawbacks, such as an internal fuse that is not
easily replaceable, or a rotary switch with contacts that wear out quickly. So
here’s a rule of thumb if you want something that I would regard as inexpensive
but acceptable:
Search eBay for the absolute cheapest model you can find, then double the
price, and use that as your guideline.
Regardless of how much you spend, the following attributes and capabilities are
important.

Ranging

A meter can measure so many values, it has to have a way to narrow the range.
Some meters have manual ranging, meaning that you turn a dial to choose a
ballpark for the quantity that interests you. A range could be from 2 to 20 volts,
for instance.
Other meters have autoranging, which is more convenient, because you just
connect the meter and wait for it to figure everything out. The key word,
however, is “wait.” Every time you make a measurement with an autoranging
meter, you will wait a couple of seconds while it performs an internal evaluation.
Personally I tend to be impatient, so I prefer manual meters.
Another problem with autoranging is that because you have not selected a range
yourself, you must pay attention to little letters in the display where the meter is
telling you which units it has decided to use. For example, the difference
between a “K” or an “M” when measuring electrical resistance is a factor of
1,000. This leads me to my personal recommendation:
I suggest you use a manual-ranging meter for your initial adventures. You’ll
have fewer chances to make errors, and it should cost slightly less.
A vendor’s description of a meter should say whether it uses manual ranging or
autoranging, but if not, you can tell by looking at a photograph of its selector
dial. If you don’t see any numbers around the dial, it’s an autoranging meter. The
meter in Figure 1-4 does autoranging. The others that I pictured do not.

Values
The dial will also reveal what types of measurements are possible. At the very
least, you should expect:
Volts, amps, and ohms, often abbreviated with the letter V, the letter A, and the
ohm symbol, which is the Greek letter omega, shown in Figure 1-6. You may not
know what these attributes mean right now, but they are fundamental.
Your meter should also be capable of measuring milliamps (abbreviated mA) and
millivolts (abbreviated mV). This may not be immediately clear from the dial on
the meter, but will be listed in its specification.

Figure 1-6. Three samples of the Greek symbol omega, used to represent electrical
resistance.

DC/AC, meaning direct current and alternating current. These options may be
selected with a DC/AC pushbutton, or they may be chosen on the main selector
dial. A pushbutton is probably more convenient.
Continuity testing. This useful feature enables you to check for bad connections
or breaks in an electrical circuit. Ideally it should create an audible alert, in
which case it will be represented symbolically with a little dot that has
semicircular lines radiating from it, as shown in Figure 1-7.

Figure 1-7. This symbol indicates the option to test a circuit for continuity, with audible
feedback. It’s a very useful feature.

For a small additional sum, you should be able to buy a meter that makes the
following measurements. In order of importance:
Capacitance. Capacitors are small components that are needed in the majority of
electronic circuits. Because small ones usually don’t have their values printed on
them, the ability to measure their values can be important, especially if some of
them get mixed up or (worse) fall on the floor. Very cheap meters usually cannot

measure capacitance. When the feature exists, it is usually indicated with a letter
F, meaning farads, which are the units of measurement. The abbreviation CAP
may also be used.
Transistor testing, indicated by little holes labeled E, B, C, and E. You plug the
transistor into the holes. This enables you to verify which way up the transistor
should be placed in a circuit, or if you have burned it out.
Frequency, abbreviated Hz. This is unimportant in the experiments in this book,
but may be useful if you go further.
Any features beyond these are not significant.
If you still feel unsure about which meter to buy, read ahead a little to get an idea
of how you will be using a meter in Experiments 1, 2, 3, and 4.

Safety Glasses
For Experiment 2, you may want to use safety glasses. The cheapest plastic type
is satisfactory for this little adventure, as the risk of a battery bursting is almost
nonexistent, and probably would not occur with much force.
Regular eyeglasses would be an acceptable substitute, or you could view the
experiment through a little piece of transparent plastic (for instance, you can cut
out a piece of a water bottle).

Batteries and Connectors
Because batteries and connectors become part of a circuit, I am categorizing
them as components. See “Other Components” for details about ordering these
parts.
Almost all the experiments in this book will use a power source of 9 volts. You
can obtain this from a basic nine-volt battery sold in supermarkets and
convenience stores. Later I’ll suggest an upgrade to an AC adapter, but you don’t
need that right now.
For Experiment 2, you will need a couple of 1.5-volt AA batteries. These have to
be the alkaline type. You must not perform this experiment with any kind of
rechargeable battery.
To transfer the power from a battery into a circuit, you need a connector for the

9-volt battery, as shown in Figure 1-8, and a carrier for a single AA battery, as
shown in Figure 1-9. One carrier will be enough, but I suggest you get at least
three 9-volt connectors for future use.

Figure 1-8. Connector to deliver power from a 9-volt battery.

Figure 1-9. You need a carrier like this for a single AA battery. Don’t buy the type of carrier
that holds two batteries (or three, or four).

Test Leads
You will use test leads (pronounced “leeds”) to connect components with each
other in the first few experiments. The type of leads I mean are double-ended.
Surely, any piece of wire has two ends, so why should it be called “doubleended”? The term usually means that each end is fitted with an alligator clip as
shown in Figure 1-10. Each clip can make a connection by grabbing something
and gripping it securely, freeing you to use your hands elsewhere.
You don’t want the kind of test leads that have a plug at each end. Those are
sometimes known as jumper wires.

Figure 1-10. Double-ended test leads with an alligator clip at each end.

Test leads are classified as equipment for the purposes of this book. See “Buying
Tools and Equipment” for more information.

Potentiometer
A potentiometer functions like the volume control on an old-fashioned stereo.
The kinds shown in Figure 1-11 are considered large by modern standards, but
large is what you need, because you’ll be gripping the terminals with the
alligator clips on your test leads. A 1” diameter potentiometer is preferred. Its

resistance should be listed as 1K. If you are buying your own, see “Other
Components” for details.

Figure 1-11. Potentiometers of the general type required for your first experiments.

Fuse
A fuse interrupts a circuit if too much electricity passes through it. Ideally you’ll
buy the type of 3-amp automotive fuse shown in Figure 1-12, which is easy to
grip with test leads, and clearly reveals the element inside it. Automotive fuses
are sold in a variety of physical sizes, but so long as you use one rated for 3
amps, the dimensions don’t matter. Buy three to allow for destroying them
intentionally or accidentally. If you don’t want to use an auto parts supplier, a
2AG-size 3-amp glass cartridge fuse of the kind shown in Figure 1-13 will be
available from electronics component suppliers, although it is not quite so easy
to use.

Figure 1-12. This type of automotive fuse is easier to handle than the cartridge fuses used in
electronics hardware.

Figure 1-13. You can use a cartridge fuse like this, although your alligator clips won’t grip it
so easily.

Light-Emitting Diodes
More commonly known as LEDs, they come in various shapes and forms. The
ones we will be using are properly known as LED indicators, and are often
described as standard through-hole LEDs in catalogs. A sample in Figure 1-14 is
5mm in diameter, but 3mm is sometimes easier to fit into a circuit when space is
limited. Either will do.

Figure 1-14. A light-emitting diode (LED) approximately 5mm in diameter.

Throughout this book I will refer to generic LEDs, by which I mean the cheapest
ones that don’t emit a high-intensity light and are commonly available in red,
yellow, or green. They are often sold in bulk quantities, and are used in so many
applications that I suggest you buy at least a dozen of each color.
Some generic LEDs are encapsulated in “water clear” plastic or resin, but emit a
color when power is applied. Other LEDs are encapsulated in plastic or resin
tinted with the same color that they will display. Either type is acceptable.
In a few experiments, low-current LEDs are preferred. They cost slightly more,
but are more sensitive. For example, in Experiment 5, where you will generate a
small amount of current with an improvised battery, you’ll get better results with
a low-current LED. See “Other Components” for additional guidance, if you are
not using components that were supplied in a kit.

Resistors
You’ll need a variety of resistors to restrict the voltage and current in various
parts of a circuit. They should look something like the ones in Figure 1-15. The
color of the body of the resistor doesn’t matter. Later I will explain how the
colored stripes tell you the value of the component.

Figure 1-15. Two resistors of the type you need, all rated for 1/4 watt.

If you are buying your own resistors, they are so small and cheap, you would be
foolish to select just the values listed in each experiment. Get a prepackaged
selection in bulk from surplus or discount sources, or eBay. For more
information about resistors, including a complete list of all the values used
throughout this book, see “Components”.
You don’t need any other components to take you through Experiments 1
through 5. So let’s get started!

Experiment 1: Taste the Power!
Can you taste electricity? It feels as if you can.

What You Will Need

9-volt battery (1)
Multimeter (1)
That’s all!

Caution: No More than Nine Volts
This experiment should only use a 9-volt battery. Do not try it with a higher
voltage, and do not use a bigger battery that can deliver more current. Also, if
you have metal braces on your teeth, be careful not to touch them with the
battery. Most important, never apply electric current from any size of battery
through a break in your skin.

Procedure
Moisten your tongue and touch the tip of it to the metal terminals of a 9-volt
battery, as shown in Figure 1-16. (Maybe your tongue isn’t quite as big as the
one in the picture. Mine certainly isn’t. But this experiment will work regardless
of how big or small your tongue may be.)

Figure 1-16. An intrepid Maker tests the characteristics of an alkaline battery.

Do you feel that tingle? Now set aside the battery, stick out your tongue, and dry
the tip of it very thoroughly with a tissue. Touch the battery to your tongue
again, and you should feel less of a tingle.
What’s happening here? You can use a meter to find out.

Setting Up Your Meter

Does your meter have a battery preinstalled? Select any function with the dial,
and wait to see if the display shows a number. If nothing is visible, you may
have to open the meter and put in a battery before you can use it. To find out
how to do this, check the instructions that came with the meter.
Meters are supplied with a red lead and a black lead. Each lead has a plug on one
end, and a steel probe on the other end. You insert the plugs into the meter, then
touch the probes on locations where you want to know what’s going on. See
Figure 1-17. The probes detect electricity; they don’t emit it in significant
quantities. When you are dealing with the small currents and voltages in the
experiments in this book, the probes cannot hurt you (unless you poke yourself
with their sharp ends).

Figure 1-17. Leads for a meter, terminating in metal probes.

Most meters have three sockets, but some have four. See Figure 1-18, Figure 119, and Figure 1-20 for examples. Here are the general rules:
One socket should be labelled COM. This is common to all your
measurements. Plug the black lead into this socket, and leave it there.
Another socket should be identified with the ohm (omega) symbol, and the
letter V for volts. It can measure either resistance or voltage. Plug the red lead
into this socket.

The voltage/ohms socket may also be used for measuring small currents in
mA (milliamps) . . . or you may see a separate socket for this, which will
require you to move the red lead sometimes. We’ll get to that later.
An additional socket may be labelled 2A, 5A, 10A, 20A, or something
similar, to indicate a maximum number of amps. This is used for measuring
high currents. We won’t be needing it for projects in this book.

Figure 1-18. Note the labeling of sockets on this meter.

Figure 1-19. Socket functions are split up differently on this meter.

Figure 1-20. Sockets on one more meter.

Fundamentals: Ohms
You’re going to evaluate the resistance of your tongue, in ohms. But what is an
ohm?
We measure distance in miles or kilometers, mass in pounds or kilograms, and
temperature in Fahrenheit or Centigrade. We measure electrical resistance in
ohms, which is an international unit named after Georg Simon Ohm, who was an
electrical pioneer.
The Greek omega symbol indicates ohms, but for resistances above 999 ohms
the uppercase letter K is used, which means kilohm, equivalent to a thousand
ohms. For example, a resistance of 1,500 ohms will be referred to as 1.5K.
Above 999,999 ohms, the uppercase letter M is used, meaning megohm, which is
a million ohms. In everyday speech, a megohm is often referred to as a “meg.” If
someone is using a “two-point-two meg resistor,” its value will be 2.2M.
A conversion table for ohms, kilohms, and megohms is shown in Figure 1-21.

Figure 1-21. Conversion table for the most common multiples of ohms.

In Europe, the letter R, K, or M is substituted for a decimal point, to reduce
the risk of errors. Thus, 5K6 in a European circuit diagram means 5.6K, 6M8
means 6.8M, and 6R8 means 6.8 ohms. I won’t be using the European style
here, but you may find it in some circuit diagrams elsewhere.
A material that has very high resistance to electricity is known as an insulator.
Most plastics, including the colored sheaths around wires, are insulators.
A material with very low resistance is a conductor. Metals such as copper,
aluminum, silver, and gold are excellent conductors.

Measuring Your Tongue
Inspect the dial on the front of your meter, and you’ll find at least one position
identified with the ohm symbol. On an autoranging meter, turn the dial to point
to the ohm symbol as shown in Figure 1-22, touch the probes gently to your
tongue, and wait for the meter to choose a range automatically. Watch for the
letter K in the numeric display. Never stick the probes into your tongue!

Figure 1-22. On an autoranging meter, just turn the dial to the ohm (omega) symbol.

On a manual meter, you must choose a range of values. For a tongue
measurement, probably 200K (200,000 ohms) would be about right. Note that
the numbers beside the dial are maximums, so 200K means “no more than
200,000 ohms” while 20K means “no more than 20,000 ohms.” See the closeups of the manual meters in Figure 1-23 and Figure 1-24.

Figure 1-23. A manual meter requires you to select the range.

Figure 1-24. A different manual meter dial, but the principle is the same.

Touch the probes to your tongue about one inch apart. Note the meter reading,
which should be around 50K. Put aside the probes, stick out your tongue, and
use a tissue to dry it carefully and thoroughly, as you did before. Without
allowing your tongue to become moist again, repeat the test, and the reading
should be higher. Using a manual ranging meter, you may have to select a higher
range to see a resistance value.
When your skin is moist (for instance, if you perspire), its electrical
resistance decreases. This principle is used in lie detectors, because someone
who knowingly tells a lie, under conditions of stress, may tend to perspire.
Here’s the conclusion that your test may suggest. A lower resistance allows more
electric current to flow, and in your initial tongue test, more current created a
bigger tingle.

Fundamentals: Inside a Battery
When you used a battery for the original tongue test, I didn’t bother to mention
how a battery works. Now is the time to rectify that omission.
A 9-volt battery contains chemicals that liberate electrons (particles of
electricity), which want to flow from one terminal to the other as a result of a
chemical reaction. Think of the cells inside a battery as being like two water
tanks—one of them full, the other empty. If the tanks are connected with each

other by a pipe and a valve, and you open the valve, water will flow between
them until their levels are equal. Figure 1-25 may help you to visualize this.
Similarly, when you open up an electrical pathway between the two sides of a
battery, electrons flow between them, even if the pathway consists only of the
moisture on your tongue.
Electrons flow more easily through some substances (such as a moist tongue)
than others (such as a dry tongue).

Figure 1-25. You can think of a battery as being like a pair of interconnected water
reservoirs.

Further Investigation
The tongue test was not a very well-controlled experiment, because the distance
between the probes might have varied a little between one trial and the next. Do
you think that may be significant? Let’s find out.
Hold the meter probes so that their tips are only 1/4” apart. Touch them to your

moist tongue. Now separate the probes by 1” and try again. What readings do
you get?
When electricity travels through a shorter distance, it encounters less resistance.
As a result, the current will increase.
Try a similar experiment on your arm, as shown in Figure 1-26. You can vary the
distance between the probes in fixed steps, such as 1/4”, and note the resistance
shown by your meter. Do you think that doubling the distance between the
probes doubles the resistance shown by the meter? How can you prove or
disprove this?

Figure 1-26. Vary the distance between the probes, and note the reading on your meter.

If the resistance is too high for your meter to measure, you will see an error
message, such as L, instead of some numbers. Try moistening your skin, then
repeat the test, and you should get a result. The only problem is, as the moisture
on your skin evaporates, the resistance will change. You see how difficult it is to
control all the factors in an experiment. The random factors are properly known
as uncontrolled variables.
There is still one more variable that I haven’t discussed, which is the amount of
pressure between each probe and the skin. If you press harder, I suspect that the
resistance will diminish. Can you prove this? How could you design an
experiment to eliminate this variable?
If you’re tired of measuring skin resistance, you can try dunking the probes into
a glass of water. Then dissolve some salt in the water, and test it again. No doubt
you’ve heard that water conducts electricity, but the full story is not so simple.
Impurities in water play an important part.
What do you think will happen if you try to measure the resistance of water that
contains no impurities at all? Your first step would be to obtain some pure water.
So-called purified water usually has minerals added after it was purified, so,
that’s not what you want. Similarly, spring water is not totally pure. What you
need is distilled water, also known as deionized water. This is often sold in
supermarkets. I think you’ll find that its resistance, per inch between the meter
probes, is higher than the resistance of your tongue. Try it to find out.
Those are all the experiments relating to resistance that I can think of, right now.
But I still have a little background information for you.

Background: The Man Who Discovered Resistance
Georg Simon Ohm, pictured in Figure 1-27, was born in Bavaria in 1787 and
worked in obscurity for much of his life, studying the nature of electricity using
metal wire that he had to make for himself (you couldn’t truck on down to Home
Depot for a spool of hookup wire back in the early 1800s).
Despite his limited resources and inadequate mathematical abilities, Ohm was
able to demonstrate in 1827 that the electrical resistance of a conductor such as
copper varied in inverse proportion with its area of cross-section, and the current

flowing through it is proportional to the voltage applied to it, so long as
temperature is held constant. Fourteen years later, the Royal Society in London
finally recognized the significance of his contribution and awarded him the
Copley Medal. Today, his discovery is known as Ohm’s Law. I’ll explain more
about this in Experiment 4.

Figure 1-27. Georg Simon Ohm, after being honored for his pioneering work, most of which
he pursued in relative obscurity.

Cleanup and Recycling
Your battery should not have been damaged or significantly discharged by this

experiment. You can use it again.
Remember to switch off your meter before putting it away. Many meters will
beep to remind you to switch them off if you don’t use them for a while, but
some don’t. A meter consumes a very small amount of electricity while it is
switched on, even when you are not using it to measure anything.

Experiment 2: Let’s Abuse a Battery!
To get a better feeling for electrical power, you’re going to do what most books
tell you not to do. You’re going to short out a battery. (A short circuit is a
shortcut between two sides of a power source.)

Caution: Use a Small Battery
The experiment that I am going to describe is safe, but some short circuits can be
dangerous. Never short out a power outlet in your home: there’ll be a loud bang,
a bright flash, and the wire or tool that you use will be partially melted, while
flying particles of melted metal can burn you or blind you.
If you short out a car battery, the flow of current is so huge that the battery might
even explode, drenching you in acid. Just ask the guy in Figure 1-28 (if he is
able to answer).

Figure 1-28. Dropping a wrench between the terminals of a car battery will be bad for your
health. Short circuits can be dramatic, even at a “mere” 12 volts, if the battery is big
enough.

Lithium batteries are often found in power tools, laptop computers, and other
portable devices. Never short-circuit a lithium battery: it can catch fire and burn
you. Lithium batteries have been known to catch fire even if you don’t short
them out, as shown in Figure 1-29. After some early laptops self-destructed,
lithium battery packs were modified to prevent this kind of thing. But shortcircuiting them is still a very bad idea.

Figure 1-29. Never fool around with lithium batteries.

Use only an alkaline battery in this experiment, and only a single AA cell. You
may also want to wear safety glasses in case you happen to have a defective
battery.

What You Will Need
1.5-volt AA battery (2)
Battery carrier (1)
3-amp fuse (2)
Safety glasses (regular eyeglasses or sunglasses will do)
Test leads with alligator clips at each end (2)

Generating Heat with Current
Use an alkaline battery. Do not use any kind of rechargeable battery.
Put the battery into a battery carrier that terminates in two thin wires, as shown
in Figure 1-9. Twist the bare ends of the wires together, as shown in Figure 1-30.
At first it seems that nothing happens. But wait one minute, and you’ll find that
the wires are getting hot. Wait another minute, and the battery, too, will be hot.

Figure 1-30. Shorting out an alkaline battery can be safe if you follow the directions
precisely.

The heat is caused by electricity flowing through the wires and through the
electrolyte (the conductive fluid) inside the battery. If you’ve ever used a hand
pump to force air into a bicycle tire, you know that the pump gets warm.
Electricity behaves in much the same way. You can imagine the electricity being
composed of particles (electrons) that make the wire hot as they push through it.
This isn’t a perfect analogy, but it’s close enough for our purposes.
Where do the electrons come from? Chemical reactions inside the battery
liberate them, creating electrical pressure. The correct name for this pressure is
voltage, which is measured in volts and is named after Alessandro Volta, another
electrical pioneer.
Going back to the water analogy: the height of the water in a tank is proportional
with the pressure of the water, and is similar to voltage. Figure 1-31 may help
you to visualize this.

Figure 1-31. The pressure in a source of water is analogous to the voltage in a source of
electricity.

But volts are only half of the story. When electrons flow through a wire, the
amount of flow during a period of time is known as amperage, named after yet
another electrical pioneer, André-Marie Ampère. That flow is also generally
known as current. The current—the amperage—generates the heat.
Think of voltage as pressure.
Think of amperes as the rate of flow, properly known as current.

Background: Why Didn’t Your Tongue Get Hot?
When you touched the 9-volt battery to your tongue, you felt a tingle, but no
perceptible heat. When you shorted out a battery, you generated a noticeable
amount of heat, even though you only used a 1.5-volt battery. How can you
explain this?
Your meter showed you that the electrical resistance of your tongue is very high.

This high resistance reduced the flow of electrons.
The resistance of a wire is very low, so if there’s a wire connecting the two
terminals of the battery, more current will pass through it than passed through
your tongue, and it will create more heat. If all other factors remain constant:
Lower resistance allows more current to flow.
The heat generated by electricity is proportional with the amount of
electricity (the current) passing through a conductor in a period of time. (This
relationship is no longer exactly true if the resistance of the wire changes as
the wire gets hot. But it remains approximately true.)
Here are some other basic concepts:
The flow of electricity per second is measured in amperes, very commonly
abbreviated as amps.
The pressure of electricity that causes the flow is measured in volts.
The resistance to the flow is measured in ohms.
A higher resistance restricts the current.
A higher voltage is better able to overcome resistance and increase the
current.
The relationship between voltage, resistance, and amperage (pressure, resistance,
and flow) is illustrated in Figure 1-32.

Figure 1-32. Resistance blocks pressure and reduces flow—in water, and in electricity.

Fundamentals: Volt Basics
The volt is an international unit, represented by an uppercase letter V. In the
United States and much of Europe, AC power for domestic use is supplied at
110V, 115V, or 120V, with separate circuits for heavy-duty appliances delivering
220V, 230V, or 240V. Solid-state electronic components traditionally required
DC power ranging from 5V to about 20V, although modern surface-mount
devices may use less than 2V. Some components, such as a microphone, deliver
voltage measured in millivolts, abbreviated mV, each millivolt being 1/1,000th
of a volt. When electricity is distributed over long distances, it is measured in
kilovolts, abbreviated kV. A few long-distance lines use megavolts. A conversion
table for millivolts, volts, and kilovolts is shown in Figure 1-33.

Figure 1-33. Conversion table for the most common multiples of volts.

Fundamentals: Ampere Basics
The ampere is an international unit, represented by an uppercase letter A.
Household appliances may draw several amps, and a typical circuit breaker in
the United States is rated for 20A. Electronic components often are rated in
milliamps, abbreviated mA, each milliamp being 1/1,000th of an amp. Devices
such as liquid-crystal displays may draw microamps, abbreviated µA, each
microamp being 1/1,1000th of a milliamp. A conversion table for amps,
milliamps, and microamps is shown in Figure 1-34.

Figure 1-34. Conversion table for the most common multiples of amps.

How to Blow a Fuse
Exactly how much current flowed through the wires of the battery carrier, when
you shorted out the battery? Could we have measured it?
Not easily, because if you try to use your multimeter to measure high current,
you may blow the fuse inside the meter. So set aside the meter, and we’ll use
your 3-amp fuse, which we can sacrifice because it didn’t cost very much.
First inspect the fuse, using a magnifying glass, if you have one. In an
automotive fuse, you should see a tiny S-shape in the transparent window at the
center. That S is a thin section of metal that melts easily. You saw it in Figure 112. In a glass cartridge fuse, there’s a thin piece of wire that serves the same
purpose.
Remove the 1.5-volt battery from its carrier. The battery is no longer useful for
anything, and should be recycled if possible. Separate the two wires that you
twisted together, and use two test leads to connect the carrier with a fuse, as
shown in Figure 1-35 or Figure 1-36. Watch the fuse as you insert a new battery
in the carrier. A break should occur in the center of the fuse element, where the
metal melted. Figure 1-37 and Figure 1-38 show what I mean.

Figure 1-35. How to short out an automotive fuse.

Some 3-amp fuses blow more easily than others, even though they all have the
same rating. If you think your fuse has not been affected, try applying the wires
from the battery to it directly, instead of passing the current through the test
leads. If you are not using a fresh AA battery, you may have to wait a few
seconds for the fuse to respond. If all else fails, you can apply a C cell or a D
cell, which have the same voltage as an AA battery but can deliver more current.
But this shouldn’t be necessary.

Figure 1-36. How to apply your test leads to a small cartridge fuse.

Figure 1-37. Note the break in the element.

Figure 1-38. In a shorted cartridge fuse, a similar break appears.

This is how a fuse works: it melts to protect the rest of the circuit. That tiny
break inside the fuse stops any more current from flowing.

Fundamentals: Direct and Alternating Current
The flow of current that you get from a battery is known as direct current, or
DC. Like the flow of water from a faucet, it is a steady stream that flows in one
direction.
The flow of current that you get from the power outlet in your home is very
different. The “live” side of the outlet changes from positive to negative, relative
to the “neutral” side, at a rate of 60 times each second (in many foreign
countries, including Europe, 50 times per second). This is known as alternating
current, or AC, which is more like the pulsing flow you get when you use a
power washer to wash a car.
Alternating current is essential for some purposes, such as cranking up voltage
so that electricity can be distributed over long distances. AC is also useful in
motors and domestic appliances. The parts of a power outlet are shown in
Figure 1-39. This style of outlet is found in North America, South America,
Japan, and some other nations. European outlets look different, but the principle
remains the same.
In the figure, socket A is the “hot” or “live” side of the outlet, supplying voltage
that alternates between positive and negative relative to socket B, which is the
“neutral” side. If an appliance develops a fault such as an internal loose wire, it
should protect you by sinking the voltage through socket C, the ground.

Figure 1-39. The parts of a power outlet.

In the United States, the outlet shown in the diagram is rated for 110 to 120

volts. Other configurations of outlet are used for higher voltages, but they still
have live, neutral, and ground wires—with the exception of three-phase outlets,
which are used primarily in industry.
For most of this book I’m going to be talking about DC, for two reasons: first,
most simple electronic circuits are powered with DC, and second, the way it
behaves is much easier to understand.
I won’t bother to mention repeatedly that I’m dealing with DC. Just assume
that everything is DC unless otherwise noted.

Background: Inventor of the Battery
Alessandro Volta, shown in Figure 1-40, was born in Italy in 1745, long before
science was broken up into specialties. After studying chemistry (he discovered
methane in 1776) he became a professor of physics and developed an interest in
the so-called galvanic response, whereby a frog’s leg will twitch in response to a
jolt of static electricity.
Using a wine glass full of salt water, Volta demonstrated that the chemical
reaction between two electrodes (one made of copper, the other of zinc) will
generate a steady electric current. In 1800, he refined his apparatus by stacking
plates of copper and zinc, separated by cardboard soaked in salt and water. This
“voltaic pile” was the first electric battery in Western civilization.

Figure 1-40. Alessandro Volta discovered that chemical reactions can create electricity.

Background: Father of Electromagnetism
Born in 1775 in France, André-Marie Ampère (shown in Figure 1-41) was a
mathematical prodigy who became a science teacher, despite being largely selfeducated in his father’s library. His best-known work was to derive a theory of
electromagnetism in 1820, describing the way that an electric current generates a
magnetic field. He also built the first instrument to measure the flow of
electricity (now known as a galvanometer), and discovered the element fluorine.

Figure 1-41. André-Marie Ampère found that an electric current running through a wire
creates a magnetic field around it. He used this principle to make the first reliable
measurements of what came to be known as amperage.

Cleanup and Recycling
You can dispose of the battery that you damaged when you shorted it. Putting
batteries in the trash is not a great idea, because they contain heavy metals that
should be kept out of the ecosystem. Your state or town may include batteries in
a local recycling scheme. (California requires that almost all batteries be
recycled.) Check your local regulations for details.
The blown fuse is of no further use, and can be thrown away.

The second battery, which was protected by the fuse, should still be OK.
The battery carrier can be reused later.

Experiment 3: Your First Circuit
Now it’s time to make electricity do something more useful. To achieve this,
you’ll be experimenting with components known as resistors, and a lightemitting diode, or LED.

What You Will Need
9-volt battery (1)
Resistors: 470 ohm (1), 1K (1), 2.2K (1)
Generic LED (1)
Test leads with alligator clips at each end (3)
Multimeter (1)

Setup
It’s time to get acquainted with the most fundamental component we’ll be using
in electronic circuits: the humble resistor. As its name implies, it resists the flow
of electricity. As you might expect, its value is measured in ohms.
If you bought a bargain-basement assortment of resistors, they may be delivered
to you in unmarked bags. No problem; we can determine their values easily
enough. In fact, even if the packages are clearly labeled, I want you to check the
resistors as we go along, because it’s easy to get them mixed up. You have two
alternatives:
Use your multimeter, after setting it to measure ohms.
Learn the color codes that are printed on most resistors. I’ll explain them
immediately below.
After you check the values of resistors, it’s a good idea to sort them into labeled
compartments in little plastic parts boxes. Personally, I like the boxes sold at the
Michael’s chain of crafts stores in the United States, but there are many

alternatives. You can also use miniature plastic bags, which you can find by
searching eBay for:
plastic bags parts

Fundamentals: Decoding Resistors
Some resistors have a value clearly stated on them in microscopic print that you
can read with a magnifying glass, as shown in Figure 1-42.

Figure 1-42. Only a minority of resistors have their values printed on them.

However, most resistors are color-coded with stripes. Figure 1-43 shows the
coding scheme.

Figure 1-43. The coding scheme that shows the value of a resistor. Some resistors have four
stripes on the left instead of three, as explained in the text.

Figure 1-44 shows you some examples. From top to bottom: 1,500,000 ohms
(1.5M) at 10% tolerance, 560 ohms at 5%, 4,700 ohms (4.7K) at 10%, and
65,500 ohms (65.5K) at 5%.

Figure 1-44. Four examples of color-coded resistors.

The code can be summarized in words like this:
Ignore the color of the body of the resistor. (The exception to this rule would
be a white resistor that may be fireproof or fused, and must be replaced with
the same type. But you are unlikely to encounter one of these.)
Look for a silver or gold stripe. If you find it, turn the resistor so that the
stripe is on the righthand side. Silver means that the value of the resistor is
accurate within 10%, while gold means that the value is accurate within 5%.
This is known as the tolerance of the resistor.
If you don’t find a silver or gold stripe, turn the resistor so that the colored
stripes are clustered at the left end. Usually there are three of them. If there
are four, I’ll deal with those in a moment.
The colors of the first two stripes, from left to right, tell you the first two

digits in the value of the resistor. The color of the third stripe from the left
tells you how many zeros follow the two numbers. The color values are
shown in Figure 1-43.
If you run across a resistor with four stripes instead of three, the first three
stripes are digits and the fourth stripe is the number of zeros. The third numeric
stripe allows a resistor to have an intermediate value.
Confusing? Well, you can still use your meter to check the values. Just be aware
that the meter reading may be slightly different from the claimed value of the
resistor. This can happen because your meter isn’t absolutely accurate, or
because the resistor is not absolutely accurate, or both. Small variations don’t
matter in the projects in this book.

Lighting an LED
Now take a look at one of your generic LEDs. Old-fashioned lightbulbs used to
waste power by converting a lot of the power into heat. LEDs are much smarter:
they convert almost all their power into light, and they last almost indefinitely—
provided you treat them right!
An LED is quite fussy about the amount of power it gets, and the way it gets it.
Always follow these rules:
The longer wire sticking out of the LED must receive a more positive voltage
relative to the shorter wire.
The positive voltage difference that you apply between the long wire and the
short wire must not exceed the limit stated by the manufacturer. This is
known as the forward voltage.
The current passing into the LED through the long wire and out through the
short wire must not exceed the limit stated by the manufacturer. This is
known as the forward current.
What happens if you break these rules? You’ll see for yourself in Experiment 4.
Make sure you have a fresh 9-volt battery. You could use a connector with the
battery, as shown in Figure 1-8, but I think it’s easier just to clip a couple of test
leads directly to the battery terminals, as in Figure 1-45.
Select a 2.2K resistor. Remember, 2.2K means 2,200 ohms. Why is it 2,200 and

not a nice round amount such as 2,000? I’ll explain that shortly. See
“Background: Puzzling Numbers” if you want to know right now.
The colored stripes on your 2.2K resistor should be red-red-red, meaning 2
followed by another 2 and two more zeros. You will also need a 1K resistor
(brown-black-red) and a 470-ohm resistor (yellow-violet-brown), so have them
ready.
Wire the 2.2K resistor into the circuit shown in Figure 1-45. Make sure you get
the battery the right way around, with its positive terminal on the right.
The “plus” symbol always means “positive.”
The “minus” symbol always means “negative.”
Be sure that the long lead of the LED is on the right, and be careful that none of
the alligator clips touches each other. You should see the LED glow dimly.

Figure 1-45. Your first circuit, to light an LED.

Now swap out your 2.2K resistor and substitute the 1K resistor. The LED should
glow more brightly.
Swap out the 1K resistor and substitute a 470-ohm resistor, and the LED should
be brighter still.
This may seem obvious, but it makes an important point. The resistor blocks a
percentage of the current in the circuit. A higher-value resistor blocks more
current, leaving less for the LED.

Checking a Resistor
I mentioned that you can use your meter to check the value of a resistor. This is
really very easy. The procedure is shown in Figure 1-46. First, don’t forget to set
your meter to ohms. Disconnect the resistor from any other components, and
apply the probes of your meter. If you have a manual-ranging meter, you must
set the meter to a higher value than you expect to find. Otherwise, you’ll get an
error message.

Figure 1-46. Testing the value of a resistor.

One thing to bear in mind is that you will get a more accurate reading if you
press the probes firmly against the leads of the resistor. Don’t hold the resistors
and probes between your fingers—you don’t want to measure the resistance of
your body along with the resistance of the resistor. Place the resistor on an
insulating surface, such as a nonmetallic desktop. Hold the probes by their
plastic handles, and press down hard with the metal tips.
Alternatively, you can use a couple of test leads. Clip one end of each lead to

each end of the resistor, and clip the other ends of the leads to the meter probes.
Now you can do hands-free resistor testing, which is much easier.

Background: Puzzling Numbers
After you check a few resistors (or shop for them online) you’ll notice that the
same pairs of digits keep recurring. In thousands of ohms, we often find 1.0K,
1.5K, 2.2K, 3.3K, 4.7K, and 6.8K. In tens of thousands, we find 10K, 15K, 22K,
33K, 47K, and 68K.
The pairs of digits are known as multipliers, because you can multiply them by
1, or 1,000, or 10,000, or 100, or 10 to get basic resistor values in ohms.
There is a logical reason for this. Long ago, many resistors had an accuracy of
plus-or-minus 20%, and therefore a 1.0K resistor could have an actual resistance
as high as 1 + 20% = 1.2K while a 1.5K resistor could have a resistance as low
as 1.5 – 20% = 1.2K. Therefore, it was pointless to have any values between 1K
and 1.5K. Similarly, a 68 ohm resistor could have a value as high as 68 + 20% =
just over 80 ohms, while a 100 ohm resistor could have a value as low as 100 –
20% = 80 ohms; so, it was unnecessary to have a value between 68 and 100.
In the top row of the table in Figure 1-47, the white numbers were the original
multipliers for resistors. These numbers are still the most widely used today,
even though modern resistor values are plus-or-minus 10% or better.
If you include the numbers in black type with the numbers in white type, you get
all the possible multipliers for 10% resistors. If you then include the values in
blue type, you have all the possible multipliers for 5% resistors.

Figure 1-47. Traditional multipliers for resistor and capacitor values. See text for details.

I have only used the original six multipliers for the projects in this book, to
minimize the range of resistors that you will require. If accuracy is important (in

Experiment 19, for example, where a circuit measures the speed of your
reflexes) you can use a potentiometer to fine-tune the output—as I will show you
in the very next experiment.

Cleanup and Recycling
You’ll use the battery and the LED in the next experiment. The resistors can be
reused in the future.

Experiment 4: Variable Resistance
You can vary the resistance in a circuit by inserting a potentiometer, which will
control the current. The potentiometer in this experiment will enable you to learn
more about voltage, amperage, and the relationship between them. You’ll also
learn how to read a manufacturer’s datasheet.

What You Will Need
9-volt battery (1)
Resistors: 470 ohms (1) and 1K (1)
Generic LEDs (2)
Test leads with alligator clips at each end (4)
Potentiometer, 1K linear (2)
Multimeter (1)

Look Inside Your Potentiometer
The first thing I want you to do is see for yourself how a potentiometer works,
and the best way to accomplish this is to open it. This is why I asked you to
acquire two potentiometers for this experiment—in case you can’t put the first
one back together again.
Some readers of the first edition of this book complained that it’s wasteful to risk
destroying a potentiometer by prying it open. But almost any learning experience
consumes some resources, from pens and paper to whiteboard markers. If you
really don’t want to risk the future of your potentiometer, you can leave it

untouched while you study the photographs that follow.
Most potentiometers are held together with little metal tabs. You need to bend
the tabs upward. One way to do this is to slide in a knife and use it as a lever.
Another way is to use a screwdriver—or maybe some pliers. I haven’t specified
any tools for this experiment, because I am hoping you already have a knife, or a
screwdriver, or pliers in your home.
Figure 1-48 shows the tabs circled in red. (A fourth one is hidden behind the
shaft of the component.) Figure 1-49 shows the tabs bent upward and outward.

Figure 1-48. The tabs that hold a potentiometer together.

Figure 1-49. The tabs have been bent upward and outward.

After you have pried up the tabs, very carefully pull up on the shaft while
holding the body of the potentiometer in your other hand. It should come apart
as shown in Figure 1-50.

Figure 1-50. The wiper of the potentiometer is circled.

Inside the shell you will find a circular track. Depending on whether you have a
really cheap potentiometer or a slightly more high-class version, the track will be
made of conductive plastic or will have thin wire wrapped around it, as shown in
the photograph. Either way, the principle is the same. The wire or the plastic
possesses some resistance (a total of 1,000 ohms in a 1K potentiometer), and as
you turn the shaft, a wiper rubs against the resistance, giving you a shortcut to
any point from the center terminal. The wiper is circled red in Figure 1-50.
You can probably put it back together, but if necessary, use your backup
potentiometer.

Testing the Potentiometer
Set your meter to measure resistance (at least 1K, on a manual-ranging meter)
and touch the probes to the two adjacent terminals shown in Figure 1-51. You
should find that when you turn the shaft of the potentiometer clockwise (seen
from above), the resistance diminishes to almost zero. When you turn the shaft
counterclockwise, the resistance increases to about 1K. Now keep the black
probe where it is, and touch the red probe on the opposite terminal. The behavior

of the potentiometer will be reversed.
Do you think, maybe, the middle terminal connects with the wiper inside the
potentiometer? Do you think the other two terminals connect with the ends of
the track?

Figure 1-51. Procedure for testing the behavior of a potentiometer.

If you move the red probe to where the black probe is, and move the black probe
to where the red probe was, the resistance between them will not change. It’s the
same in both directions. Unlike an LED, which has to be connected the right way
around, a potentiometer has no polarity.

Caution: Don’t Add Power
Don’t apply power to a circuit while trying to measure resistance. Your meter
uses a small amount of voltage from its internal battery when you are measuring
resistance. You don’t want that voltage to fight with voltage that you are
applying from a battery.

Caution: Destructive Experiment Ahead
I have performed the next procedure many times uneventfully, but one reader
reports that his LED fractured. You may wish to use safety glasses, if you want
to be cautious. Regular eyeglasses will be acceptable.

Dimming Your LED
Now you can use the potentiometer to control the brightness of your LED.
Connect everything exactly as shown in Figure 1-52. Make sure the two alligator
clips are on the terminals shown. You are now using a variable resistance (the
potentiometer) where the fixed resistor was in Experiment 3 (see Figure 1-45).
Begin with the shaft turned all the way counterclockwise (seen from above),
otherwise you’ll burn out the LED before we even get started. Now turn the
shaft clockwise, very slowly, as shown by the blue arrow. You’ll notice the LED
glowing brighter, and brighter, and brighter—until, oops, it just went dark! You
see how easy it is to destroy modern electronics? When I titled this procedure
“Dimming your LED,” you probably didn’t realize I was talking about dimming
it permanently.
Set aside that LED. I’m sorry to say, it will never glow again.

Figure 1-52. Adjusting the brightness of an LED with a potentiometer.

Substitute a new LED, and this time, let’s protect it. Add a 470-ohm resistor, as
shown in Figure 1-53. Electricity now passes through the 470-ohm resistor as
well as the potentiometer, so that the LED will be protected even if the
potentiometer’s resistance diminishes to zero. You can turn the shaft of the
potentiometer without worrying about destroying anything.

Figure 1-53. Protecting the LED.

The lesson that I hope you have learned is that an LED is too sensitive to be
connected directly with a 9-volt battery. It must always be protected by some
extra resistance in the circuit.
Could you power an LED directly from a single 1.5-volt battery? Try it. You
may get a dim glow, but 1.5 volts is below the threshold for the LED. Let’s find
out how much voltage an LED needs.

Measuring Potential Difference

While the battery is connected in the circuit, set the dial of your meter to
measure volts DC. You can leave the red lead plugged into the meter where it
was before, because the socket for measuring volts is the same as the socket for
measuring ohms.
If your meter uses manual ranging, set the voltage higher then 9 volts.
Remember, the numbers beside the dial on the meter are the maximum in each
range.
Now touch the probes to the terminals of the potentiometer that you are using, as
shown in Figure 1-54. Try to hold the probes in place while you turn the
potentiometer up a little, and down a little. You should see the voltage changing
accordingly. We call this the potential difference between the two probes.
“Potential difference” means the same as voltage between two points.

Figure 1-54. Measuring the potential difference across an LED.

If you measure the potential across the LED, this will also change when you

adjust the potentiometer, although not as much as you might expect. An LED
self-adjusts to some extent, modifying its resistance as the voltage and current
fluctuate.
What if you swap the positions of the red and black probes? A minus sign should
appear in the meter’s display. You won’t damage the meter this way, but it’s less
confusing if you always measure voltage with the red probe more positive than
the black probe.
Lastly, touch the probes across the fixed-value resistor, and once again the
potential difference will change when you adjust the potentiometer. Voltage from
the battery is shared by all the components in this simple circuit. When the
potentiometer reduces its share, a larger voltage difference is available for the
fixed-value resistor and the LED. In addition, when the potentiometer has a
lower resistance, the total resistance in the circuit is lower, allowing more current
to flow.
A few things to keep in mind:
If you add up the potential differences across all the devices in the circuit, the
total will be the same as the voltage supplied by the battery.
You measure voltage relatively between two points in a circuit. This is what
their potential difference means.
When measuring voltage, apply your meter like a stethoscope, without
disturbing or breaking the connections in the circuit.

Checking the Flow
Now I want you to make a different measurement. I want you to check the
amperage in the circuit, using your meter set to mA (milliamps). When
measuring current, you must observe these rules:
You can only measure current (amperage) when it passes through the meter.
You have to insert your meter into the circuit.
Too much current will blow the fuse inside your meter.
You will have to use a socket on the meter labelled mA. This may be the
same as the socket that you have used so far, or it may be different.

Make sure you turn the dial on your meter to measure mA, not volts, before you
try this.

Caution: Meter Overload
Be careful when measuring current. For instance, if you put the probes of your
meter directly against the terminals of a battery, and the meter is set to measure
mA, you will create an instant overload, and the meter will blow its internal fuse.
A cheap meter will not have any fuses supplied with it, so you’ll have to open
the case, check the value of the fuse, and search around online until you find an
exact replacement. This is really annoying (I have been through it myself, more
than once). A really cheap meter may not even have an easily replacable fuse.
Always measure current when there are components in the circuit to restrict
the flow.
As a precaution, if your meter has a separate socket for measuring current,
plug the red lead into that socket only while you are actually performing that
task. Move the red lead back to the volts/ohms socket afterward.

Checking the Current
Insert the meter between the LED and the potentiometer, as shown in Figure 155. As you adjust the potentiometer up and down a little, you should find that the
varying resistance in the circuit changes the flow of current—the amperage. The
LED burned out in the previous experiment because too much current made it
hot, and the heat melted it inside, just like a fuse. A higher resistance limits the
amperage.
Now here’s an interesting test. Turn the potentiometer all the way
counterclockwise. Make a note of the current that you measure.

Figure 1-55. Current passes through the meter on its way around the circuit.

Without readjusting the potentiometer, move the meter and insert it between the
battery and the LED, as shown in Figure 1-56. What’s the value of the current
now? It should be exactly the same as before—or very nearly the same, allowing

for tiny changes in resistance that resulted from shifting the alligator clips.
The current is the same at all points in a simple circuit. It has to be, because
the flow of electrons has no place else to go.

Figure 1-56. The current flowing through a simple circuit is always the same throughout the

circuit, regardless of where you measure it.

Making Measurements
It’s time now to nail this down with some numbers. This will enable you to
establish the most fundamental rule in all of electronics.
Remove the LED from the circuit, and put the meter directly between the battery
and the potentiometer. Remove the 470-ohm resistor, and substitute a 1K resistor
(with colors brown-black-red), as shown in Figure 1-57. Now the only resistance
in the circuit is provided by the 1K potentiometer plus the 1K resistor. (Your
meter also has some resistance, but it’s so low, we can ignore it. The wires and
alligator clips also have some tiny amount of resistance, but this is even lower
than the resistance of the meter.)

Figure 1-57. In this final LED test, you get rid of the LED.

Turn the potentiometer all the way clockwise, so that it provides almost-zero
resistance. You now have only 1,000 ohms in the circuit, from the resistor. How
much current does your meter show flowing?
Turn the potentiometer halfway, so it creates about 500 ohms resistance. The
total resistance in the circuit is now 1,500 ohms, approximately. How much
current does your meter show, now?
Turn the potentiometer all the way counterclockwise, so its full value is in the

circuit, plus the resistor, making 2,000 ohms total. What’s the amperage now?
When I tried this, I got the values shown below. Yours should be about the same.
9mA with 1K total resistance
6mA with 1.5K total resistance
4.5mA with 2K total resistance
Do you notice something interesting? On each line, if you multiply the number
on the left by the number on the right, the result is always 9. And 9 volts just
happens to be the voltage of the battery.
We only have three measurements, but if you ran a more detailed test using a
series of resistors with fixed values, I’ll bet that the result would be the same. I
can summarize it like this:
battery voltage = milliamps × kilohms
But wait a minute: 1K is 1,000 ohms, and 1mA is 1/1,000 of an amp. Therefore,
using the fundamental units of volts, amps, and ohms, our formula should really
look like this:
voltage = (amps / 1,000) × (ohms × 1,000)
(I’m using the / symbol, which is often referred to as the “slash” symbol, to
mean “divide by.”)
The two factors of 1,000 cancel each other out, so we get this:
volts = amps × ohms
This is known as Ohm’s Law. It is absolutely fundamental.

Fundamentals: Ohm’s Law
The general way to express Ohm’s Law is:
voltage = current × resistance
which is usually abbreviated like this:
V = I × R
Letter I represents the flow of current, because originally current was measured
by its inductance, meaning the ability to induce magnetic effects. Perhaps it

would be more helpful if some other letter, such as C, was used to represent
current, but it’s too late to persuade everyone to do that. You just have to
remember that I means current.
By shifting the terms around, you get these versions of the formula:
I = V / R
R = V / I
To apply the formula, you have to make sure that the units are consistent. If V is
measured in volts, and I is measured in amps, then R must be measured in ohms.
What if you have measured a current in milliamps? You must express it in amps.
For instance, a current of 30mA must be written as 0.03 in the formula, because
0.03A = 30mA. If you get confused, use a calculator to divide milliamps by
1,000 to get a value in amps. Likewise, divide millivolts by 1,000 to get a value
in volts.
To minimize the risk of errors, you can memorize Ohm’s Law using the actual
units, like this:
volts = amps × ohms
amps = volts / ohms
ohms = volts / amps
But remember:
Volts are measured as a difference in voltage between two points in a simple
circuit. Ohms are the resistance between the same two points. Amps are the
current flowing through the circuit.

Fundamentals: Series and Parallel
In your test circuit, the resistor and the potentiometer have been connected in
series, meaning that the electricity had to go through one before it went through
the other. The alternative would have been to put them side by side, in parallel.
Resistors in series are positioned so that one follows the other.
Resistors in parallel are positioned side by side.
When you put two equal-valued resistors in series, you double the total

resistance, because electricity has to pass through two barriers in succession.
This is shown in Figure 1-58.
When you put two equal-valued resistors in parallel, you cut the total resistance
in half, because you’re giving the electricity two paths of equal resistance
instead of one. This is shown in Figure 1-59.

Figure 1-58. Two resistors of the same value in series.

Figure 1-59. Two resistors of the same value in parallel.

In both figures, the current in milliamps has been calculated using Ohm’s Law.
In reality we don’t normally need to put resistors in parallel, but we often put
other types of components in parallel. All the lightbulbs in your house, for
instance, are wired in parallel across the main supply. So, it’s useful to
understand that resistance in a circuit goes down if you keep adding components
in parallel. At the same time, as you add more pathways for electricity to follow,
the total current through the circuit goes up.

Using Ohm’s Law
Ohm’s Law is extremely useful. For example, it can tell you precisely what
resistance to put in series with an LED, to protect it adequately while generating
as much light as possible.
The first step is to discover the specification for the LED established by its
manufacturer. This information is easily available in a datasheet that you can
locate online. Suppose you have an LED made by Vishay Semiconductors. You
know that its part number is TLHR5400, because the number was printed on a

label when you received a bag of LEDs in the mail, and you snipped out the
label and stored it with the LEDs. (At least, that’s what you should have done.)
All you have to do is Google the part number and the manufacturer’s name:
vishay tlhr5400
The very first hit is the datasheet maintained by Vishay. Scroll down, and you
see the information that you need. I’ve included the left side and right side of a
screen capture in Figure 1-60. I outlined the part number of the component in red
on the left, and I outlined two types of forward voltage on the right. “Typ” means
typical and “Max,” as I’m sure you guessed, is maximum. So, the LED typically
should run with a 2V potential difference. But what does “at IF (mA)” mean?
Well, remember that the letter I is used to represent the current passing through a
circuit. The letter F means “Forward.” So the forward voltage in the table is
measured at a forward current of 20mA, which is the recommended value for
this LED.

Figure 1-60. Screen capture from an LED datasheet.

How about if you have a Kingbright WP7113SGC? This time, the second hit
from a Google search takes you to the appropriate datasheet, where the second
page specifies a typical forward voltage of 2.2V, maximum 2.5V, and a
maximum forward current of 25mA. The layout of the Kingbright datasheet is
different from that of the Vishay datasheet, but the information is still easy to

find.
Let’s go with the Vishay LED. Now that you know that it works well with 2V
and 20mA, Ohm’s Law can tell you the rest.

How Big a Resistor?
In the simple circuit shown in Figure 1-61, you want to know the correct value
for the resistor. Begin by recalling the rule I mentioned before:

Figure 1-61. This basic circuit enables you to calculate the value of the resistor.

If you add up the potential differences across all the devices in the circuit, the
total will be the same as the voltage supplied by the battery.
The battery is 9V, of which we want the LED to take 2V. Therefore, the resistor
must drop the voltage by 7V. What about the current? Remember another rule
that I mentioned previously:
The current in a simple circuit is the same at all locations in the circuit.
Therefore, the current through the resistor will be the same as the current
through the LED. Your target is 20mA, but Ohm’s Law requires you to make all
the units match. If you are dealing with volts and ohms, you have to express the
current in amps. Well, 20mA is 20 / 1,000 amps, which is 0.02 amps.
Now you can write down what you know, which is always the first step:
V = 7
I = 0.02
Which version of the Ohm’s Law formula should you use? The one where the
value that you don’t know, and want to know, is on the left. That would be this
one:
R = V / I
Now plug the values for V and I into the formula, like this:
R = 7 / 0.02
There’s a trick that I will tell you for doing calculations involving decimal
points, but to save time, use your calculator to show you the answer:
7 / 0.02 = 350 ohms
That is not a standard value for resistors, but 330 ohms is. Alternatively, just in
case you use a more sensitive LED, you could move up to the next higher
standard resistance value, which is 470 ohms. You may remember, I used a 470ohm resistor in Experiment 3. Now you know why: I did the math.
Some people make the mistake of thinking that when they divide volts by amps
to find the correct value for a series resistor, they should use the supply voltage
(9V in this case). This is not correct, because the supply voltage is being applied
to the resistor and the LED. To find the value for the resistor, you have to
consider just the potential difference across it alone, which is 7V.

What happens if you use a different power supply? Later in the book, you’ll be
using a 5V supply in several experiments. How will this change the appropriate
value of the resistor?
The LED still has to take 2V. The power supply is 5V, so the resistor has to drop
3V. The current should still be the same, and the calculation now looks like this:
R = 3 / 0.02
Therefore the resistance value is 150 ohms. But you don’t need the LED to
deliver its maximum light output, and you might happen to use an LED that has
a lower limit than 20mA. Also, if a battery is powering the circuit, you might
want to reduce the power consumption to make the battery last longer. Bearing
this in mind, you could use the next higher standard value for the resistor, which
would be 220 ohms.

Background: Hot Wires
I mentioned that wires have a very low resistance. Is it so low that you can
always ignore it? Actually, no. If a large current is flowing through a wire, the
wire will get hot, as you saw yourself when the 1.5-volt battery was shorted out
in Experiment 2. And if the wire gets hot, you can be sure that some voltage is
being blocked by the wire, leaving less voltage available for any device attached
to the wire.
Once again, you can use Ohm’s Law to establish some numbers.
Suppose that a very long piece of wire has a resistance of 0.2 ohms. You want to
run 15 amps through it, to run a device that consumes a lot of power.
You begin by writing down what you know:
R = 0.2 (resistance of the wire)
I = 15 (amperage through the circuit)
You want to know V, the voltage drop between one end of the wire and the other.
So you should use the version of Ohm’s Law that places V on the left side:
V = I × R
Now plug in the values:
V = 15 × 0.2 = 3 volts

Three volts is not a big deal if you have a high-voltage power supply, but if you
are using a 12-volt car battery, this length of wire will take one-quarter of the
available voltage.
Now you know why the wiring in automobiles is relatively thick—to waste as
little of the 12V power as possible.

Fundamentals: Decimals
Legendary British politician Sir Winston Churchill is famous for complaining
about “those damned dots.” He was referring to decimal points. Because
Churchill was Chancellor of the Exchequer at the time, supervising all
government expenditures, his difficulty with decimals was a bit of a problem.
Still, he muddled through in time-honored British fashion, and so can you.
Suppose you have decimals in a division sum. You can make it easier by moving
the decimal points in the top half and the bottom half of the division by the same
number of places. So, when you wanted to know the answer to 7 / 0.02 to find
the series resistor for the LED, you could move the decimals two spaces to the
right:
7 0.02 = 700 2
This is much easier. Notice that if you move a decimal point to the right beyond
a digit, you add a zero for each extra place. So, when you move the decimal in
7.0 two places to the right, you get 700.
What if you have decimals in a multiplication sum? For example, you need to
multiply 0.03 by 0.002. Because you are now multiplying instead of dividing,
you have to move the decimal points in opposite directions. Like this:
0.03 × 0.002 = 3 × 0.00002
So the answer is 0.00006. Again, if you find this too confusing, you can use a
calculator. But sometimes it’s quicker to use a pen and paper—or even do it in
your head.

Theory: The Math on Your Tongue
I’m going back to the question I asked in the previous experiment: why didn’t
your tongue get hot?

Now that you know Ohm’s Law, you can figure out the answer in numbers. Let’s
suppose the battery delivered its rated 9 volts, and your tongue had a resistance
of 50K, which is 50,000 ohms. As always, begin by writing down what you
know:
V = 9
R = 50,000
You want to know the current, I, so you use the version of Ohm’s Law that puts
this on the left:
I = V / R
Plug in the numbers:
I = 9 / 50,000 = 0.00018 amps
Move the decimal point three places to convert from amps to milliamps:
I = 0.18 mA
That’s a very small current. It will not produce much heat.
What about when you shorted out the battery? How much current made the
wires get hot? Well, suppose the wires had a resistance of 0.1 ohms (probably
it’s less, but I’ll start with 0.1 as a guess). Write down what you know:
V = 1.5
R = 0.1
Once again I’m trying to find I, the current, so I use:
I = V / R
Plug in the numbers:
I = 1.5 / 0.1 = 15 amps
That’s almost 100,000 times the current that may have passed through your
tongue. It generated substantial heat in a thin wire.
A room heater or a large power tool, such as a table saw, might draw 15 amps.
Maybe you’re wondering if that little AA battery really could deliver as much
current as that. The answer is . . . I’m not sure. I couldn’t measure the current
with my meter, because 15A would blow the meter’s fuse, even if I plug the
probe into the high-current socket labeled 10A. But I did try the experiment with

a 10-amp fuse instead of a 3-amp fuse, and the 10-amp fuse survived.
Now, why was that? Ohm’s Law says that the current should be 15A, but for
some reason it was less. Maybe the resistance of the wire on the battery carrier
was actually higher than 0.1 ohms? No, I think it was probably lower. So—what
was restricting the current to a lower value than Ohm’s Law predicted?
The answer is that everything in the everyday world has some electrical
resistance, even including a battery. Always remember that a battery is an active
part of a circuit.
Do you remember that when you shorted out the battery, it became hot, as well
as the wires? Definitely, the battery has some internal resistance. You can ignore
it when you are dealing with small currents in milliamps, but for large currents,
the battery is actively involved.
This is why I cautioned against using a larger battery (especially a car battery).
Larger batteries have a much lower internal resistance, allowing much higher
currents, which can generate explosive amounts of heat. A car battery is
designed to deliver literally hundreds of amps when it turns a starter motor.
That’s quite enough current to melt wires and cause nasty burns. In fact, you can
weld metal using a car battery.
Lithium batteries also have low internal resistance, making them very dangerous
when they’re shorted out. Here’s the take-home message:
High current is not dangerous in the same way as high voltage. But it is still
dangerous.

Background: The Watt
So far I haven’t mentioned a unit that everyone is familiar with: watts.
A watt is a unit of power, and when power is applied throughout a period of
time, it performs work. An engineer might say that work is done when a person,
an animal, or a machine pushes something to overcome mechanical resistance.
Examples would be a car cruising along a level stretch of road (overcoming
friction and air resistance) or a person walking upstairs (overcoming the force of
gravity).
When one watt of power is applied for one second, the work done is one joule,

usually represented by letter J. If P is used to represent power:
J = P × s
Or if the formula is turned around:
P = J / s
When electrons push their way through a circuit, they are overcoming a kind of
resistance, and so they are doing work.
The electrical definition of a watt is easy:
watts = volts × amps
Or, using the units customarily assigned, with W meaning watts, these three
formulas all mean the same thing:
W = V × I (watts = volts × amps)
V = W / I
I = W / V
The terms milliwatts (mW), kilowatts (kW), and megawatts (MW) are
commonly used in different situations—megawatts being usually reserved for
heavy-duty equipment such as generators in power stations. Be careful not to
confuse the lowercase m in the abbreviation for milliwatts with the uppercase M
in the abbreviation for megawatts. A conversion table for milliwatts, watts, and
kilowatts is shown in Figure 1-62.

Figure 1-62. Conversion table for the most common multiples of watts.

Old-style incandescent light bulbs are calibrated in watts. So are stereo systems.
The watt is named after James Watt, inventor of the steam engine. Incidentally,
watts can be converted to horsepower, and vice versa.
Resistors are commonly rated as being capable of dealing with 1/4 watt, 1/2
watt, 1 watt, and up. For all of the projects in this book, you can use 1/4-watt
resistors. How do I know this?
Go back to the first LED circuit, using a 9V battery. Remember you wanted the
resistor to drop the voltage by 7 volts, at a current of 20mA. How many watts of
power would the resistor have to deal with?
Write down what you know:
V = 7 (potential difference at the resistor)
I = 20mA = 0.02 amps
You want to know W, so use this version of the formula:
W = V × I
Plug in the numbers:
W = 7 × 0.02 = 0.14 watts
This is the power being dissipated by the resistor.
Because 1/4 watt is 0.25 watts, a 1/4 watt resistor will have no trouble dealing
with 0.14 watts. In fact you could almost use a 1/8 watt resistor, but in future
experiments we may need resistors that can handle 1/4 watt, and there’s no
penalty for using a resistor that is rated for more watts than necessary. They just
cost slightly more and are slightly larger.

Background: The Origins of Wattage
James Watt, shown in Figure 1-63, is known as the inventor of the steam engine.
Born in 1736 in Scotland, he set up a small workshop in the University of
Glasgow, where he struggled to perfect an efficient design for using steam to
move a piston in a cylinder. Financial problems and the primitive state of the art
of metal working delayed practical applications until 1776.

Figure 1-63. James Watt’s development of steam power enabled the industrial revolution.
After his death, he was honored by having his name applied to the basic unit of power in
electricity.

Despite difficulties in obtaining patents (which could only be granted by an Act
of Parliament in those times), Watt and his business partner eventually made a
lot of money from his innovations. Although he predated the pioneers in
electricity, in 1889 (70 years after his death) his name was assigned to the basic
unit of electric power that can be defined by multiplying amperes by volts.

Cleanup and Recycling
The dead LED can be thrown away. Everything else is reusable.

Experiment 5: Let’s Make a Battery
Long ago, before the Web existed, kids were so horribly deprived, they tried to
amuse themselves with kitchen-table experiments such as making a battery by
pushing a nail and a penny into a lemon. Hard to believe, but true!
Now that modern LEDs will emit light when just a few milliamps flow through
them, the old lemon-battery experiment is more interesting. If you’ve never tried
it, the time is right.

What You Will Need
Lemons (2) or squeeze-bottle of pure lemon juice (1)
Copper-plated coins, such as US pennies (4)
One-inch (or larger) zinc-plated steel brackets from a hardware store (4)
Test leads with alligator clips at each end (5)
Multimeter (1)
Low-current LED (1). (See “Light-Emitting Diodes” for a reminder of the
difference between generic and low-current LEDs)

Setup
A battery is an electrochemical device, meaning that chemical reactions create
electricity. Naturally, this only works if you have the right chemicals working for
you, and the ones I’m going to use are copper, zinc, and lemon juice.
The juice should be no problem. Lemons are cheap, or you can buy one of those
little yellow plastic squeeze-bottles of concentrated juice. Either will work.
Pennies are not made of copper anymore, but they are still plated with a thin
layer of copper, which is good enough. Just make sure that your pennies are new
and bright. If the copper has oxidized, it will be a dull brown, and the experiment
won’t work as well.
Zinc is a bit more of a problem. What you need is a metal part that is galvanized,
meaning it is coated in zinc to prevent rust. Small galvanized steel brackets
should be available at your local hardware store, and they don’t cost much.
Brackets that measure about one inch along each side will be fine.

Lemon Test: Part One
Cut a lemon in half, and push a penny into it. As close as possible to the penny
(but not touching it), push in your galvanized bracket. Now set your multimeter
so that it can measure up to 2V DC, and hold one probe against the penny while
you hold the other probe against the bracket. You should find that your meter
detects between 0.8V and 1V.
To power a typical LED, you need more voltage. How can you get it? By putting
batteries in series. In other words, more lemons! You’ll use test leads to link the
batteries, as shown in Figure 1-64. Notice that each lead connects a bracket to a
penny. Do not connect pennies to pennies or brackets to brackets.
If you set things up carefully, keeping the pennies and brackets close to each
other but making sure they don’t actually touch each other, you should be able to
illuminate your LED with three lemon-juice batteries in series.
Another option is to use a little parts box divided into small sections, as shown in
Figure 1-65. When everything is nicely aligned, squeeze in some concentrated
lemon juice. Vinegar or grapefruit juice may also work.

Figure 1-64. A three-lemon battery should generate just enough voltage to drive a lowcurrent LED.

Figure 1-65. Lemon juice, either from lemons or from a squeeze-bottle, will produce reliable
results, even though the equipment doesn’t look so nice. Here a box intended for parts has
been repurposed as a four-cell juice battery.

I decided to have four cells in my juice battery, because the LED pulls the
voltage down somewhat, and the battery is not capable of delivering enough
current to damage the LED. The setup in the photograph worked immediately.

Theory: The Nature of Electricity
To understand why the lemon battery works, you have to start with some basic
information about atoms. Each atom consists of a nucleus at the center,
containing particles called protons, which have a positive charge. The nucleus is
surrounded by electrons, which carry a negative charge.
Breaking up the nucleus of an atom requires a lot of energy, and can also liberate
a lot of energy—as happens in a nuclear explosion. But persuading a couple of
electrons to leave an atom (or join an atom) can take very little energy. For
instance, when zinc reacts chemically with an acid, this can liberate electrons.
The reaction soon stops if the zinc-plated part isn’t connected with anything, as
electrons accumulate with nowhere to go. They have a mutual force of repulsion,
and you can imagine them like a crowd of hostile people, each one wanting the

others to leave, and refusing to allow new ones to join them, as shown in
Figure 1-66.

Figure 1-66. Electrons on an electrode have a bad attitude known as mutual repulsion.

Now consider what happens when a wire connects the zinc electrode, which has
a surplus of electrons, to another electrode, made from a different material (such
as copper), which contains “holes” for the electrons to occupy. The electrons can
pass through the wire very easily by jumping from one atom to the next. As soon
as we open up this pathway, mutual repulsion makes the electrons try to escape
from each other to their new home as quickly as possible. This is how an electric
current is created. See Figure 1-67.

Figure 1-67. Electrons escaping from a zinc electrode to a copper electrode.

Now that the population of electrons on the zinc electrode has been reduced, the
zinc–acid reaction can continue, replacing the missing electrons with new ones
—which promptly imitate their predecessors and try to get away from each other
by running away down the wire. They move with such force, we can divert them
through an LED, and they will liberate some of their energy by making it light
up.
The process continues until the zinc–acid reaction grinds to a halt, usually
because it creates a layer of a compound such as zinc oxide, which won’t react
with acid and prevents the acid from reacting with the zinc underneath. (This is
why your zinc electrode may have looked sooty when you pulled it out of the

acidic electrolyte.)
This description applies to a primary battery, meaning one that is ready to
generate electricity as soon as a connection between its terminals allows
electrons to transfer from one electrode to the other. The amount of current that a
primary battery can generate is determined by the speed at which chemical
reactions inside the battery can liberate electrons. When the raw metal in the
electrodes has all been used up in chemical reactions, the battery can’t generate
any more electricity and is dead. It cannot easily be recharged, because the
chemical reactions are not easily reversible, and the electrodes may have
oxidized.
In a rechargeable battery, also known as a secondary battery, a smarter choice of
electrodes and electrolyte does allow the chemical reactions to be reversed.

Background: Positive and Negative
I’ve told you that electricity is a flow of electrons, which have a negative charge.
In that case, why have I been talking as if electricity flows from the positive
terminal to the negative terminal of a battery, in the experiments that you have
performed so far?
The story started with an embarrassment in the history of research into
electricity. When Benjamin Franklin was trying to understand the nature of
electric current by studying phenomena such as lightning during thunderstorms,
he believed he observed a flow of “electrical fluid” from positive to negative. He
proposed this concept in 1747.
In fact, Franklin had made an unfortunate error that remained uncorrected until
physicist J. J. Thomson announced his discovery of the electron in 1897.
Electricity really is a flow of negatively charged particles, from an area of
greater negative charge to some other location that is “less negative” or “more
positive.” In a battery, electrons originate from the negative terminal and flow to
the positive terminal.
You might think that when this fact was established, everyone should have
discarded Ben Franklin’s idea of a flow from positive to negative. But people
had been thinking in those terms for 150 years. Also, when an electron moves
through a wire, you can think of an equal positive charge flowing in the opposite

direction. When the electron leaves home, it takes a small negative charge with
it; therefore, its home becomes a bit more positive. When the electron arrives at
its destination, its negative charge makes the destination a bit less positive. This
is pretty much what would happen if an imaginary positive particle traveled in
the opposite direction. Moreover, all of the mathematics describing electrical
behavior are still valid if you apply them to the imaginary flow of positive
charges.
As a matter of tradition and convenience, Ben Franklin’s erroneous concept of
flow from positive to negative survived, because in the end, it makes no
difference.

Figure 1-68. In some weather conditions, the flow of electrons during a lightning strike can
be from the ground, through your feet, out of the top of your head, and up to the clouds.
Benjamin Franklin would have been surprised.

In the symbols that represent components such as diodes and transistors, you
will find arrows reminding you which way these components should be placed—
and the arrows all point from positive to negative, even though that’s not the way
things work at all.

When Ben Franklin studied lightning, he saw this as an electric charge moving
from a positive domain (the clouds in the sky) to a negative reservoir (the planet
Earth). Well, it’s true that the clouds are more positive, but this simply means
that in reality, lightning is a transfer of electrons from the ground up to the sky.
That’s right: someone who is “struck by lightning” may be hurt by emitting
electrons rather than by receiving them, as shown in Figure 1-68.

Theory: Basic Measurements
I’m going to backtrack, now, to the kinds of definitions you would normally find
at the beginning of an electronics text.
Electrical potential is measured by adding up the charges on individual electrons.
The basic unit is the coulomb, equal to the total charge on
6,241,509,629,152,650,000 electrons.
If you know how many electrons pass through a piece of wire each second, you
can calculate the flow of electricity, which can be expressed in amperes. In fact:
1 ampere = 1 coulomb/second
(about 6.24 quintillion electrons/second)
Even if you could see inside a wire carrying electric current, electrons are
smaller than the wavelength of visible light, so you would have no way to
observe them, and there are far too many, moving much too fast. However, we
have indirect ways of detecting them. For instance, the motion of an electron
creates a wave of electromagnetic force. More electrons create more force, and
this force can be measured. We can calculate the amperage from that. The
electric meter installed at your home by the utility company functions on this
principle.
The force required to push electrons through a conductor is voltage, and it
creates a flow that can create heat, as you saw when you shorted out a battery. (If
the wire that you used had zero resistance, the electricity running through it
would not have created any heat.) We can use the heat directly, as in an electric
stove, or we can use the electrical energy in other ways—to run a motor, for
instance. Either way, we are taking energy from the electrons to do some work.
One volt can be defined as the amount of pressure that you need to create a flow
of 1 ampere, which does 1 watt of work. As previously defined, 1 watt = 1 volt ×

1 ampere, but the definition actually originated the other way around:
1 volt = 1 watt / 1 ampere
It’s more meaningful this way, because a watt can be defined in nonelectrical
terms. Just in case you’re interested, we can work backward through the units of
the metric system like this:
1 watt = 1 joule / second
1 joule = 1 newton force acting through 1 meter
1 newton accelerates 1kg by 1m / sec each second
On this basis, the electrical units can all be anchored with observations of mass,
time, and the charge on electrons.

Practically Speaking
For practical purposes, I think an intuitive understanding of electricity can be
more useful than the theory. I like to go back to the water analogies that have
been used for decades in guides to electricity.
In Figure 1-31 I showed how the rate at which water leaks from a hole in a tank
can be compared to amperage, while the height of the water in the tank creates
pressure, comparable to voltage, and the size of the hole is equivalent to
resistance.
Where’s the wattage in this picture? Suppose you place a little water wheel
where it is hit by the flow from the hole, as shown in Figure 1-69. You could
attach some machinery to the water wheel. Now the flow would be doing some
work. (Remember, wattage is a measurement of the rate at which work is done.)
Maybe this looks as if you would be getting something for nothing, extracting
work from the flow of water without putting any energy back into the system.
But remember, the water level in the tank is falling. As soon as I include some
helpers hauling the waste water back up to the top of the tank, it becomes
obvious that you have to put work in to get work out. See Figure 1-70.

Figure 1-69. If a wheel extracts energy from the flow of water, the flow is now doing some
work, which could be measured in watts during a period of time.

Similarly, a battery may seem to be giving power out without taking anything in,
but the chemical reactions inside it are changing pure metals into metallic
compounds, and the power we get out of a battery is enabled by this change of
state. If it’s a rechargeable battery, we have to push power back into it during the
charging process, to reverse the chemical reactions.
Going back to the tank of water, suppose we can’t get enough power out of it to
turn the wheel. One answer could be to increase the height of the water, to create
more force, as in Figure 1-71.

Figure 1-70. To continue getting work out of the system, we have to put work into it.

This would be the same as putting two batteries end to end, positive to negative,
in series (as I suggested with lemons, in the lemon battery). Two batteries in
series will double the voltage, as shown in Figure 1-72. As long as the resistance
in the circuit remains the same, greater voltage will create more amperage,
because amperage = voltage / resistance.
Thinking again about the tank analogy, what if we want to run a wheel for twice

as long, and we’ve run out of tank capacity? Maybe we should build a second
tank, and pipe their outputs through the same hole. Similarly, if you wire two
batteries side by side, in parallel, you get the same voltage, but the batteries
should last twice as long. Alternatively, the two batteries may be able to deliver
more current than if you just used one. See Figure 1-73.

Figure 1-71. The amount of available work will increase with greater water pressure.

Figure 1-72. Two batteries in series provide twice the voltage of a single battery, provided
they are both fully charged.

Summing up:
Two batteries in series deliver twice the voltage.
Two batteries in parallel can deliver the same current for twice as long, or
twice the current for the same amount of time.

Figure 1-73. Batteries in parallel, powering the same load as before, will run it for about
twice as long. Alternatively, they can provide twice the current for the same time as a single
battery.

That’s enough theory for now. In the next chapter, I’ll continue with some
experiments that will build on the foundations of knowledge about electricity, to
take you gradually toward gadgets that can be fun and useful.

Cleanup and Recycling
The hardware that you immersed in lemons or lemon juice may be discolored,
but it is reusable. Bearing in mind that some zinc ions may have been deposited
in the lemons, eating them might not be such a good idea.

Chapter 2. Switching
This chapter of the book contains Experiments 6 through 11, which explore the
seemingly simple topic of switching—by which I mean not just manual control,
but using one flow of electricity to switch, or control, another. It’s such an
important principle, no digital device can exist without it.
Today, switching is mostly done with transistors. I will deal with them in detail,
but before that I’ll back up and illustrate the concept by introducing you to
relays, which are easier to understand, because you can see what’s going on
inside them. And before I get to relays, I’ll show how manually activated
switches can demonstrate some of the concepts that will follow. So, the sequence
will be switches—relays—transistors.
Also in this chapter, I’ll deal with capacitance, because capacitance is almost as
fundamental as resistance in electronic circuits.

Necessary Items for Chapter Two
As before, when buying tools and equipment, see “Buying Tools and
Equipment” for a shopping list. If you want kits containing components and
supplies, see “Kits”. If you prefer to buy your own components and supplies
from online sources, see “Components”.

Essential: Small Screwdrivers
A set such as the one made by Stanley (part number 66-052) is shown in
Figure 2-1. Screwdrivers that you may already have in your home will be too big
for most of the little screws that you find on components.
You can buy cheaper screwdriver sets that look very similar to the one in
Figure 2-1, but I think the quality of steel is better in name-brand screwdrivers.

Figure 2-1. Miniature screwdrivers, with both flat blades and Phillips blades. The white
lines are spaced at intervals of 1”.

Essential: Small Long-Nosed Pliers

The type of long-nosed pliers that you need are no more than five inches from
end to end. You’ll be using them to bend wire precisely, or to pick up small parts
where a finger and thumb are too big and clumsy. For these kinds of operations I
don’t think you benefit much from spending extra money on high-quality tools,
so feel free to buy the cheapest. An example is shown in Figure 2-2. These have
spring-loaded handles, which some people don’t like, but you can pull out the
springs—if you have a second pair of pliers to do so.

Figure 2-2. Appropriate pliers for electronics work should be no more than 5” long.

Optional: Sharp-Nosed Pliers
These are like small long-nosed pliers, but with very precise, pointed jaws. I like
them for accessing tightly packed components on a breadboard. Your best source
is a website or store that specializes in craft work such as beading. Be careful,
however, that you don’t buy beading pliers that have rounded noses for making
loops in wire. For our purposes, the inner surfaces of the jaws should be flat, as
shown in Figure 2-3.

Figure 2-3. Sharp-nosed pliers enable very precise work on a small scale.

Essential: Wire Cutters
Pliers usually have cutting edges near the joint, which you can use for chopping
wire. Often, however, a piece of wire will be attached to something else, and you
won’t be able to reach it with your pliers. You really need wire cutters such as
those shown in Figure 2-4. They should be no longer than five inches. So long as
you use them to cut thin, soft copper wire, they do not have to be of high quality.

Figure 2-4. Wire cutters should be no more than 5” long.

Optional: Flush Cutters
Flush cutters, shown in Figure 2-5, are similar to wire cutters, and do the same
job, but they are thinner, smaller, and better able to get into small spaces.
However, they are less robust. Whether you use them or wire cutters is a matter
of personal preference. Personally I like wire cutters.

Figure 2-5. Flush cutters can get into smaller spaces than wire cutters.

Essential: Wire Strippers
Wire of the type that you will be using has a coating of plastic insulation. Wire
strippers are specifically designed to remove a short section of insulation to
expose the conductor inside it. Macho hobbyists may claim that they don’t need
any tool to do this job, but I have two corners missing from the insides of my
front teeth to testify that this is a really bad idea (see Figure 2-6).

Figure 2-6. In a hurry? Can’t find your wire strippers? The temptation is obvious, but not a
good idea.

Another option is to use wire cutters, as shown in Figure 2-7. You hold the wire
in one hand, close the jaws of the cutters gently with the other hand, and lever
your two hands apart. However, this is a skill that requires practice. Sometimes
the cutters slip off without doing anything, or they may cut the wire instead of
stripping it.

Figure 2-7. How to use wire cutters to strip insulation. Wire strippers are easier to use.

For a few extra dollars, a pair of wire strippers makes the job so much easier.
The first edition of this book included an option to buy so-called automatic wire
strippers, which can be used with only one hand. Unfortunately they are
significantly more expensive than other types of wire strippers, and many brands
don’t work well with the 22-gauge hookup wire required for all the circuits in
this book. Therefore, I don’t recommend them anymore.
The type of tool shown in Figure 2-8 is available from many manufacturers.
Some brands have angled handles, some have straight handles, and some have
curved handles. I don’t think it matters. They all work the same way: you insert
the wire in a hole of appropriate size, close the jaws, and pull away the
insulation.

Figure 2-8. The recommended wire strippers are designed for 20-gauge to 30-gauge wire.

You do have to be careful, though, that they are suitable for the right size of
wire.
Wire gauge is a measure of the thickness of a conductor. A higher number
indicates a thinner wire. As it happens, 20-gauge wire is slightly too thick for our
purposes, while 24-gauge wire is slightly too thin. The optimal thickness is 22
gauge, and you will have a much easier time if you buy a tool that is calibrated
for that specific size. As you can see in Figure 2-8, a range from 20 gauge to 30
gauge includes a little hole for 22 gauge. This is the right tool for the job.

Essential: Breadboards
Breadboards are not required until Experiment 8, but I will provide a brief
introduction here. The breadboard is a little plastic slab perforated with holes at
intervals of 0.1”. You push components and wires into the holes. Hidden beneath
the plastic are conductors that make connections along the rows of holes.
A breadboard allows components to be connected together more neatly than with
the test leads that you have used so far, and more easily (and reversibly) than if
you join them with solder.
A breadboard is properly known as a solderless breadboard and is sometimes

referred to as a prototyping board.
The brand or source is not important, but you should be careful to buy the same
configuration that I have used throughout this book. You have three options, only
one of which is correct:
Breadboard Option 1: The Mini, shown in Figure 2-9. Often sold as being
“suitable for Arduino,” it doesn’t have enough holes in it for our purposes, so,
don’t buy one of those.

Figure 2-9. A mini-board is not big enough for many of the projects in this book.

Breadboard Option 2: Single-Bus, shown in Figure 2-10. The term “bus”
refers to a long column of holes alongside the short, numbered rows of holes.
There is a single bus on each side, outlined in red in the photograph. This is the
kind of board that you want. Check a photograph of the product that you are
buying, to make sure. Also, note that it should have 60 rows of holes and 700
connection points (also known as tie points). If you are buying your own, search
Amazon or eBay for:
solderless breadboard 700
If you prefer, you can use a dual-bus breadboard and just ignore the extra holes.

Figure 2-10. A single-bus breadboard has a single long row of holes along each side.

Breadboard Option 3: Dual Bus, shown in Figure 2-11. This has two long
rows of holes on each side, which are the dual buses, outlined in red in the
photograph. I used this type of board in the first edition of this book, because it
can be more convenient. Then I saw how it encouraged wiring errors when
people used it for the first time, so I don’t recommend dual-bus breadboards
anymore.

Figure 2-11. A dual-bus breadboard has two pairs of long rows of holes, outlined in red in

this photograph. This style of board is no longer recommended.

Now that I’ve established the type of board that I recommend, how many of
them do you need? I used to say, “Only one,” bearing in mind that they are
reusable, but their price has been driven down to the point where I think you
should consider buying two or three. This way, you can prototype new circuits
without having to disassemble old ones first.

Supplies
If you want to buy a kit containing components and supplies, see “Kits”. When
buying your own supplies, see “Supplies”.

Essential: Hookup Wire
The type of wire you need for making connections on a breadboard is often
called hookup wire although it can be found, sometimes, under the general
category of bulk wire. Either way, it must have a solid core (not stranded), and
must be 22 gauge in size.
Often it is sold in 25-foot and 100-foot lengths on plastic spools, as shown in
Figure 2-12.

Figure 2-12. Hookup wire is available on spools holding 25 feet and 100 feet, shown here.

Wire is cheaper, per foot, if you buy a 100-foot spool, but I suggest you should
buy smaller quantities in at least three different colors of insulation. The reason
is that wire colors are helpful when you are trying to find an error in a circuit
that you have built. Red and blue can be used for connections with positive and
negative power, and one other color for other connections.
When the insulation is stripped away, it reveals a solid conductor, as shown in
Figure 2-13. Compare this with stranded wire, shown in Figure 2-14. Stranded
wire does have some uses, which I will talk about in a moment, but if you try to
push it into holes in a breadboard, you are likely to become frustrated quite
quickly. You really need solid wire.

Figure 2-13. Inside the plastic insulation, there should be a single conductor of solid wire.

Figure 2-14. For specific purposes (described in the text) stranded wire can be a useful
option.

Just as I emphasized the need for wire strippers that are specifically designed for
22-gauge wire, I will now emphasize that the wire should be 22-gauge, not 20gauge, and not 24-gauge. You will find that the 24-gauge wire doesn’t fit tightly
in a breadboard, and may not make a reliable connection, while 20-gauge wire is
just a little too thick, so that when you try to push it in, it can bend instead of
sliding into place—and if you do manage to insert it, pulling it out can be
difficult.

Some copper wire has a silver-colored coating, when you strip the insulation
away. This is said to be “tinned.” Other wire is plain copper, and I don’t have
any opinion about which type is better.
How much will you need? For assembling the circuits in this book, 25 feet of
each color will be more than enough. However, Experiments 26, 28, and 29
require you to make coils of wire, to explore the relationship between electricity
and magnetism, and to build your own crystal-set radio. If you want to pursue
these projects (which I think are worthwhile), you’ll need 200 feet of wire. This
is your choice, as none of the kits for this book contains that much wire. See
“Supplies” for information about buying wire.

Jumpers
If you cut a section of wire, strip at least 1/4” but no more than 3/8” insulation
from each end, bend the ends down, and push them into holes in a breadboard,
you have just made a jumper, which creates a connection by jumping across
some intervening holes in the board. Jumpers of this type result in a neat circuit
where you can find errors relatively easily.
The trouble is, stripping insulation and making right-angle bends is tedious, even
with the right tools for the job. Therefore you may be inclined to purchase precut
wire which has been made into jumpers for you. An assortment looks like the
one shown in Figure 2-15. For guidance about finding a selection like this, see
“Supplies”.

Figure 2-15. An assortment of precut wire, stripped and bent for use in a breadboard.

I used to use precut wire myself, but gave up on it because the wire segments are
colored according to their length rather than their function. Red wires are all 0.2”
long, yellow wires are all 0.3” long, and so on.
I want wires to be colored according to what they do in a circuit. Thus, red wires
should always be connected to the positive side of the power supply, regardless
of how long they are.
The only way to achieve this is to cut your own, which is what I do. You are
welcome to use the precut wire if you so choose—but in addition to being
confusingly colored, it costs more.
There is one more issue I have to clarify regarding jumpers. Many people like to
use a different type of jumper wire that has a little plug at each end, just the right
size to push into holes in a breadboard. These “plugged jumpers” are sold in
bundles, and are probably the first thing you will find if you search for jumper
wires online.
Because they are flexible, and they are usually about three inches long, you can
use them to make almost any connection you are likely to need on a
breadboarded circuit. They are reusable, and appear to be the simplest, quickest,

cheapest option.
So far, so good; but if you make a mistake, you are going to have a problem
finding it. Figure 2-16 shows a small circuit for an application outside of this
book, using flexible jumpers that have plugs on each end. Figure 2-17 shows
exactly the same circuit with hand-cut jumper connections using solid-core 22gauge wire. Each of these circuits contains one wiring error. On the one using
hand-cut wire, I can see it within a few seconds. On the one using flexible
jumpers, I would have to dig around for quite a while, probably using a meter to
search for the fault.

Figure 2-16. A circuit on two mini-breadboards using flexible jumper wires with a plug at
each end.

Figure 2-17. The same circuit as in the previous figure, using hand-cut solid jumper wires.

To make matters worse, the plugs on flexible jumpers are sometimes defective,
and may contain loose connections. This can make fault-tracing almost
impossible. Therefore:
I don’t recommend flexible jumpers that have plugs on each end.

Optional: Stranded Wire
Getting back to stranded hookup wire, it does have one advantage. It is much
more flexible than solid wire, which is useful if you are running it out from a
circuit board to a switch or a potentiometer. Flexibility can be essential if the
wire is making a connection with an object that moves or vibrates.
While flexible wire is not essential for any of the projects in this book, 25 feet of
22-gauge stranded will come in handy occasionally. If you buy some, I suggest
you choose a color that is different from your colors of solid wire, so that you
won’t confuse it with them.

Components

Again I must remind you that component kits for the projects in this book are
available. See “Kits”. If you prefer to buy your own components from online
sources, see “Components”.

Essential: Toggle Switch
A full-size toggle switch is an old-fashioned device, but useful for your
switching experiments. You will need two. They should be described as SPDT,
meaning single-pole double-throw. I’ll explain this in detail a little later. Doublepole double-throw, described as DPDT, can also be used, but may cost slightly
more.
A toggle switch with screw terminals will reduce the inconvenience of attaching
it to hookup wire, but other types of terminals are acceptable.
A typical full-size toggle switch is shown in Figure 2-18. E-Switch ST16DD00
is an example, but cheaper generic alternatives can be found on eBay.

Figure 2-18. A full-size toggle switch.

Essential: Tactile Switch

Confusingly, a tactile switch is not what you would think of as a switch. It is a
very tiny pushbutton. If you plug it into your breadboard, it provides a
convenient way for a circuit to receive user input.
The most commonly used tactile switches have four little legs to push into a
board, and can be annoying, because the legs often don’t engage properly. The
component is liable to spring out like a baby grasshopper at unexpected
moments. I suggest you use a tactile switch with two pins spaced 0.2” apart. The
Alps SKRGAFD-010 will be used in projects throughout this book, and is shown
in Figure 2-19. Any other tactile switch with two pins spaced 0.2” apart can be
substituted, such as the Panasonic EVQ-11 series.

Figure 2-19. The recommended tactile switch for breadboarded projects in this book.

Essential: Relay
Because pin functions are not standardized among manufacturers, you have to be
cautious about making substitutions when you buy a relay. I am recommending
the Omron G5V-2-H1-DC9, shown in Figure 2-20, which should minimize
confusion, because it has its pin functions printed on it.

Figure 2-20. The relay recommended for use with this book.

Omron is a large manufacturer of relays, so I have some hope that the one I am
recommending will be around for a while. You may also use the Axicom
V23105-A5006-A201 or the Fujitsu RY-9W-K. All of them are are 9VDC DPDT
relays, with pins spaced as shown on the left side of Figure 2-21. If the spacing
is shown in millimeters, 5mm or 5.08mm are acceptable substitutes for 0.2”, and
7.5mm or 7.62mm can substitute for 0.3”.
If a diagram is printed on the relay, it should look like the one on the right side of
Figure 2-21. Datasheets for relays almost always contain this information. You
can use relays with different pin functions, but they will cause you some
inconvenience, because they won’t match the schematics that I will be providing.
The relays I have recommended are high-sensitivity type, meaning that they
consume less current. You can substitute others, but they will draw more current.
Whichever type of relay you use, it must have the same 9VDC coil voltage and
pin spacing.

Figure 2-21. Pin spacing and internal connections in a relay should be as shown.

One thing to watch out for, when buying relays, is their polarity, meaning a
requirement to apply current in one specified direction, because the relay won’t
work when current flows through its coil in the other direction. I have
recommended relays that do not require polarity. Many Panasonic relays do, so
read the datasheet carefully before buying one of them.
Lastly, any relay that you buy must be of the nonlatching type.
If this seems confusing and overly technical, you can put off buying the relay
until you read Experiment 7, which describes how to use it. You will need two
relays to carry out that experiment fully.

Essential: Trimmer Potentiometer
Instead of the big clunky potentiometer that you used in Experiment 4, you’ll be
using a trimmer potentiometer, which is smaller, cheaper, and plugs into a
breadboard. Examples (with various arbitrary values) are shown in Figure 2-22.

Figure 2-22. Trimmer potentiometers.

The trimmers at left and at right in this photograph are the type that I have
chosen to use in this book. They will sit flush with a breadboard when their leads
are pushed down into it. The only difference between these two samples is that
one is slightly larger than the other. They are also available in variants that stand
up at an angle of 90 degrees with the breadboard, but these are less accessible.
The one in the center of the photograph is a multi-turn trimmer, which allows
much finer adjustment via a brass screw connected with a worm gear inside the
component. This is less convenient, more expensive, and is not necessary for our
purposes, as you won’t require that degree of accuracy.

Essential: Transistors
Only one type of transistor is used in this book. The generic part number is
2N2222, but unfortunately, not all 2N2222 transistors are alike.
If you are using a kit, you should have no problems. If you do your own
shopping, you absolutely must avoid any part that has P2N preceding the 2222
number. When the P2N2222 was introduced, the manufacturers reversed the pin
functions of the 2N2222 that had been standardized for decades. (Why would
they do this? I do not know.)

Here’s the rule.
Part numbers 2N2222 or PN2222 or PN2222A are okay. PN2222 has become
a more common designation than 2N2222, but either will work.
Part numbers P2N2222 or P2N2222A are not okay.
The trap is that if you are searching for 2N2222, you will be offered a P2N2222
because the search engine will help you out by showing parts that have extra
letters preceding the number. So—shop with care! And if you have a meter that
tests transistors, check each one. If the transistor has the traditional pin
functions, the meter should tell you that it has an amplification ratio exceeding
200. If you have the wrong type of transistor, your meter will show an error or an
amplification value lower than 50.
2N2222 transistors used to be packaged in tiny metal cans. These days, they are
almost always packaged in black plastic. Examples of both types are shown in
Figure 2-23. Plastic and metal packages both work equally well—so long as the
transistor’s part number does not begin with P2N.

Figure 2-23. Two 2N2222 transistors. Either can be used.

Essential: Capacitors

Capacitors are not quite as cheap as resistors, but still cheap enough for you to
consider buying an assortment of small ones in bulk. Capacitor values in the
range that we will be using are most often measured in microfarads, abbreviated
µF. I’ll explain this in detail when you start using capacitors in your circuits.
For small values, ceramic capacitors are recommended. For larger values,
electrolytics are cheaper. For additional guidance about purchasing them, see
“Components”. Various capacitors are shown in Figure 2-24. The cylindrical
ones are electrolytic, while the others are ceramic.

Figure 2-24. A variety of capacitors.

Essential: Resistors
If you are shopping for your own components, I am assuming that you bought a
good selection of resistors as I suggested for Experiment 1.

Essential: Loudspeaker
Minimum size for a loudspeaker is 1” diameter, but 2” diameter is good. A 3”
diameter is maximum. The impedance should be 8 ohms or higher. When
searching for a loudspeaker, bear in mind that some suppliers call them

“speakers.” This may cause a search for “loudspeaker” to yield no results.
We will not be dealing with high-fidelity sound, so any cheap loudspeaker will
do. A couple of samples are shown in Figure 2-25.

Figure 2-25. Two speakers, one measuring 1” diameter, the other measuring 2”.

And More?
By now you may be thinking that I have specified quite a lot of components.
Rest assured that almost everything that I have listed here will be reusable, and
you will not need many additional parts for the remaining chapters of the book.

Experiment 6: Very Simple Switching
This experiment will acquaint you with the function of manually operated
switches. You may feel that you already know how to use a switch, but when
two double-throw switches are combined in a circuit, the subject becomes a little
more interesting.

What You Will Need

Screwdriver, wire cutters, wire strippers
Hookup wire, 22-gauge, no more than 12”
9-volt battery (1)
Generic LED (1)
Toggle switches, SPDT or DPDT (2)
470-ohm resistor (1)
Test leads with alligator clips at each end (2)
Assemble the parts as shown in Figure 2-26. You’ll need to practice your
abilities at wire stripping, here, to bare the ends of the two sections of black
wire. To secure them in the screw terminals of the switches, try using your pliers
to curl the end of each wire so that it looks like a letter J. Then feed it under the
screw from the left, so that the screw will draw in the wire when tightened in a
clockwise direction.

Figure 2-26. Your very first experiment in switch connections.

The long lead on the LED also fits one of the screw terminals. Don’t use the
short lead of the LED by mistake. Remember, the long lead must always be more
positive than the short lead.
If your switches don’t terminate in screw terminals, you will have to use a
couple of alligator test leads instead of the black wires, and one more test lead to
connect the LED with the center terminal of the lefthand switch.

After you connect the battery, experiment, flipping the switches. What do you
find?
If the LED is on, flipping either of the switches will turn it off. If the LED is off,
either of the switches will turn it on. I’ll explain this interesting behavior shortly
(see “Introducing Schematics”), but I have to tell you some fundamentals and
background information first.

Fundamentals: All About Switches
The toggle in a toggle switch is the part that you flip with your finger. In the type
of switch shown in Figure 2-26, flipping the toggle connects the center terminal
with one of the terminals on either side of it, as shown in Figure 2-27.

Figure 2-27. Usually, but not absolutely always, toggle switches work like this.

The center terminal is called the pole of the switch. Because you can flip, or
throw, this switch to make two possible connections, it is called a double-throw
switch, abbreviated DT (or, sometimes, 2T). A single-pole, double-throw switch
is abbreviated SPDT (or, sometimes, 1P2T).
Some switches only have two terminals instead of three. They are on/off,

meaning that if you throw them in one direction they make a contact, but in the
other direction they make no contact at all. Most of the light switches in your
house are like this. They are known as single-throw switches. A single-pole,
single-throw switch is abbreviated SPST (or, sometimes, 1P1T).
Some switches have two entirely separate poles, so you can make two separate
connections simultaneously when you flip the switch. These are called doublepole switches, abbreviated DP (or, sometimes, 2P). Check Figure 2-28, Figure 229, and Figure 2-30 for photographs of old-fashioned “knife” switches, which
are still used sometimes to teach electronics to kids in school. You wouldn’t use
a switch like this for any practical purpose, but they illustrate very clearly the
differences between SPST, SPDT, and DPST connections.

Figure 2-28. Manufactured for educational use, this is a single-pole, single-throw (SPST)

switch.

The only place you’re likely to see a knife switch being used for serious
purposes is in a horror movie. In Figure 2-31, a mad scientist is powering up his
experiment with a single-pole, double-throw knife switch, conveniently mounted
on the wall of his basement laboratory.

Figure 2-29. A single-pole, double-throw (SPDT) switch connects one pole with a choice of
contacts.

Figure 2-30. A double-pole, single-throw (DPST) switch has two poles that are completely
isolated from each other. Each pole can connect with only one contact.

Figure 2-31. Left: Mad scientist. Right: SPDT knife switch.

To make things more interesting, you can buy switches that have three or four
poles. (Some rotary switches have even more, but we won’t be using them.)
Also, some double-throw toggle switches have an additional “center off”
position.
Putting all this together, I made a table showing some possible types of switches
and the abbreviations that describe them. Pushbuttons use the same
abbreviations. See Figure 2-32. If you’re reading a parts catalog, you can check
this table to remind yourself what the abbreviations mean.

Figure 2-32. This table summarizes various options for toggle switches (and pushbuttons).

Some switches are spring-loaded, so that they snap back to a default position
when you release pressure on them. When you see ON or OFF in parentheses,
you know that you have to maintain pressure on the switch to keep it in that
position.
Here are some examples:
OFF-(ON): Because the ON state is in parentheses, it’s the momentary state.
Therefore, this is a single-pole switch that makes contact only when you push
it, and flips back to make no contact when you let it go. It is also known as a
“normally open” momentary switch, abbreviated “NO.” Most pushbuttons
also work this way.
ON-(OFF): The opposite kind of momentary switch. It’s normally ON, but
when you push it, you break the connection. So, the OFF state is momentary.
It is known as a “normally closed” momentary switch, abbreviated “NC.”
(ON)-OFF-(ON): This switch has a center-off position. When you push it
either way, it makes a momentary contact, and returns to the center when you
let it go.
Other variations are possible, such as ON-OFF-(ON) or ON-(ON). As long as
you remember that parentheses indicate the momentary state, you should be able
to figure out how these switches behave.

Sparking
When you make and break an electrical connection, it tends to create a spark.
Sparking is bad for switch contacts. It erodes them until the switch doesn’t make
a reliable connection anymore. For this reason, you must use a switch that is
appropriate for the voltage and amperage that you are dealing with.
The electronic circuits in this book are low-current and low-voltage, so you can
use almost any switch; but if you are switching a motor, it will tend to suck an
initial surge of current that is at least double the rating of the motor when it is
running constantly. For instance, you should probably use a 4-amp switch to turn
a 2-amp motor on and off.

Checking Continuity
You can use your meter to check a switch. Doing this enables you to find out
which contacts are connected when you turn a switch one way or the other. It’s
also useful if you have a pushbutton and you can’t remember whether it’s the
type that is normally open (you press it to make a connection) or normally closed
(you press it to break the connection).
It’s convenient to set your meter to measure “continuity” when checking a
switch. The meter will beep (or show a visual indication) if it finds a connection,
and will do nothing if it doesn’t. See Figure 2-33, Figure 2-34, and Figure 2-35
for examples of meters that are set to measure continuity. Remember that in
Experiment 1, I showed you the symbol that is used on meters to represent
continuity. See Figure 1-7.

Figure 2-33. A meter dial that has been turned to measure continuity.

Figure 2-34. Another meter dial set to measure continuity.

Figure 2-35. A third meter measuring continuity.

Background: Early Switching Systems
Switches seem to be such a fundamental feature of our world, and their concept
is so simple that we can easily forget that they went through a gradual process of
evolution. Primitive knife switches were quite adequate for pioneers of
electricity who simply wanted to connect and disconnect some apparatus in a
laboratory, but a more sophisticated approach was needed when telephone
systems began to proliferate. Typically, an operator at a “switchboard” needed to
connect any pair of 10,000 lines on the board. How could it be done?
In 1878, Charles E. Scribner (shown in Figure 2-36) developed the “jack-knife
switch,” so called because the part of it that the operator held looked like the
handle of a jack knife. Protruding from it was a plug, and when the plug was
pushed into a socket, it made contact inside the socket. The socket, in fact,
contained the switch contacts.

Figure 2-36. Charles E. Scribner invented the “jack-knife switch” to satisfy the switching
needs of telephone systems in the late 1800s. Today’s audio jacks still work on the same
principle.

Audio connectors on guitars and amplifiers still work on the same principle, and
when we speak of them as being “jacks,” the term dates back to Scribner’s
invention. Switch contacts are still mounted inside a jack socket.
Today, of course, telephone switchboards have become as rare as telephone
operators. First they were replaced with relays—electrically operated switches,
which I’ll talk about later in this chapter. And then the relays were superceded
by transistors, which made everything happen without any moving parts. In
Experiment 10, you’ll be switching current with transistors.

Introducing Schematics

In Figure 2-37, I’ve redrawn the circuit from Figure 2-26 in a simplified style
known as a “schematic.” From this point onward, I will be illustrating circuits
with schematics, because they make the connections easier to understand. You
only need to know a few symbols to interpret them.

Figure 2-37. The circuit with two switches is redrawn here as a schematic.

Figure 2-26 and Figure 2-37 both show the same components and connections
between them. In the schematic, the zigzag thing is the resistor, the symbol with
two diagonal arrows is the LED, and the battery is shown as two parallel lines of
unequal length.
The large triangle in the LED symbol indicates the direction of flow of
conventional current, meaning the imaginary flow that runs from positive to
negative. The pair of diagonal arrows tells you that this is the type of diode that
is light-emitting (I’ll get to other kinds of diodes later). In the battery symbol, the
longer of the two lines identifies the positive side.
Trace the path that electricity can take through the circuit and imagine the
switches turning one way or the other. You should see clearly, now, why either
switch will reverse the state of the LED from on to off or off to on.
Figure 2-38 shows the same schematic cleaned up a bit. The lines are straight,
and the power supply is now shown with the positive side at top-left, and the
negative side at bottom-right. You tend to see conventional current moving from

top to bottom, in schematics, while signals of some kind (such as the audio input
to an amplifier) move from left to right. The top-down organization of a circuit
makes it easier to understand.

Figure 2-38. The previous schematic has been reorganized along more conventional lines.

The important thing to grasp is that the two schematics show exactly the same
circuit, even though they look different. The type of components, and the way in
which they are connected, are all that matters. The exact locations of the
components are irrelevant.
A schematic doesn’t tell you where to put the components. It just tells you
how to join them together.
Incidentally, you probably have an example of the circuit in Figure 2-38 in your
home, especially where two light switches are placed at the top and at the bottom
of a flight of stairs, and either switch can be used to turn a light on and off. This
is shown in Figure 2-39, where the live and neutral wires of the AC supply enter
the picture at bottom-left. The live wire is switched, while the neutral wire runs
alongside it to the lightbulb (the white circle with a curly line representing the
element of an old-fashioned incandescent bulb).
The only problem with schematics is that some symbols are not standardized.
You may see several variants that all mean the same thing. I will be explaining
them as we go along.

Figure 2-39. The same circuit as shown in the previous figure is used in homes where two
switches control a single light.

Fundamentals: Basic Schematic Symbols
1. The Switch. Figure 2-40 shows five variations of that most basic component,
a single-pole, single-throw switch. In each case, the pole happens to be on the
right, while the contact is on the left—although with a SPST switch, this does
not make a significant difference. In this book I have chosen to include a white
rectangle around each switch, to emphasize that although it has two parts, they
constitute one component.

Figure 2-40. Five variations in the schematic symbol for a SPST switch. They are all
functionally identical.

Figure 2-41 shows how things get a little more complicated when you have a
double-throw, double-pole switch. A dashed line indicates that both segments of
the switch move together when the switch is turned, even though each pole and
set of contacts is electrically isolated from the other. The variation at center is
sometimes found in large schematics where the layout makes it difficult to put
the sections of a switch close to each other. Each set of contacts is identified by
an abbreviation ending in A, B, C . . . and you are expected to understand that
the contacts are actually contained in one switch.

Figure 2-41. Three variations on a DPDT switch symbol.

2. Power Supply. The power supply for a DC (direct-current) circuit can be
indicated in several ways. The top section of Figure 2-42 shows symbols for a
battery. A short line indicates the negative end, while a longer line indicates the
positive end. Traditionally, a single pair of lines represented a single 1.5-volt
cell, two pairs indicated a 3-volt cell, and so on. But when circuits used high
voltage with vacuum tubes, the person drawing the schematic would usually
show a dashed line between cells instead of drawing dozens of them in a row.

Figure 2-42. Various ways to show positive and negative DC power in a circuit.

A battery symbol may still be used in a simple schematic, but more often
positive and negative DC power is indicated by separate symbols, shown in the
center section and the bottom section of Figure 2-42. Positive is applied in one
location of a circuit labelled Vcc, VCC, or V+, or +V, or +V with a number added
to indicate the voltage. Originally the term VC referred to the voltage at the
collector of a transistor. VCC meant the supply voltage for the whole circuit, and
is now used regardless of whether the circuit has any transistors in it. Many
people say “vee cee cee” without knowing its derivation.
In this book, because I have the luxury of full-color reproduction, I have used a
plus symbol in a red circle to indicate positive power input.
The negative side of the power supply can be shown with any of the symbols in
the bottom section of Figure 2-42. It may be referred to as “negative ground” or
simply “ground.” Because many parts of a circuit may share a negative potential,
multiple ground symbols may be found scattered around a schematic. This is
more convenient than drawing lines linking them all together.
In this book, I have chosen to use the minus sign in a blue circle because it is so

intuitively obvious. You will not see it used often in schematics generally.
My discussion so far has referred to battery-powered devices. In a gadget that
uses AC power from a wall outlet, the situation is more complicated, because the
outlet has three sockets in it for live, neutral, and ground connections. A
schematic typically shows the AC source as an S shape turned on its side, as in
Figure 2-43. Often the value of the power supply is shown, and in the US it is
usually 110, 115, or 120 volts. Elsewhere in the circuit, the symbols shown on
the righthand side of Figure 2-43 refer to the chassis of the device in which the
electronics are mounted.

Figure 2-43. Symbolic representation of AC power (left) and chassis in an AC device (right).

Note that the ground pin in an AC power outlet in the home really does connect
with the ground outside the building. An electronic device with a metal chassis
that connects with that pin is “grounded.” In a battery-powered circuit without
any high voltages, grounding “in the ground” is unnecessary, but a ground
symbol may still be used.
In the UK, a grounded device is sometimes referred to as being “earthed.”
3. Resistor. Only two variants of the symbol for a resistor exist, shown in
Figure 2-44. The symbol on the left is used in the United States, with a number
beside it indicating its resistance in ohms. Alternatively the resistor may be
identified as R1, R2, R3 . . . with a separate parts list showing the values. The
righthand symbol in Figure 2-44 originated in Europe, and here again the
number is the value of the resistor in ohms. The value of 220 ohms in the figure
was selected arbitrarily.

Figure 2-44. Symbol for a resistor in the United States (left) and Europe (right).

Remember that where a resistance value includes a decimal point, Europeans
omit the point and substitute a K or M, while resistances less than 1K are shown
as one or more digits followed by letter R.
4. Potentiometer. In Figure 2-45 the lefthand symbol is used in the United
States, while the righthand symbol originated in Europe. In both symbols, the
arrow identifies the wiper in the potentiometer. The value of 470 ohms was
selected arbitrarily.

Figure 2-45. The lefthand symbol for a potentiometer is used in the United States, while the
righthand symbol originated in Europe.

5. Pushbutton. Three possible pushbutton symbols are shown in Figure 2-46.
These symbols represent the most common type of normally open pushbutton or
momentary switch, where pressure closes two contacts and release of the
pressure opens the circuit. In more complex pushbuttons, where a single button
press closes or opens numerous contacts, the symbol for a multi-pole switch may
be used.

Figure 2-46. Three variants of the pushbutton symbol. The white rectangle is added in this
book for clarity, but is not used elsewhere.

6. Light-Emitting Diode (LED). Figure 2-47 shows four variants of a symbol
representing an LED. The meaning is the same, regardless of whether a circle is
included, and regardless of whether the triangle is solid or open. The white
highlight in the circle is added in this book for clarity, but is not used elsewhere.
LED symbols may be oriented in any direction, for convenience in drawing a
circuit. Arrows also may point in any direction.

Figure 2-47. Four ways of representing an LED. They are functionally identical.

I’ll explore other symbol variants later in the book. Meanwhile, the most
important things to remember are:
The positions of components in a schematic do not affect the functionality.
The styles of symbols used in a schematic are not important.
The connections between the components are extremely important.

Schematic Layout
I mentioned previously that schematics commonly show positive power at the
top and negative at the bottom. This convention is a great help in understanding
how the circuit works, but is not helpful at all when you actually want to build
the circuit, because almost certainly you will begin by using a breadboard that

imposes a completely different geometry.
Almost all the electronics books that I have seen expect you to change a circuit
from the way it looks as a schematic to the way it has to be on a breadboard.
This can be challenging, and may be a significant barrier to learning electronics.
Therefore, the schematics in this book are all laid out in a pattern that is similar
to that of a breadboard. This will make more sense after you encounter a
breadboard yourself in Experiment 8.

Crossovers
The last topic I have to mention about schematics concerns the way in which
they show two wires crossing each other. In the simple circuits that you have
built so far, no crossovers occurred, but as circuits become more complicated,
wires must pass over each other without making an electrical connection. How
can a schematic illustrate this?
In the first edition of this book, I used a style in which one wire crossing another
had a little semicircular “jump” in it. This is identified as the “Old Style” in
Figure 2-48. I still prefer this style, because you can see so clearly that the wires
are not making an electrical connection. However, a few decades ago, rendering
the little jump became more troublesome as circuits were created with graphics
software instead of pen and ink. At that point, jumps were used less frequently.
An alternative, identified as “Newer Style” in Figure 2-48, showed one of the
wires with a break in it. This was confusing, and was not easily rendered by
automated circuit-drawing software. Consequently it, too, has become rare.
The third style, labelled “Conventional,” is now extremely common. In this
edition of Make: Electronics I decided I should conform with the conventional
style that is used in the rest of the world, even though I think it isn’t as clear as
the old style.
Perhaps you are wondering—if two lines crossing each other are not electrically
connected, how do you draw them when they are connected? The answer is, you
use a dot, and to avoid confusion, the dot should be large, not just a little pinprick. The lower half of Figure 2-48 shows what I mean. This leads to the
general rule:
Two lines crossing each other do not indicate an electrical connection.

Where lines intersect in a dot, there is an electrical connection.

Figure 2-48. Various styles for depicting wires that do or do not connect. See text for details.

There’s still one more note to add. In the interests of clarity, I think it’s good
practice to avoid the style shown at the bottom of Figure 2-48. It’s too confusing.
If we avoid that configuration, and use the one immediately above it instead,
then we know that wires crossing each other never make a connection under any
circumstances.

Colored Conductors
Did I say that crossovers would be my last topic about schematics? Actually
there is one more small matter. Because I never want you to get confused
between the positive and negative sides of a power supply, I’m going to be
coloring all the positive conductors red in schematic drawings in the rest of the
book, while the negative/ground side will be blue. Readers have told me that this
was very helpful where I used it occasionally in the past, so, now I’m going to
use it consistently throughout.
Black is a more commonly used color for negative/ground (as in the black wire
on your meter, or the black wire from a battery connector). But blue is still
sometimes used, and is more distinctive.
Just bear in mind that schematics that you encounter in the world outside of this
book will not use this helpful coloring convention. All the wires will be black,
and you will have to figure out which ones are connected with the power supply.

Experiment 7: Investigating a Relay
The next step in your exploration of switching is to use a remote-controlled
switch. By “remote-controlled,” I mean that it turns on or off in response to a
signal that you send to it. This kind of switch is known as a relay, because it
relays an instruction from one part of a circuit to another.
Often a relay is controlled by a low voltage or small current, and switches a
larger voltage or higher current.
This can be very useful. When you start your car, for instance, a relatively small,
cheap ignition switch sends a small signal down a thin, inexpensive piece of wire
to a relay that is near the starter motor. The relay activates the motor through a
shorter, much thicker, more expensive piece of wire, capable of carrying as much
as 100 amps.
Similarly, if you raise the lid on an old-fashioned top-loading washing machine
during its spin cycle, you close a small switch that sends a small signal down a
thin wire to a relay. The relay handles the bigger task of switching off the large
motor spinning the drum full of wet clothes.

What You Will Need:
9-volt battery (1)
DPDT 9VDC relays (2)
Tactile switch, SPST (1)
Test leads with alligator clips at each end (5)
Utility knife (1)
Multimeter (1)

The Relay
The type of relay that I want you to use has two pins at one end and six at the
other. The six are clustered in two lines of three, as in Figure 2-49 (where the
relay is upside-down with its pins in the air). If you buy two relays, you can use
one for investigational purposes, meaning that you’ll be cutting it open to take a
look inside. If you do this very, very carefully, the relay should still be usable
afterward. If not—well, you will have a spare.

Caution: Polarity Problems
Some relays are fussy about the way that you apply voltage to the coil that’s
hidden inside. Everything works fine with the electricity flowing one way
through the coil, but if you reverse the positive and negative connections (in
other words, if you reverse the polarity) the relay stops working.
This is especially annoying when the relay datasheet doesn’t make it clear. The
relays that I have recommended do not require a particular polarity. See
“Essential: Relay”.

Procedure
Attach test leads and a tactile switch (pushbutton) as shown in Figure 2-49.
(Note that the parts in these drawings are not drawn to scale.) When you press
the button to apply 9 volts to the pair of pins that are separate from the others,
you should hear a very faint click. Let go of the button, and you may hear
another click. (If your hearing is not good, touch the relay gently with your

fingertip, and you should feel a faint vibration when the click occurs.)
What’s happening here? Your meter will help you to investigate. Set it to
measure continuity, and verify that it’s working by touching the two probes
together. If it doesn’t beep, you haven’t set it to measure continuity, or the
battery is dead, or one of the probes is plugged into the wrong socket.
Now hold the probes against the pins as shown in Figure 2-50, and press the
button. The meter should beep while the button is pressed.

Figure 2-49. The first step in figuring out what’s happening inside a relay.

This test tells you that some contacts must close inside the relay when you apply
voltage to the pair of terminals at the end nearest you. But maybe you’re having
difficulty holding the meter probes against the pins at the same time as you press
the button. In that case, try using a couple of test leads as shown in Figure 2-51.
With one end of each lead clipped to a meter probe, and the other end of each
lead clipped to a relay pin, you have your hands free.

Figure 2-50. Step 2: Measuring continuity.

Figure 2-51. You can extend your meter probes with test leads, to free yourself from holding
the probes.

Now try moving the red test lead from the relay pin farthest away from you to
the vacant pin next to it. You should find that the behavior of the meter is
reversed, so that it beeps when you don’t press the button, and then stops
beeping when you do press it.

What’s Going On Inside
Figure 2-52 shows an x-ray view of the interior of the relay when you pressed
the button. The relay contains a coil at the bottom, which generates a magnetic
field, which moves a pair of internal switches. The coil moved the switch on the
right to connect pins A and C internally, so the meter beeped.

Figure 2-52. Inside the relay, when the button is pressed, the meter starts beeping.

You may be wondering why the coil in the relay seems to push the internal
switch away from it. The reason is that there is a mechanical linkage inside the
relay which converts a pulling force to a pushing force. You’ll be able to inspect
this when I get to the point of opening up the relay, later in this experiment.
Figure 2-53 shows what happened when you were not pressing the button. The
switch contacts relaxed into their opposite state, breaking the connection

between A and B and making the connection between B and C. The contacts
remain in this position when no power is flowing through the relay coil.

Figure 2-53. Inside the relay, when the button is not pressed and the meter is not beeping.

Other Relays
I believe that the pin functions that I have described are the most common for
this size of relay, but I know there are some exceptions that do things differently.
In fact, the first edition of this book used a relay that had different pin functions.
When you encounter a double-pole, double-throw (DPDT) relay for the first
time, how can you determine what’s going on inside it? You test different pairs
of pins with your meter while you apply voltage to the coil. By a process of
elimination, you can figure out how the pins are connected.
You can also read the manufacturer’s datasheet. It should contain diagrams such
as the one in Figure 2-21.
Is this all you need to know about relays? No, I’ve hardly scratched the surface.
Some relays are latching, meaning that the internal switches remain in either

position when the power is off. Latching relays usually have two coils to
move the switches each way. I will not be using them in this book.
Some relays have two poles, some have only one; some are double-throw,
and some are single-throw.
Some coils switch with AC, some switch with DC, and as I’ve mentioned
previously, some DC coils require you to apply DC voltage with correct
polarity.
As always, datasheets should provide the necessary information.
Figure 2-54 shows a selection of schematic symbols for various types of relays.
Type A is single-pole, single-throw. Type B is single-pole, double-throw. Type C
is single-pole, single-throw, drawn in the style that I like to use, with a white
rectangle reminding you that the parts are enclosed in a single component. Type
D is single-pole, double-throw. Type E is double-pole, double throw. Type F is
single-pole, double-throw, latching.
Relay schematics are always drawn with the internal switch in its relaxed
position, when power is not applied—with the exception of the latching relay,
where the position of the switch is arbitrary.

Figure 2-54. Various schematic symbols for relays. See text for details.

The type of relay you have been testing is a small-signal relay, meaning that it
can’t switch a lot of current. Larger relays may be capable of switching many
amperes. It’s important to choose a relay that is rated for the maximum current in
your circuit (or higher), because overloading a relay will cause sparking that
quickly erodes its contacts.
In future experiments you’ll discover some practical uses for a relay—for
example, in a home security system. Before you get to that, I’m going to show
you how to turn a relay into an oscillator that buzzes. But first, I think it’s time to
take a look inside.

Opening It Up
If you have an impatient disposition, you can open your relay using methods
such as those in Figure 2-55 and Figure 2-56. Generally, though, you may be
better off using a most mundane piece of equipment: a box cutter or utility knife.

Figure 2-55. Option 1 for opening a relay (probably not recommended).

Figure 2-56. Option 2 for opening a relay (definitely not recommended).

Figure 2-57 and Figure 2-58 illustrate the technique that I like to use. You shave
the edges of the plastic shell, beveling them until you see just a hair-thin
opening. Don’t go any farther; the parts inside are very, very close to your knife
blade. Now pop the top off. Repeat this procedure with the remaining edges of
the shell, and if you were really careful, the relay will be exposed but will still
work when you energize its coil.

Figure 2-57. Shaving the edges of the plastic box of a relay is a first step to opening it.
Always cut away from you and downward toward your work bench.

Figure 2-58. After shaving the edges, you should be able to pry open one section of the case.

What’s Inside?
Figure 2-59 shows a simplified view of the parts in a typical relay. The coil, A,
generates a magnetic attraction pulling lever B downward. A plastic extension,
C, pushes outward against flexible metal strips and moves the poles of the relay,
D, between the contacts. (This is a slightly different configuration from the relay
recommended for experiments in this book, but the general principle is the
same.)

Figure 2-59. Simplified view of the interior of a relay. See text for details.

You can compare the diagram with an actual relay that I opened up, in Figure 260.
Various sizes of relays are shown with their cases removed in Figure 2-61. All of
them happen to be designed for 12 volts DC. The automotive relay at far left is
the simplest and easiest to understand, because it is designed without much
concern for the size of the package. Smaller relays are more ingeniously
designed, more complex, and more difficult to figure out. Usually, but not
always, a smaller relay is designed to switch less current than a larger one.

Figure 2-60. An actual relay, exposed. The squares on the cutting mat are 1” x 1”.

Figure 2-61. A variety of 12-volt relays. See text for details.

Fundamentals: Relay Terminology
Coil voltage is the voltage that the relay is supposed to receive when you
energize it. This may be AC or DC.
Set voltage is the minimum that the relay will accept, to close its switch. This
will be a bit less than the ideal coil voltage. In practice, a relay will probably
work with even less power than the set voltage, but the set voltage tells you the
minimum at which it is guaranteed to work.
Operating current is the power consumption of the coil, usually in milliamps,
when the relay is energized. Sometimes the power is expressed in milliwatts.
Switching capacity is the maximum amount of current that the contacts inside
the relay can switch without damage. Usually this is specified for a resistive
load, meaning a passive device such as an incandescent lightbulb. When you use
a relay to switch on a motor, it imposes an inductive load, which takes a big
initial surge of current before it gets up to speed. Switching the motor off creates
another surge. If the datasheet for a relay doesn’t rate its ability to handle an
inductive load, a rule of thumb is to assume that a motor may draw twice as
much current when it starts, compared with when it is running.

Experiment 8: A Relay Oscillator
When you used test leads with alligator clips in previous experiments, they had
two big advantages: you could assemble a circuit quickly, and you could see its
connections easily.
Sooner or later, though, you have to get acquainted with a quicker, more
convenient, more compact, and more versatile method for building circuits, and
that time has come. I’m referring to the most widely used prototyping device: a
solderless breadboard.
In the 1940s, circuits were built on a platform that really did look like a board
that could be used for slicing bread. Wires and components were nailed, stapled,
or screwed into place, because this was a whole lot easier than the alternative,
which was mounting them on pieces of sheet metal. Remember, plastic barely
existed back then. (A world without plastic—can you imagine it?)
Today the term “breadboard” is used for a little slab measuring about 2” by 7”,

and no more than 1/2” thick, as pictured in Figure 2-10. This is a wonderfully
quick and easy system for assembling components. The only problem is that it
creates internal connections between the components that are difficult to
visualize—although I have ways to help you deal with that.
The best way to learn breadboarding is to assemble a circuit, which is exactly
what you are about to do, taking the previous experiment with a relay one step
further.

What You Will Need
9-volt battery (1)
Battery connector (1)
Breadboard (1)
DPDT 9VDC relay (1)
Generic LEDs (2)
Tactile switch (1)
Resistor, 470 ohms (1)
Capacitor, 1,000µF (1)
Pliers, wire cutters, wire strippers (1 each)
Hookup wire, at least two colors, no more than 12” each

A Beginner’s Board
Figure 2-62 shows the top part of your breadboard with the components that I
would like you to plug into it.

Figure 2-62. A relay test circuit mounted in a breadboard.

In case you’re wondering exactly what some of these components are, Figure 263 shows all the pictorial symbols that will be used in the rest of the book in
breadboard diagrams. You have not encountered most of these components yet,
but you can refer back to this diagram for reference.

Figure 2-63. Representation of breadboarded components.

In Figure 2-62 the relay from the previous experiment is in the center. You won’t
be able to see the pins from above, because they are inserted into the board
underneath. I have shown their positions so that you know which way around the
relay should be (that is, with its coil pins at the bottom). I have also shown the
connections that exist inside the relay, just to remind you how they are
configured. The switch is in the position where it rests when there is no power.
This is the “relaxed” position.
The gray circular object is your pushbutton, more properly known as a tactile
switch. I have shown an x-ray view of its pin positions, too, so you know how it
should be oriented.
The two red circular objects are LEDs. Make sure the long lead of each one is on
the side where the plus sign is shown.
The resistor value is 470 ohms—but you could have figured that out by looking
at the colors of its stripes.
The red, green, and blue segments that look like pieces of wire, plugged into the
breadboard, really are pieces of wire, plugged into the breadboard. My next task
is to tell you how to make them.

Making Jumpers
If you bought an assortment of precut hookup wires, also known as jumpers, you
can just go ahead and push them into the breadboard in the positions shown,
although they won’t be the same colors as the ones in my illustration.
As I mentioned previously, I advocate making your own. The exact procedure
that I use is shown in Figure 2-64. First, strip off a couple of inches of insulation
from some hookup wire. To do this, hold the wire in your left hand (or your right
hand, if you are lefthanded). Hold the wire strippers in your other hand. Close
the wire strippers so that they grip the wire in the hole marked “22” on the blade
of the strippers. Pull the strippers away from your other hand, and they should
take the insulation with them. (If you are wondering why you use the hole
marked “22,” it’s because you are using 22-gauge wire. At least, I hope that’s the
size you are using.)

Figure 2-64. Procedure for making jumper wires. See text for details.

Next assess how long the visible part of your wire is supposed to be when it is
installed on the board. I will call that distance X inches. Measure X inches of the
insulation that remains on your hookup wire. Drag a section of insulation that is
X” long until it is about 3/8” from the end of the wire.
Using your wire cutters, or the blades built into your wire strippers, snip the wire
3/8” behind the X” section of insulation that you just dragged along the wire.
Finally, use your pliers to make a neat right-angle bend at each end, and push it
into the board. Wait—does it not quite fit? If you practice a little, you’ll soon get
to the point where you can make jumpers of the right length just by visual
estimation.

Power Up
Lastly you need to apply power from your 9-volt battery. You should find that
the wires attached to the connector terminate in little bare soldered ends that will
poke into the holes in the breadboard. If you have trouble with them, try feeding
them in with the tips of your pliers. If you still have trouble, you may need to
strip off a couple more millimeters of insulation, using your wire strippers.
After inserting the wires into the breadboard, snap the connector onto the battery,
as suggested in Figure 2-62. As soon as you have power on the breadboard, the
LED on the left should light up. When you press the button, the switch inside the
relay will close and the LED on the right will light up. Congratulations! You just
breadboarded your first circuit.
Now, why does it work?

Inside the Board
Figure 2-65 reveals the copper strips that are hidden inside the breadboard. The
little squares show where each lead of a component can poke through and make
contact with the strips inside.
Each of the two long, vertical strips is known as a bus (plural: buses). This type
of bus does not transport people, but does transport electrons, as the positive and
negative sides of the power supply are typically connected with the buses.
In this book, I am consistently placing the positive side of the supply on the
left bus and negative ground on the right bus.
An important thing to notice is that each bus has two breaks in it. Not all
breadboards have this feature, but many do. The purpose is to allow you to use
multiple power supplies of different voltages at different locations on the board.
In practice this doesn’t happen often, and the breaks in the buses are annoying,
because you may tend to forget that they’re there. When you build a circuit that
extends down the board, and you find a mysterious lack of power around the
halfway mark, you may realize eventually that you forgot to add jumper wires
bridging the gaps in the buses.
Where necessary, I will be reminding you to take care of this little detail.

Figure 2-65. A single-bus breadboard contains copper connecting strips in this

configuration.

Relay Circuit, Revealed
Figure 2-66 shows you the copper strips hidden inside your breadboard. They
make connections between components plugged into the breadboard. The
electricity takes a zigzag path, but the resistance of the copper strips is so low,
the length of the path doesn’t matter.

Figure 2-66. Components on the breadboard are connected through the copper strips inside
it.

Maybe the diagram is easier to understand if I hide the copper strips that aren’t
doing anything, and just show the ones that are part of the circuit, as shown in
Figure 2-67.

Figure 2-67. The previous diagram is modified so that strips in the breadboard that are not
an active part of the circuit have been omitted.

Now take a look at the schematic for the same circuit, in Figure 2-68. I laid out
the schematic to resemble the breadboard, to emphasize the similarity. As you
continue through the book I’m going to rely on schematics more, and will expect
that you can create your own breadboard layouts. But I’ll take a while to get to
that point.

Figure 2-68. A schematic that corresponds with the breadboard connections already shown.

If you’re wondering why there is only one 470-ohm resistor to protect two
LEDs, it’s because the LEDs only light up one at a time.

Making It Buzz
The next step is to modify your circuit, to make it more interesting. Look at the
new schematic in Figure 2-69. Compare it with the previous version in Figure 268. Can you spot the difference? In the old version, the pushbutton that
energized the coil received its power directly from the 9V supply. In the new
version, the pushbutton gets its power through the lower contact of the relay.
What effect will this have?

Figure 2-69. A revised version of the previous schematic now delivers power to the
pushbutton through the lower contact of the relay.

Figure 2-70 shows how you can adapt your previous breadboarded circuit to
match the new schematic. All you have to do is rotate the pushbutton by 90
degrees, and use an extra jumper wire (colored green in the figure) to link it with
the same relay pin that energizes the lefthand LED.
Push the button—briefly!—and what happens? The relay makes a buzzing
sound. (If your hearing is not good, touch the relay to feel it vibrating.)
Can you see what’s happening, here? In its relaxed state, the switch inside the
relay rests against the lower contact. This feeds positive voltage to the lefthand
LED, and also to the pushbutton. Consequently, when you press the button, the
power connects with the relay coil. The coil pushes the internal switch upward—
but as soon as it does that, it breaks the connection feeding voltage to the coil.
So, the switch falls back to its relaxed position. But this energizes the coil again,
so the cycle repeats.

Figure 2-70. The previous breadboarded circuit has been modified to match the revised
schematic.

The relay is oscillating between its two states.
Because you’re using a small relay, it switches on and off quite fast. In fact, it
oscillates perhaps 20 times per second (too fast for the LEDs to show what’s
really happening).
When you force a relay to behave like this, it’s liable to burn itself out or
destroy its contacts. You are also controlling a bit more current than your
tactile switch is designed to handle. So don’t hold down the button for long!

To make the circuit less self-destructive, we need to make everything happen
more slowly. I’m going to achieve this by using a capacitor.

Adding Capacitance
Add a 1,000µF electrolytic capacitor in parallel with the coil of the relay as
shown in the diagram in Figure 2-71, making sure that the capacitor’s short wire
is connected to the negative side of the circuit; otherwise, it won’t work. In
addition to the short wire, you should find a minus sign on the body of the
capacitor, which is there to remind you which side should be more negative. In
the diagram, I used a plus symbol, because it’s more obvious than a minus
symbol, and I wanted to be consistent with the style I used for LEDs.
Electrolytic capacitors react very badly to being connected the wrong way
around. They may self-destruct. Double-check the polarity.

Figure 2-71. With the addition of a large capacitor, the behavior of the circuit slows down.

When you press the button now, the relay should click intermittently instead of
buzzing.
A capacitor is like a tiny rechargeable battery. It’s so small that it charges in a
fraction of a second, before the relay has time to open its lower pair of contacts.
Then, when the contacts are open, the capacitor releases its power to the relay
(and to the lefthand LED). This keeps the coil of the relay energized for a
moment. After the capacitor exhausts its power reserve, the relay relaxes and the
process repeats.

During this process, the capacitor is charging and discharging.
Disconnect the righthand LED, and you should find that the lefthand LED pulses
in a pleasing manner, gradually fading as the voltage from the capacitor
diminishes.
Because the capacitor takes a big surge of current when it charges, your tactile
switch may overheat if you hold it down for too long during this experiment.

Fundamentals: Farad Basics
The storage ability of a capacitor is measured in farads, represented by an
uppercase letter F. The term is named after Michael Faraday, another in the
pantheon of electrical pioneers.
The farad is a large unit, and is divided into microfarads (abbreviated µF, each
being 1/1,000,000th of a farad), nanofarads (abbreviated nF, each being
1/1,000th of a microfarad), and picofarads (abbreviated pF, each being 1/1,000th
of a nanofarad). In the United States, the nanofarad is used less often than in
Europe. Instead, values may be expressed using picofarads and fractions of a
microfarad.
A conversion table for picofarads, nanofarads, microfarads, and farads is shown
in Figure 2-72.

Figure 2-72. Conversion table for fractions of farads.

Caution: Getting Zapped by Capacitors
If a large capacitor is charged with a high voltage, it can retain that voltage for
minutes or even hours. Because the circuits in this book use low voltages, you
don’t have to be concerned about this here, but if you are reckless enough to
open an old TV set and start digging around inside (which I do not recommend),
you may have a nasty surprise. A large charged capacitor can kill you as easily as
if you stick your finger into an electrical outlet.

Fundamentals: Capacitor Basics
No electrical connection exists inside a capacitor. Its two leads are connected
internally with plates that are a tiny distance apart, separated by an insulator
known as the dielectric. Consequently, DC current cannot flow through a
capacitor. However, if you connect a capacitor across a battery, it will charge
itself as suggested in Figure 2-73, because the charge on one plate attracts an

opposite charge on the other plate.

Figure 2-73. A capacitor connected across a battery will accumulate equal and opposite
charges, as suggested here.

In modern capacitors, the plates have been reduced to strips of very thin,
flexible, metallic film.
The two most common varieties of capacitors are ceramic (usually small, to
store a relatively small charge) and electrolytic (which can be much larger).
Electrolytics are usually shaped like miniature tin cans and may be any color,
although black is most common. Older ceramics are often disc-shaped, while
newer ones are little rounded blobs.
Ceramic capacitors have no polarity, meaning that you don’t have to worry about
which way around they are in a circuit. Electrolytics do have polarity, and won’t
work unless you connect them the right way around.
The schematic symbol for a capacitor contains two lines representing the two
plates inside it. If both of the lines are straight, the capacitor does not have a
polarity—it can be used either way around. If one of the lines is curved, that side
of the capacitor must be more negative than the other. A + sign may be included
to remind you of the polarity. The variants are shown in Figure 2-74.

Figure 2-74. Two variants of the symbol representing a capacitor. See text for details.

The symbol with the curved plate is not used so much anymore. People assume
that if you have an electrolytic capacitor, you’ll be smart enough to connect it the
right way around. Also, multilayer ceramic capacitors have become available in
higher values, and may be substituted for electrolytics.
My schematic diagrams will only use the nonpolarized capacitor symbol.
Whether you use an electrolytic capacitor or a ceramic capacitor is your
choice.
My breadboard diagrams will show electrolytic capacitors where I think you
are most likely to use them. Still, you can substitute ceramic capacitors if you
wish.

Caution: Observe Capacitor Polarity!
The most common type of electrolytic capacitor uses aluminum plates. Two
other types use tantalum and niobium, respectively. All of these capacitors are
fussy about polarity. In Figure 2-75, a tantalum capacitor was plugged into this
breadboard, connected the wrong way to a power source capable of delivering a
lot of current. After a minute or so of this abuse, the capacitor rebelled by
popping open and scattering small flaming pieces, which burned their way into
the breadboard. Lesson learned: observe polarity!

Figure 2-75. The aftermath of an error in which a polarized tantalum capacitor was
connected the wrong way around to a power source capable of supplying substantial
current.

Fundamentals: Fault Tracing
As you build more circuits on breadboards, and they become more complex,
errors become more likely. No one is exempt from this unfortunate fact.
One frequent breadboarding error is to plug a wire into the wrong row on a
breadboard. This is especially easy when you have a component such as a relay,
where the pins are hidden. Often I pull that component out, take another look,
and push it back in, just to make sure.
A more subtle error occurs when you forget the connections made by the strips
hidden inside the board. Take a look at Figure 2-76. What could be simpler?
Clearly, the positive source of power feeds current through the LED, through a
jumper, and then through a resistor to the negative bus. But if you assemble the
components as I have shown them, I absolutely, positively guarantee that they
won’t work.

Figure 2-76. This breadboarded circuit won’t work. Can you see why?

The situation will get much worse if you swap the positions of the resistor and
the LED. Now the circuit will immediately burn out the LED.
The explanation becomes apparent when you check the x-ray view in Figure 277. The problem is that both leads of the LED are plugged into the same strip
inside the board. The electricity has the option to run through the LED, or run
through the copper strip instead—and since the resistance of the strip is a tiny
fraction of the resistance of the LED, most of the electrons prefer the strip, and
the LED remains dark.

Figure 2-77. An x-ray view helps to explain why this won’t work.

Many other kinds of errors are possible. How can you find them most quickly
and efficiently? You simply have to be methodical. Try to follow these steps:
1. Check voltages. Attach the red lead from your meter to a connection near
the top of the positive bus on your breadboard. Set the meter to measure
volts (DC volts, unless an experiment suggests otherwise). Make sure the
power to your circuit is switched on. Now touch the black probe from your
meter to various locations down the negative bus. The meter reading
should be close to the supply voltage. If you find a value close to zero, you
probably forgot to include a jumper to bridge one of the gaps in the
negative bus. If you find a value of a few volts, but it is significantly lower
than the supply voltage, you may have a short circuit somewhere, pulling
down the voltage from the battery (if you are using a battery).
Now secure the black probe to a connection near the top of the negative
bus, and check the positive bus from top to bottom.
Finally, with the black probe still attached near the top of the negative bus,
use the red probe to check voltages at random locations in your circuit. If
you find a voltage close to zero, probably a connection is missing
somewhere, or a component or wire is not making contact inside the
breadboard.
2. Check placement. Make sure that all the jumper wires and component
leads are exactly where they should be on the breadboard.
3. Check component orientation. Diodes, transistors, and capacitors that
have polarity must be the right way around. When you start to use
integrated circuit chips, later in this book, check that they are the right way
up, and make sure that none of the pins on a chip has been bent so that it is
hidden underneath the chip.
4. Check connections. Sometimes (seldom, but it can happen) a component
may make a bad connection inside the breadboard. If you have an
inexplicable intermittent fault or zero voltage, try relocating some of the
components. In my experience this problem is more likely to occur if you
buy very cheap breadboards. It is also more likely if you use wire that has a
smaller diameter than 22 gauge. (Remember, a higher gauge number means
a thinner wire.)

5. Check component values. Verify that all the resistor and capacitor values
are correct. My standard procedure is to check each resistor with a meter
before I plug it in. This is time-consuming but can actually save time in the
long run.
6. Check for damage. Integrated circuits and transistors can be damaged by
incorrect voltages, wrong polarity, or static electricity. Keep spares on hand
so that you can make substitutions.
7. Check yourself! When all else fails, take a break. Working obsessively for
long periods can create tunnel vision, which prevents you from seeing
what’s wrong. If you move your attention to something else for a while,
then come back to your problem, the answer may suddenly appear obvious.
You may want to bookmark this list of fault-tracing procedures and come back to
it later if something doesn’t work.

Background: Michael Faraday and Capacitors
As previously noted, the farad is named after Michael Faraday. He was an
English chemist and physicist who lived from 1791 to 1867. See Figure 2-78.

Figure 2-78. Michael Faraday, after whom the farad is named.

Although Faraday was relatively uneducated and had little knowledge of
mathematics, he had an opportunity to read a wide variety of books while
working for seven years as a bookbinder’s apprentice, and thus was able to
educate himself. Also, he lived at a time when relatively simple experiments
could reveal fundamental properties of electricity. He made major discoveries
including electromagnetic induction, which led to the development of electric
motors. He also discovered that magnetism could affect rays of light.
His work earned him numerous honors, and his picture was printed on English
bank notes denominated in 20 pounds sterling, from 1991 through 2001.

Experiment 9: Time and Capacitors
Electrons travel almost at the speed of light, yet we can use them to measure
time in seconds, minutes, or even hours. This experiment will show you how.

What You Will Need
Breadboard, hookup wire, wire cutters, wire strippers, test leads, multimeter
9-volt battery and connector (1)
Tactile switches (2)
Generic LED (1)
Resistors: 470 ohms, 1K, 10K (one of each)
Capacitors: 0.1µF, 1µF, 10µF, 100µF, 1,000µF (one of each)

Charging a Capacitor
First set your meter to measure volts DC, and measure the voltage of a 9-volt
battery with your meter. If it’s less than 9.2V, you need a newer battery for this
particular experiment.
Install two tactile switches, a 1K resistor, and a 1,000µF capacitor on your
breadboard as shown in Figure 2-79. Use a couple of test leads to connect your
meter so that you can measure the voltage across the leads of the capacitor while
keeping your hands free.
Snap a connector on your battery, and plug the wires into the breadboard to
provide the 9VDC supply on the two buses of the breadboard, with positive on
the left, as shown in the figure.
If the meter measures more than 0.1V, discharge the capacitor by pressing button
B, which shorts together the two sides of the capacitor.

Figure 2-79. A simple setup for timing the charging of a capacitor. The capacitor is 1,000µF
and the resistor is 1K.

A schematic in Figure 2-80 shows the same circuit, and may help you to see
what’s going on.
Now hold down button A while you use a watch, a clock, or a smartphone to
count how many seconds the capacitor takes to charge to 9.0V. If you have an
autoranging meter, it should automatically switch from measuring millivolts, at
first, to measuring volts as the charge increases. When I performed this
experiment, the meter took just over three seconds.

Figure 2-80. This schematic shows the same circuit as the preceding figure, which shows the
breadboarded version.

The positive side of the capacitor has become “more positive” and the negative
side has become “more negative” as electron-holes and electrons have been
attracted to each other on the plates. The potential difference between the leads
of the capacitor has increased, while current has not passed through it. One of
the first statements you will find, when you read any introductory electronics
text, is:
A capacitor blocks DC (direct current).
So long as you apply a steady electrical potential to the capacitor, this is true.

An RC Network
Remove the 1K resistor and substitute a 10K resistor. If the meter shows that

there is still some voltage across the capacitor, discharge it by pressing button B.
Now repeat the test. How long does the capacitor take to reach 9.0V, charging
through a 10K resistor?
This simple combination of a capacitor and a resistor is known as an RC network
(R for resistor, C for capacitor). It’s a very important concept in electronics.
Before I explain what it does, here are some questions to consider:
Did the capacitor take exactly 10 times as long to reach 9 volts when you
used the 10K resistor instead of the 1K resistor?
Did the voltage across the capacitor rise at a steady rate, or did it increase
faster at the beginning of the experiment—or toward the end?
If you wait long enough, will the capacitor ever reach the initial value that
you measured as the voltage of your battery?

Voltage, Resistance, and Capacitance
Think of the resistor as a faucet restricting the flow of water, and the capacitor as
a balloon that you are trying to fill (see Figure 2-81). If you screw down the
faucet until only a trickle comes through, the balloon will take longer to fill. But
a slow flow of water should still fill the balloon if you wait long enough.
Assuming that the balloon doesn’t burst, the process will end when the pressure
inside the balloon is equal to the water pressure in the pipe supplying the faucet.

Figure 2-81. Water flowing into a balloon can be compared with electrons flowing into a
capacitor.

But this description leaves out an important factor. As the balloon starts to fill, it
stretches, exerting more pressure on its contents. As the pressure inside the
balloon increases, it pushes back against the incoming flow of water.
Consequently we may expect the water to flow in more slowly as the process
continues.
How does this compare with electrons flowing into a capacitor? The concept is
similar. Initially, the electrons go rushing in, but as they occupy more of the
electron-holes, the newcomers take longer to find a resting place. The charging
process gets slower, and slower. In fact, theoretically, the charge on the capacitor
never quite reaches the voltage being applied to it.

Background: The Time Constant
The speed with which a capacitor charges is measured with a function known as
the “time constant.” The definition is very simple:

T = R × C
where T is the time constant, in seconds, if a capacitor of value C (measured in
farads) is being charged through a resistor of R ohms.
Going back to the circuit you first tested, using a 1K resistor, we can put the
values of the components that you used into the time-constant formula—but only
if we convert the units to ohms and farads. Well, 1K is 1,000 ohms, and 1,000µF
is 0.001 farads. So the calculation becomes very easy:
TC = 1,000 / 0.001
Therefore, for those values of a resistor and a capacitor, TC = 1.
But what exactly does this mean? Does it mean that the capacitor will be fully
charged in one second? Sorry, it’s not that simple.
T, the time constant, is the number of seconds required for a capacitor to
acquire 63% of the voltage being supplied to it, if it starts with zero volts.
What if the capacitor doesn’t start from zero? If we start measuring after the
capacitor has already acquired some voltage, the definition becomes a bit more
complicated. If VDIF is the difference between the voltage on the capacitor and
the supply voltage, T is the number of seconds required for a capacitor to add
63% of VDIF to its current charge.
(Why 63%? Why not 62%, or 64%, or 50%? The answer to that question is too
complicated for this book, and you’ll have to read about time constants
elsewhere if you want to know more. Be prepared for differential equations.)
A comparison may be helpful. Figure 2-82 shows a greedy guy who is ready to
eat some cake. At first he’s ravenously hungry, so he takes 63% of the cake and
eats it in one second, which is his time constant for eating cake. In his second
bite, he takes another 63% of the cake that is left—and because he’s not feeling
so hungry anymore, he requires one more second (remember, this is his time
constant). In his third bite, he takes 63% of what still remains, and still ingests it
in one second. And so on. He is gradually filling up with cake, like a capacitor
filling up with electrons. But he never quite eats all the cake, because he only
takes 63% of whatever is left.

Figure 2-82. If our gourmet always eats just 63% of the cake still on the plate, he “charges
up” his stomach in the same way that a capacitor charges itself. No matter how long he
keeps at it, the cake is never quite gone and his stomach is never completely filled.

Figure 2-83 shows the process another way. After each time constant (which is
one second, if we have a 1,000µF capacitor and a 1K resistor), the capacitor
acquires another 63% of the difference between the charge it had and the voltage
being applied.

Figure 2-83. Another way of looking at a charging capacitor.

In a perfect world of perfect components, the charging process for a capacitor
would continue for an infinite time. In the real world, we say rather arbitrarily:
After five time constants, the charge on the capacitor will be so close to 100
percent, we can think of the process as being complete.

Background: Graphing It
I want to draw a graph showing the voltage in a capacitor as it charges. To do
this, I’m going to calculate the data by using the time-constant formula.
Suppose VCAP is the voltage on a capacitor right now, while VDIF is the
difference between that amount of charge and the battery voltage being applied
(as before). The formula shown below will tell me what the new voltage on the
capacitor will be after one time constant. I’ll call the new voltage VNEW. The
formula looks like this:
VNEW = VCAP + (0.63 × VDIF)
The 0.63 value is the same as 63 percent.
Suppose the battery was supplying exactly 9V and the capacitor started with
exactly 0V. So, VCAP = 0 and VDIF = 9. Plug those values into the formula:
VNEW = 0 + (0.63 × 9)
My calculator tells me that 0.63 × 9 = 5.67. So after one time constant (one
second, with a 1K resistor and a 1,000µF capacitor) the capacitor acquired 5.67
volts.
What about the next second? We have to repeat the calculation, using the new
values. The current voltage on the capacitor, VCAP, is now 5.67. The battery is
still applying 9V, so VDIF equals 9 minus 5.67, which is 3.33. We take those
values back to the same formula:
VNEW = 5.67 + (0.63 × 3.33)
My calculator tells me that 0.63 times 3.33 equals 2.1, approximately. And 2.1
plus 5.67 equals 7.77. So, after two seconds, the capacitor has acquired 7.77

volts.
We can repeat this calculation any number of times, creating a sequence of
numbers like this (rounded to two decimal places), showing the voltage on the
capacitor at the end of each second, assuming a power supply of 9V:
After 1 second: 5.67 volts
After 2 seconds: 7.77 volts
After 3 seconds: 8.54 volts
After 4 seconds: 8.83 volts
After 5 seconds: 8.94 volts
After 6 seconds: 8.98 volts
The graph in Figure 2-84 was created by drawing a smooth curve through those
values. I didn’t bother to go beyond six seconds, because the values climb so
close to 9V.

Figure 2-84. A graph can help to show how charge accumulates on a capacitor over a
period of time.

Experimental Verification

I’ve told you how to calculate the charge on a capacitor in an RC network. But—
how do you know I’m right? Should you just take my word for it?
Maybe you should test it yourself. In other words, you could do some
experimental verification, which is a big part of Learning by Discovery.
Go back to the circuit that you used before, and make sure you have the 10K
resistor in it, not the 1K resistor. Ask a friend to sit beside you, keeping track of
the time, while you watch the display of volts on your multimeter. Every 10
seconds, your friend says “Now!” and you write down the voltage on the meter
at that moment. You follow this procedure for one minute.
Because you’re using a 10K resistor, not a 1K resistor, the time constant is now
10 seconds instead of 1 second. So, your readings should look like the series of
voltages that I tabulated above at 1-second intervals, except that yours will be at
10-second intervals.
The voltages that you measure should be close to mine, but they won’t match
precisely. Why? I can think of many reasons.
Your battery doesn’t provide exactly the same voltage as mine.
Your resistor isn’t precisely 10,000 ohms.
Your capacitor is not exactly 1,000 microfarads.
Your meter is not totally accurate.
You will take a few microseconds to read the meter.
Your friend may not prompt you precisely every 10 seconds.
There are two other factors that you might not think of. First, capacitors don’t
store electricity perfectly. They suffer from leakage, in which the charge
gradually leaks away. This happens even while the capacitor is gaining charge.
Toward the end of the charging process, the electrons are trickling in so slowly,
the leakage (the rate at which they are trickling out) becomes significant by
comparison.
Additionally, your meter has an internal resistance. It’s very high, but still, it’s
there. This means that the meter is stealing a little bit of the charge from your
capacitor while you are measuring the voltage. Yes, the process of making a
measurement changes the value that you are trying to measure! This is actually a
common problem in physics and engineering.

I can think of ways to minimize all of these factors, but I can’t imagine a way to
eliminate them completely. There will always be some experimental error. This
is the challenge when you use an experiment to verify a theory. Verification can
be a very lengthy process, requiring a lot of patience—which is why theorists
tend to have different personalities from experimentalists.

Capacitive Coupling
Now that I’ve told you how capacitors become charged and discharged, I have to
go back to the statement I made before:
A capacitor blocks DC (direct current).
You may remember, I also said, “So long as you apply a steady electrical
potential to the capacitor, this is true.”
But what if there isn’t a steady electrical potential? What happens at the moment
when a capacitor goes from having no charge on it to connecting suddenly to a
source of voltage?
Ahhh, that’s a different matter. Under those circumstances, the capacitor allows
a signal to pass through.
How can this be? The plates inside a capacitor don’t touch each other, so, how
can a pulse of electricity jump from one to the other?
I’ll deal with the “how” and “why” in a moment. First you need to make sure
that what I’m talking about actually happens.
Take a look at the components on the breadboard in Figure 2-85. The layout is
similar to the circuit in Figure 2-79, but the 10K resistor has moved from the left
side to the right side, and an LED and a 470-ohm resistor have been added.

Figure 2-85. The flashing of a red LED shows how the behavior of a capacitor changes
when there is a quick change in voltage.

The breadboarded circuit is redrawn as a schematic in Figure 2-86, which may
help to clarify it.

Figure 2-86. This schematic shows the same circuit as in the preceding figure depicting a
breadboarded version.

And just to make sure there is no confusion, I’m showing the component values
in Figure 2-87.

Figure 2-87. Component values for the breadboarded circuit.

After you assemble the circuit, first remember to press button B to discharge the
capacitor. Now press button A, and—why did the LED just flash and slowly fade
away?
Press button A again. This time, little or nothing happens. Evidently, the
capacitor has to begin in a discharged state for this to work. So, press button B to
discharge it. Now press button A again, and the LED flashes again.
We know that the capacitor started with almost no positive voltage on its lower
pin, because it was connected to negative ground through the 10K resistor. We
also know that the capacitor started with almost no positive voltage on its upper
pin, because button B shorted both sides of the capacitor together. (That was
why I asked you to discharge it.)
Then you pressed button A, which applied a sudden positive pulse, and the LED
lit up on the other side of the capacitor. The current through the LED had to
come from somewhere, and the only explanation is that it came through the
capacitor.

Displacement Current
Let’s try this again, using your meter instead of the LED and its series resistor.
Figure 2-89 shows the breadboard layout, while Figure 2-88 shows the
schematic. Discharge the capacitor by pressing button B, and then check the
reading on your meter. It should be near 0V.

Figure 2-88. The schematic version of the preceding breadboarded circuit.

Watch your meter very carefully while you press button A. A digital meter does
not respond very quickly, but still you will see a sudden rise in the voltage, after
which the voltage gradually diminishes.
When I connected this circuit with an oscilloscope, which can measure and
display very rapid changes in voltage, the trace looked look like the curve that I
added at the bottom of Figure 2-89. The rise in voltage was so fast, it appeared to
be instant.
The way that a capacitor allows a sudden fluctuation in voltage to pass through
is well known, and is often used in electronics. But how can it happen?

Figure 2-89. A meter has been substituted for the LED and 470-ohm series resistor that were
used in the previous version of this circuit.

This question interested an early experimenter named James Maxwell, who felt
it shouldn’t happen; so he developed a theory and invented a phrase to describe
what he saw. He called it displacement current. This conformed with some
theories that he was developing at the time.
Today, there are other theories. Apparently an inrush of current creates a field
effect inside the capacitor, and the field effect can induce voltage on the opposite
plate. But this concept becomes complicated very quickly, and most books
simply say something like, “a capacitor will block DC but will pass fluctuations
in voltage.”
If you substitute a smaller capacitor, you’ll find that it passes a briefer pulse.
Remove the meter, put the LED and its 470-ohm resistor back into the circuit,
and try 100µF, 10µF, 1µF, and 0.1µF capacitors. By the end of the series, the
LED barely flickers.

Alternating Current
If you reverse the circuit, it still works, although current flows in the opposite
direction. Figure 2-91 shows the circuit, with the 10K resistor moved to the left,
and button A moved to the right. The meter still measures the voltage from the
point between the resistor and the capacitor. The schematic in Figure 2-90 shows
the same revision.

Figure 2-90. A schematic of the preceding breadboarded circuit.

Figure 2-91. The previous circuit has been modified, with the voltages reversed.

After you press and release button B to discharge the capacitor, the meter
measures approximately 9VDC, because the upper pin of the capacitor is
connected with the positive bus through the 10K resistor. The capacitor is
blocking DC, so it appears to have infinite resistance, and the positive charge has
“nowhere to go.” This is illustrated in Figure 2-92, which shows how the voltage
between a pair of resistors increases when the resistance increases between that
point and ground.

Figure 2-92. When you have a pair of resistors in series, and the left one is connected with
the power supply while the right one is connected with negative ground, the voltage between
the resistors increases as the value of the righthand resistor increases. A capacitor has an
almost infinite effective resistance to DC current.

However, when you press button A in your breadboarded circuit, this creates a
negative pulse. The effective resistance of the capacitor disappears momentarily
as the pulse passes through, causing your meter reading to fall. Then the
capacitor slowly recharges, just as it did in your very first test in this experiment.

The graph in Figure 2-91 gives a rough idea of how the charge on the capacitor
changes.
A capacitor does block direct current (DC).
The same capacitor will allow a brief fluctuation to pass through, regardless
of which way the current is flowing.
The capacitor then accumulates a charge, as I described at the beginning of
this experiment.
This leads to an important conclusion. Because alternating current (AC) is a
rapid series of relatively negative and relatively positive pulses, a capacitor will
allow them through.
The size of the capacitor will be important. When you substituted smaller values,
you saw that they would only respond briefly. A smaller capacitor will pass highfrequency fluctuations, but will block low-frequency fluctuations—and this
behavior is useful in many applications, including audio. You’ll see this for
yourself in Experiment 29. Bear in mind that audio signals are a form of
alternating current, because they fluctuate rapidly.
When a capacitor is positioned in a circuit to pass AC while blocking DC, we
call it a coupling capacitor. It can allow a signal to travel from one part of a
circuit to another, while blocking their DC voltages, which can be completely
different. I’ll be using this concept when we get to Experiment 11.

Experiment 10: Transistor Switching
Now that you’ve seen the behavior of capacitors, I’m going to move on to
another fundamental component: the transistor. After you learn how that works,
you’ll see how capacitors and transistors can be used together.

What You Will Need
Breadboard, hookup wire, wire cutters, wire strippers, multimeter
Transistor, 2N2222 (1)
9-volt battery and connector (1)
Resistors: 470 ohms (2), 1M (1)

Trimmer potentiometer, 500K (1)
Generic LED (1)

The Finger Test
I’m going to be using the 2N2222 transistor, which is the most widely used
semiconductor of all time (it was introduced by Motorola in 1962 and has been
in production ever since, in one form or another).
Because Motorola’s patents on the 2N2222 ran out long ago, any company can
manufacture their own version of it. Some versions are packaged in a little piece
of black plastic, while others are enclosed in a little metal “can.” I showed these
two versions in Figure 2-23. For our purposes, either will do. However, note the
warning that I included previously about part numbers (see “Essential:
Transistors”). Some 2N2222s are not the same as others, and you need to use the
right type.
Plug your transistor into your breadboard with an LED and a 470-ohm resistor,
as shown in Figure 2-93. Make sure that the longer lead on your LED is facing
to the left, as indicated by the + sign. Also, check that the transistor has its flat
side facing to the right. In the unlikely event that you are using a transistor in a
metal can, the tab sticking out from the can should point down and to the left.

Figure 2-93. Breadboard setup for your first transistor test.

Notice that the wires that I have shown as green and orange have had some extra
insulation removed. If you are using precut jumpers, you’ll have to bend out one
leg of each, so that they rest flat on the breadboard.
Now for the fun part. Press your finger to the exposed metal of the green and
orange jumpers as shown in Figure 2-94, while you watch the LED. If nothing
happens, moisten your finger slightly and try again. The harder you press, the
brighter the LED becomes. The transistor is amplifying the tiny amount of
current flowing through your finger.

Figure 2-94. Adding your finger makes the experiment work.

Caution: Never Use Two Hands
The fingertip switching demo is safe if the electricity only passes through your
finger. You won’t even feel it, because it’s 9 volts DC from a small battery. But
it’s not a good idea to put the finger of one hand on one wire, and the finger of
your other hand on the other wire. This would allow the electricity to pass
through your body. Although there is no chance of hurting yourself in this circuit
because the current is so small, you should never get into the habit of allowing
electricity to run through you from one hand to the other. Also, when touching
the wires, don’t allow them to penetrate your skin. This also means that you
shouldn’t apply voltage to any body ornaments that already pierce your skin.

Inside the Finger Test
Take a look at Figure 2-95, which reveals the connectors inside the breadboard,
omitting the ones that are not connected in this experiment. Notice that the
bottom lead of the transistor is connected through the breadboard to the LED,
and then through the 470-ohm resistor to the negative bus. So, enough current

flowed out of the transistor to light the LED.

Figure 2-95. X-ray view of the breadboard from the previous figure.

Where did this current come from? Well, some electricity flowed in through the
skin of your finger, to the center lead of the transistor. But this wasn’t enough to
light an LED.
There’s only one other explanation. The transistor has a third lead, at the top,
which is connected to the positive bus. Electricity entered the transistor through
this lead. And then, somehow, this flow of current was controlled by the smaller
amount of current that flowed through your finger into the center lead of the
transistor.
This principle is illustrated in Figure 2-96.

Figure 2-96. The basic function of an NPN transistor.

Incidentally, this phenomenon is very different from the behavior of the
capacitor that you saw in the previous experiment. A capacitor just passed a
quick pulse of electricity. A transistor controls a steady flow.

Fundamentals: Transistor Variants
The component that you’re using in this experiment is a bipolar transistor. It
comes in two variants named NPN and PNP. The NPN type, which you have
been using, contains three layers of silicon, of which two “N” layers have a
surplus of negative charge carriers. A third layer, sandwiched between the other
two, is the “P” layer, with a surplus of positive charge carriers. I won’t be going
into a lot of detail about how the transistor works on an atomic level, because in
this book I’m more interested in what a transistor does than in the theory that
explains how it does it. You can find that information in any technical book, or
in many sources online.
The three leads on an NPN bipolar transistor are named the collector, base, and
emitter, as shown in Figure 2-97.

Figure 2-97. The names of the three leads of an NPN bipolar transistor, supplied in a plastic
body (left) and metal can (right).

When the base of an NPN transistor is slightly more positive than its emitter,
the transistor allows positive current to flow in through the collector and out
through the emitter.
In this way, a very small current entering through the base of the transistor
can control a larger current entering through the collector.
A PNP transistor functions oppositely to an NPN transistor. It allows negative
current to flow in through the collector and out through the emitter when the
base is slightly more negative than the emitter. PNP transistors are sometimes
more convenient in a circuit, but are less commonly used. I will not be using
them in Make: Electronics.
Four variants of the schematic symbol for an NPN transistor are shown in
Figure 2-98. They all function the same way. The letters C, B, and E remind you
that these connections are for the collector, base, and emitter.

Figure 2-98. Any of these symbols may be used to represent an NPN transistor.

Four variants of the schematic symbol for a PNP transistor are shown in
Figure 2-99. They all function the same way.

Figure 2-99. Any of these symbols may be used to represent a PNP transistor.

It’s easy to get the symbols for PNP and NPN transistors mixed up, but there’s a
simple way to remind yourself which is which. The arrow in the NPN symbol
points outward, never in. So, think of “NPN” as being short for “never pointing
in.”

Adding a Potentiometer
To learn more about the way in which a transistor works, we need a component
that is a little more controllable than the tip of your finger. I think a
potentiometer will do the job, but not the large type that you used previously. A
trimmer potentiometer is what I have in mind, as pictured in Figure 2-22.
Even though they are dissimilar in shape and size, they all have three pins. These
pins are functionally the same as the three tags that stick out of a large
potentiometer of the kind that you used previously. The middle pin always
connects with the wiper inside the trimmer, while the other two pins connect
with each end of the resistive track inside it. Here is the basic rule that you must
always follow:
When you plug a trimmer into your breadboard, each pin must connect with a
separate row of holes on the breadboard.
This rule is illustrated in Figure 2-100. At the top of the figure I have drawn a
plan view of three types of trimmers, including the multi-turn type, because even
though I am not recommending it, you may find yourself using one, some day.
The pins are not visible from above, but I have shown their positions as if you
can see them through the component. The positioning varies, but there are
always three pins, and they should be 1/10” apart vertically.
In the lower part of the figure, the two “Yes” examples will work because each
pin connects with a different row of holes in the breadboard. The two “No”
examples are unacceptable, because a pair of pins will be shorted together by a
conductor inside the board.
Having dealt with the trimmer basics, I want you to add a 500K trimmer to your
transistor circuit. This is shown in Figure 2-101. Connect the power and use a
small screwdriver to rotate your trimmer all the way clockwise, and all the way
counterclockwise. Notice that if you start with the LED completely dark, you
have to turn the screw on the trimmer a little way before the LED begins to glow.

Figure 2-100. Three types of trimmers, and the correct orientation of their pins.

Figure 2-101. The previous circuit now has a trimmer potentiometer so that you can control
the transistor more precisely than was possible with your finger.

Take a look at the schematic in Figure 2-102, which shows the same connections
that you made on the breadboard, but in a format that is easier to understand.

Figure 2-102. This schematic shows the same breadboard circuit that you built using a
trimmer.

The component values are also shown in Figure 2-103.

Figure 2-103. Values for the breadboarded components.

The potentiometer is connected between the positive bus and the negative bus. In
this orientation we call it a voltage divider. When the wiper is at one end of the
track, it connects directly with the positive side of the power supply. At the other
end of the track, it connects directly with negative ground. At positions in
between, it divides the voltage. Potentiometers are often used in this way, to
provide a full range of voltages.
I mentioned that the LED didn’t light up when you first started moving the wiper
of the potentiometer from negative to positive. Is this just because the LED isn’t
getting enough power? Not exactly. The bipolar transistor deducts some of the
power as its fee for providing a service. It won’t respond unless the voltage at its
base is higher than the voltage at its emitter (usually by around 0.7V). In this
mode, the transistor is positively biased.
The general concept is illustrated in Figure 2-104.

Figure 2-104. Rule of thumb for using an NPN transistor.

Voltage and Current
You’ve seen that the voltage at the base of a bipolar transistor controls the output
from the transistor. Does that mean the transistor is amplifying the voltage?
You can discover this for yourself. Take your meter, set it to measure volts, and
use a test lead to anchor the negative probe to the negative bus on the
breadboard, as shown in Figure 2-105. Touch the red probe to the emitter pin of
the transistor, make a note of the voltage, and move the probe to the base pin. I
guarantee that the voltage at the emitter will be lower than the voltage on the
base.
Readjust the trimmer to a different position, and try again. Regardless of how
you change the voltage on the base pin, the emitter pin will always be lower.
Could this be because the 470-ohm resistor doesn’t provide much resistance
between the emitter of the transistor and the negative bus? Could it be pulling
the voltage down?

Figure 2-105. Testing to discover if a transistor amplifies voltage.

Let’s find out. Remove the LED and the 470-ohm resistor, and substitute a 1M
resistor between the emitter of the transistor and negative ground. It won’t make
much difference. The voltage on the emitter will still be lower than the voltage
on the base.
If you have the patience to test the current into the base and out of the emitter,

you would find something very different. This would entail setting your meter to
measure milliamps and inserting it into the circuit in each location. Remember,
current must pass through the meter to be measurable.
But I’ll tell you what you would find. This particular transistor amplifies the
current entering its base by a factor of more than 200:1. This is called the beta
value of a transistor, and leads me to a fundamental fact:
A bipolar transistor amplifies current, not voltage.
In Make: More Electronics you can find a lot more on this topic. I’m keeping it
brief, here, because this is an introductory book.
Now I’ll summarize the facts about bipolar transistors, for your future reference.

Fundamentals: All About NPN and PNP Transistors
A transistor is a semiconductor, midway between being a conductor and an
insulator. Its effective internal resistance varies, depending on the power that you
apply to its base.
All bipolar transistors have three connections: Collector, Base, and Emitter,
abbreviated as C, B, and E on the manufacturer’s data sheet, which will identify
the pins for you.
NPN transistors are activated by positive voltage on the base relative to the
emitter.
PNP transistors are activated by negative voltage on the base relative to the
emitter.
In their passive state, both types block the flow of electricity between the
collector and emitter, just like an SPST relay in which the contacts are normally
open. (Actually a transistor allows a tiny bit of current known as leakage.)
In a schematic, the orientation of a transistor may vary. The emitter may be at the
top and the collector at the bottom, or vice versa. The base may be on the left, or
on the right, depending on what was most convenient for the person drawing the
schematic. Be careful to look at the arrow in the transistor to see which way up it
is, and whether the component is NPN type or PNP type. You can damage a
transistor by connecting it incorrectly.
Transistors come in many different sizes and configurations. In a lot of them,

there is no way to tell which wires connect to the emitter, the collector, or the
base. You may need to check the manufacturer’s datasheet to find out.
If you forget which lead is which, many multimeters have a function that will
identify the emitter, collector, and base for you. Typically there are four holes
labeled E, B, C, and E. When you have the emitter lead of your transistor
inserted in either of the holes marked E, the base lead in B, and the collector lead
in C, the meter will display the beta value of the transistor. In any other
orientation, the meter reading will be unstable, or blank, or zero, or much lower
than it should be (almost always below 50, and usually below 5).

Caution: Fragile Component!
Transistors are easily damaged, and the damage will be permanent.
Never apply a power supply directly between any two pins of a transistor.
You can burn it out with too much current.
Always limit the current flowing between the collector and the emitter of a
transistor by using another component such as a resistor, in the same way you
would protect an LED.
Don’t apply voltage in reverse orientation. The collector of an NPN transistor
should always be more positive than the base, which should be more positive
than the emitter.

Background: Transistor Origins
Although some historians trace the origins of the transistor back to the invention
of diodes (which allow electricity to flow in one direction while preventing
reversal of the flow), the first practical and fully functional transistor was
developed at Bell Laboratories in 1948 by John Bardeen, William Shockley, and
Walter Brattain.
Shockley was the leader of the team, and had the foresight to see how potentially
important a solid-state switch could be. Bardeen was the theorist, and Brattain
actually made it work. This was a hugely productive collaboration—until it
succeeded. At that point, Shockley started maneuvering to have the transistor
patented exclusively under his own name. When he notified his collaborators,
they were naturally unhappy about this.

A widely circulated publicity photograph didn’t help, in that it showed Shockley
sitting at the center in front of a microscope, as if he had done the hands-on
work, while the other two stood behind him, implying that they had played a
lesser role. A copy of this picture appeared on the cover of Electronics magazine
(see Figure 2-106). In fact Shockley, as the supervisor, was seldom present in the
laboratory where the real work was done.

Figure 2-106. Front, William Shockley. Rear, John Bardeen. Right, Walter Brattain. For
their collaboration in development of the world’s first working transistor in 1948, they
shared a Nobel prize in 1956.

The productive collaboration quickly disintegrated. Brattain asked to be
transferred to a different lab at AT&T. Bardeen moved to the University of
Illinois to pursue theoretical physics. Shockley eventually left Bell Labs and
founded Shockley Semiconductor in what was later to become Silicon Valley,
but his ambitions outstripped the capabilities of the technology of his time. His
company never manufactured a profitable product.
Eight of Shockley’s coworkers in his company eventually betrayed him by
quitting and establishing their own business, Fairchild Semiconductor, which
became hugely successful as a manufacturer of transistors and, later, integrated
circuit chips.

Fundamentals: Transistors and Relays
One limitation of NPN and PNP transistors is that they require power to perform
their function, unlike a relay, which can be passively on or off without any
power input at all.
Relays also offer more switching options. Different versions can be normally
open, normally closed, or can latch in either position. A relay can contain a
double-throw switch, which gives you a choice of two “on” positions. It can also
contain a double-pole switch, which makes (or breaks) two entirely separate
connections. Single-transistor devices cannot provide the double-throw or
double-pole features, although you can design more complex circuits that
emulate this behavior.
A table comparing the attributes of transistors and relays appears in Figure 2107.

Figure 2-107. Principal attributes of relays and transistors, compared.

The decision to use a relay or a transistor will depend on each particular
application.
So much for the theory. Now what can we do with a transistor that’s fun, or
useful, or both? We can do Experiment 11!

Experiment 11: Light and Sound
It is time now for your first project that has a function and a purpose. It will
culminate with an ultra-simple sound synthesizer.

What You Will Need
Breadboard, hookup wire, wire cutters, wire strippers, multimeter
9-volt battery and connector (1)
Resistors: 470 (2), 1K (1), 4.7K (4), 100K (2), 220K (2), 470K (4)
Capacitors: 0.01µF (2), 0.1µF (2), 0.33µF (2), 1µF (1), 3.3µF (2), 33µF (1),
100µF (1), 220µF (1)
Transistors: 2N2222 (6)
Generic LED (1)
Loudspeaker, 8-ohm, 1” or (preferably) 2” (1)

Fluctuations
Figure 2-108 shows the new circuit that I’d like you to create on your
breadboard. There’s not a lot of room among the components, so you may find
that it’s easier to install them using your pliers instead of your fingers. Count the
holes in the board carefully, and double-check to make sure that everything is in
exactly the right place.

Figure 2-108. Breadboard layout for an oscillator circuit.

The component values are shown in Figure 2-109.

Figure 2-109. Component values in the breadboarded circuit.

Apply power, and the LED should flash on for approximately one second, and
off for approximately one second.
Is that all? No, we’ve just begun. First, however, you have to understand how it
works. Check the layout in Figure 2-110 if you have difficulty visualizing how
the components are connected inside the board. Then look at the schematic in
Figure 2-111, and you’ll see that the connections between components are the
same. I’m going to be using the schematic to explain what’s going on.

Figure 2-110. This x-ray view may help to elucidate the interconnections between
components.

Figure 2-111. The components in this schematic are in similar locations in the breadboard
layout.

The first thing you’ll notice is that it is somewhat symmetrical. Does that mean
that the left half and the right half are both doing the same thing? Yes, but not at
the same time. In effect, one half turns the LED on, and the other half turns it
off.
Understanding this in detail is tricky, because the voltages are constantly
fluctuating, and more than one thing is happening at any given moment.
However, I have created four snapshots showing the inner workings at intervals,
and I’m hoping they will make everything clear.
I have omitted the third transistor and the LED from each snapshot, as they have
no role in creating the oscillation in the circuit.
The first snapshot is in Figure 2-112. I have color-coded the wires like this:

Figure 2-112. The first of four snapshots showing voltages in the LED-flasher circuit. See
text for details.

Black conductors and components have an unknown or indeterminate
voltage.
Blue conductors are at a near-zero voltage.
Red conductors are rising toward positive supply voltage.
White conductors are briefly pulled down to a more negative voltage (below
negative ground), for reasons I’ll get to in a moment.
As for the transistors:
A gray transistor is not conducting electricity from collector to emitter. You
can think of it as “switched off.”
A pink transistor is conducting.
The transistors are labeled Q1 and Q2, because this is a common way to identify
semiconductors. The little tab sticking out of an old-fashioned metal-can
transistor made it look like a letter Q when seen from above, and people got into
the habit of identifying transistors this way.
To distinguish between the two sides of the circuit, r1 and R1 are on the left, and

r2 and R2 are on the right. Lowercase letters identify the lower-value resistors.
One last note before I begin the explanation. Bear in mind the fundamental
behavior of a transistor:
When current into its base switches it “on,” its effective internal resistance
drops very low. Consequently, if its emitter is grounded at approximately 0
volts, its collector will also be near 0 volts, and so will anything connected
directly to the collector. The base can also be at a relatively low voltage, so
long as it is not quite as low as the emitter. You can see this happening to Q2
in Snapshot 1.
When it switches “off,” the effective internal resistance of the transistor rises
to at least 5K. Consequently, any component attached to its collector isn’t
grounded through the transistor anymore, and can accumulate a positive
charge.

Step by Step
I’m going to begin at an arbitrary moment while the circuit is already running.
After I proceed through the sequence of events, I’ll get to the issue of how it
begins to oscillate initially.
In Snapshot 1, let’s suppose that Q1 has just switched off and Q2 has just
switched on. The bottom end of r1 was being grounded through Q1, but now that
Q1 is off, the voltage on its collector starts to rise, and this increases the voltage
on the left side of C1. The voltage on the base of Q1 also starts to rise, but not as
rapidly, because R2 has a higher value. Meanwhile, because Q2 is on, it is
sinking current from r2, pulling the voltage down. The base of Q2 is also sinking
current through the transistor to negative ground.
That’s the setup. What next?
In Snapshot 2, shown in Figure 2-113, the voltage on the base of Q1 increased
enough to start it conducting. It is now sinking current from C1 and also through
its base, which is why those wires are now blue. The sudden change in the
voltage on the left side of C1 momentarily induces an equal drop on its righthand
side, as a result of the field effect that can also be described as displacement
current, described in Experiment 9. This actually pulls the voltage on the
righthand side of C1 below zero, represented by the white wire. This

immediately switches off Q2 by inflicting negative bias on its base.

Figure 2-113. The second snapshot.

In Snapshot 3, shown in Figure 2-114, Q1 is still switched on while Q2 is still
off. This is the mirror image condition of Snapshot 1. C1 has started to charge in
the opposite direction, through R1. Gradually this is increasing the voltage on
the base of Q2.

Figure 2-114. The third snapshot.

In Snapshot 4, shown in Figure 2-115, Q2 has started conducting, grounding the
right side of C2. This transition pulls down the voltage of the left side of C2
below zero, and switches off Q1 by grounding its base. This is the mirror image
of Snapshot 2.

Figure 2-115. The fourth snapshot. After this, the sequence repeats.

After the fourth snapshot, the sequence repeats from Snapshot 1. If the extra
transistor and LED are connected as in Figure 2-111, the LED should light up
during snapshots 1 and 4.

Coupling Capacitor
As you can see, oscillators can be difficult to understand. This particular circuit
is extremely common. In fact, if you search Google Images for “oscillator,” this
is probably what you’ll find. Still, many people have difficulty with it.
The key is that in Snapshots 2 and 4, a sudden voltage drop on one side of a
capacitor creates an equal voltage drop on the other side—the coupling effect
that you saw for yourself in Experiment 9.

But How Does It Start?
Bear in mind that the circuit is basically symmetrical. When you first power it
up, why shouldn’t both of the transistors be on, or both of them off?
In a perfect world, where two transistors or two resistors can be absolutely

identical, the circuit would initialize itself symmetrically. But in reality, there’s
always a tiny manufacturing difference among resistors and capacitors, causing
one transistor to start conducting before the other. As soon as that happens, the
circuit is out of balance, and it starts to oscillate as I described above.
Another issue to explain would be, how did I decide where to take an output
from the oscillator circuit? In the original schematic, notice that r1 and r2 have
much lower values than R1 and R2. This will allow the left side of C1 to charge
quickly, almost to the full value of the supply voltage—and the right side of C2
behaves the same way. So, we can get a nice wide voltage range from either of
those locations. I chose the one on the left, simply because it enabled an easier
layout of additional components in the schematic.
If the circuit is tapped for too much current, this will slow down the process of
charging the capacitor, and will affect the timing and balance of the oscillator.
Therefore, I fed the signal through a 100K resistor to the base of another
transistor. That transistor will draw very little current through its base but will
amplify the signal so that you can do something useful with it.

Why So Complicated?
In the first edition of this book, I suggested a flashing-LED project using a
component called a Programmable Unijunction Transistor (PUT). Its behavior is
much easier to understand, and you only need one of them to get a result. But
PUTs are not used much anymore, and some readers complained that you can’t
buy them easily, while others said that using a PUT was just too old-school.
Really you can still buy PUTs, but they are almost obsolete. Bipolar transistors
are still widely used, so I listened to my reader feedback and abandoned the
PUT. I considered various alternative oscillator schematics before settling on this
one, mainly because this circuit is more common than any of the others. Also, I
think all oscillator circuits can be somewhat difficult to understand.

A Processed Pulse
You’ve learned that two transistors can create a signal that pulses on and off, and
a third transistor can amplify it to power an LED. Think back for a moment to
the previous experiments. What have you learned from them that you might be

able to apply to this one?
We have an output that is fluctuating quite slowly. So, we can make it more
interesting by adding an RC network. (See “An RC Network” if you need to
refresh your memory regarding this concept.)
Take a look at Figure 2-116. The new RC section is at the bottom.

Figure 2-116. The previous schematic has been modified with one additional resistor and a
220µF capacitor at the bottom, making an RC network.

In Figure 2-117 the components that have been added or repositioned are in
color at bottom-right, while the components that are unchanged have been
grayed out.

Figure 2-117. Components in color have been added or repositioned. The new capacitor is a
220µF electrolytic.

Now when you run the circuit, the LED pulses gently instead of flashing on and
off. Can you see why? The capacitor charges through the first 470-ohm resistor,
then discharges through the other. Why does this matter? Well, let’s suppose you
were thinking of making some electronic jewelry. Adjusting the way that it
flickers or pulses could be an important aesthetic factor. On old Apple laptops,
the logo used to pulse instead of flashing.

Upping the Speed
What else can you do with this circuit? You can easily adjust the speed. Remove
the two 3.3µF capacitors, and substitute two 0.33µF capacitors. They should
charge about 10 times faster, so the LED should flash 10 times faster, too. Is that
what happens?
What if you reduce the capacitor values even more, to 0.01µF? Beyond 50
flashes per second, you have moved from a frequency that you can see to a
frequency that you can hear.

How can you change the output of this circuit to be audible instead of visible?
Easily! Remove the LED, the 470-ohm resistors, and the 220µF capacitor, and
substitute a little loudspeaker, a 100µF coupling capacitor, and a 1K resistor as
shown in Figure 2-118. The resistor grounds the emitter of the transistor, because
a transistor will only work if its emitter has a defined voltage lower than the
voltage at its base. The capacitor blocks the DC component of the signal, while
allowing the alternating current through. In the schematic, I only included the
parts that have changed. How should they be installed on the breadboard? I think
you can figure that out.

Figure 2-118. Modifying the circuit to generate audio.

Still More Mods
Now that you have sound, how about raising the pitch of the sound? Just
substitute smaller resistors or capacitors in the oscillator circuit. You could
remove the 470K resistors and substitute 220K resistors (or a value in between).
Transistors can switch a signal more than a million times per second, so you
certainly won’t push their limits by making your oscillator run faster. A signal
that oscillates 10,000 times per second sounds extremely high-pitched. If you
push it to 20,000 times per second, it’s above the hearing range of almost all
human ears.
How about changing the character of the sound?
In the upper half of Figure 2-119 I’ve substituted a 1µF coupling capacitor in
series with the loudspeaker, instead of the 100µF capacitor that was there
previously. The lower value for the capacitor will only pass high frequencies
(short pulses), and will deprive the sound of some of its lower resonance.

Figure 2-119. Substituting a smaller value for the coupling capacitor blocks the lower audio
frequencies, so that you only hear the higher frequencies. Placing a capacitor so that it
bypasses the speaker reroutes the higher frequencies to negative ground, so that you only
hear the lower frequencies.

What if you put a capacitor across the loudspeaker, as shown in the lower part of
Figure 2-119? Now the opposite effect occurs, because the capacitor is still
passing higher frequencies, but routes them past the loudspeaker. In this
orientation, you have a bypass capacitor.
These are all simple ways to modify a circuit. If you feel a little more ambitious,
you could duplicate the circuit and use one section to control the other.
Restore the original component values from Figure 2-109, so that it runs at the
slow original speed. Then use its output to power the duplicate section below it
on the breadboard with 0.01µF capacitors to generate an audio frequency. This is
shown in Figure 2-120, where the part that you built originally in this project has
been grayed out, and the audio section is at the bottom.
The red piece of wire labeled A has been repositioned so that the lower section
of the circuit now gets its power from the output of the upper section. The red
and blue wire segments labeled B have been added to bridge the gaps that you
may have in the buses of your breadboard.

Figure 2-120. Driving the audio section of the circuit by using a slower-running duplicate to
provide fluctuating power.

What happens if you change the capacitor or resistor values in the top half of the
circuit, to switch the bottom half faster?
What would happen if you take a 220µF capacitor and apply it between various
points (either in the top half of the circuit, or the bottom half) and negative
ground? You won’t damage any components, so feel free to experiment.
Another option is to go back to the “processed pulse” of light created in
Figure 2-116, and change the way in which the components are physically joined
together. You can remove them from the breadboard and rebuild them into a
small wearable object.
I’m going to show you how to do that in Experiment 14. Of course, this will
entail some soldering, but learning to solder components together is what I want
you to do in Experiment 12, which is next.

Background: Mounting a Loudspeaker

Figure 2-121. A paper or cardboard tube increases the perceived volume from a
loudspeaker.

The diaphragm of a loudspeaker, also known as its cone, is designed to radiate
sound. However, as it oscillates up and down, it emits sound from its back side
as well as its front side. Because the sounds are opposite in phase, they tend to
cancel each other out.
The perceived output from a loudspeaker can increase dramatically if you add a
horn around it in the form of a tube that focuses the output from the front. For a
miniature 1-inch loudspeaker, you can bend and tape a large file card around it.
See Figure 2-121.

Better still, mount it in a box with holes drilled in it to allow sound from the
front of the speaker to radiate, while the closed back side of the box absorbs
sound from the rear of the speaker.

Chapter 3. Getting Somewhat
More Serious
This third chapter of the book applies what you have learned so far to some
finished projects. I’ll show you how to make a wearable version of the “pulsing
glow” project from Experiment 11, and will take you through the initial
development process of an intrusion alarm. Looking further ahead, in Chapter
Four you’ll move into the world of integrated circuit chips.
The tools, equipment, components, and supplies described below will be useful
in Experiments 12 through 15, in addition to items that have been recommended
previously.

Necessary Items for Chapter Three
As before, when buying tools and equipment, see “Buying Tools and
Equipment” for a shopping list. If you want kits containing components and
supplies, see “Kits”. If you prefer to buy your own components from online
sources, see “Components”. For supplies, see “Supplies”.

Essential: Power Supply
You could continue to use 9-volt batteries for all the projects in the book, but I
am now classifying an AC adapter as essential, because it’s so much more
convenient. Also, I think it should turn out to be cheaper than buying batteries,
as you start to build circuits that take more power.
To convert AC current from an outlet in your home, you have three options:
A universal adapter such as the one in Figure 3-1 is the most versatile option,
providing a switchable range of outputs. Typically these will include 3V, 4.5V or
5V, 6V, 9V, and 12V. Universal adapters are intended to power small devices
such as voice recorders, phones, and media players. They may not deliver a
perfectly smooth or accurate DC output, but you should be able to smooth the
power yourself with a couple of capacitors, as I will illustrate when we get to a
project that uses the adapter.

Figure 3-1. This AC adapter plugs into the wall and allows you a choice of DC voltages by
moving a small switch.

Alternatively you can buy a single voltage AC adapter to deliver 9 volts DC, as
shown in Figure 3-2. When you start using digital logic chips that require 5
volts, you can convert the 9 volts with a small, cheap component called a voltage
regulator. (The regulator will also work with power from a 9-volt battery.)

Figure 3-2. An AC adapter that delivers a fixed 9-volt DC output.

Your third option is to spend much more money on a proper benchtop power
supply that provides variable DC outputs of 0V to +15V and 0V to −15V, plus a
fixed 5V output. It should also have several breadboards mounted conveniently
on top of its box. There is no doubt that this will be very useful if you continue
into the field of electronics, but you may not feel sure about that yet.
If you decide to buy a universal adapter, see “Other Components” and scroll
down to the part referring to Chapter Three of the book, for search instructions.
Whichever kind of adapter you buy, it must have these attributes:
The output must be DC, not AC. Almost all AC adapters give you a DC
output, but there are a few exceptions.
Outputs must be rated for at least 500mA (which may be written as 0.5A).
It doesn’t matter what kind of plug is on the end of the DC power-output
wire, because you’ll be cutting it off anyway.
For the same reason, if a universal adapter offers you a range of output plug
adapters, don’t worry about what type they are, as you won’t be using them.
Very cheap AC adapters may become unreliable if you draw current up to

their rated limit. In the United States, look for the UL symbol indicating
certification from Underwriters Laboratories.

Essential: Low-Power Soldering Iron
While a breadboard is indispensable for putting together a circuit quickly to
understand how it works, a soldering iron is necessary for making permanent
electrical connections in a circuit that you want to keep. The soldering iron
works by melting a thin wire composed of an alloy called solder until it forms a
blob around the copper wires or components that you wish to join. When the
solder cools, the joint becomes durable.
You don’t absolutely have to have a soldering iron. You can complete all the
projects in this book just by breadboarding them. However, there is a special
pleasure in building something durable, and soldering is a useful skill. For these
reasons, I have categorized a soldering iron as “essential.”
Personally I like to have a low-power soldering iron for small parts that are
vulnerable to excessive heat, and a separate general-duty soldering iron for
heavier tasks (described immediately below). Some people prefer to use just one
thermostatically controlled soldering iron for everything, but if it’s small, I don’t
think it delivers the heat capacity that is sometimes required, and if it’s mediumsized, it isn’t so easy to use for delicate work. Also, a thermostatically controlled
unit can be expensive.
A low-power soldering iron should be rated at 15W, and the smaller it is, the
easier it is to handle. The tip should taper to a slender but rounded point, like a
newly sharpened pencil. A plated tip is preferable, although the manufacturer
may not state that the tip is plated. A well-used 15W soldering iron is shown in
Figure 3-3. The discoloration is a normal consequence of heat, and does not
degrade function.

Figure 3-3. A low-wattage soldering iron designed for precise electronics work.

Essential: General Duty Soldering Iron
The limited heat capacity of a 15W soldering iron will be insufficient if you need
to connect thicker wires, especially to components such as heavy-duty switches
with terminals designed to handle substantial current. The terminals may sink
heat so rapidly, the low-wattage iron will be unable to create a temperature high
enough to melt solder. You may run into a similar situation when you try to
attach a wire to a solder tab on a full-size potentiometer.
For these situations, you will need a soldering iron rated for 30 to 40 watts.
While it is not required for most of the projects in this book, I do recommend it
when you are creating your first solder joints, because the greater heat capacity
will make the joints easier. A 30W iron is usually cheaper than a 15W iron, and
represents a relatively small additional expense. I think a chisel-shaped tip
enables better heat transfer, and since you will not be using this iron for delicate
work, you don’t really need a pointed tip.

Soldering Iron Terminology
Some soldering irons have a desoldering pump built in, to help you undo a
solder joint. This is a plunger which you pull with your fingers to suck a little air
in through the tip of the iron. I don’t think it works very well. In any case, I have

only seen it on 30W irons, which are too powerful to be used in many electronics
applications.
A soldering iron may have the term “welding” in its product description. You can
ignore the inaccurate use of this term, because soldering irons do not do welding
in the usual sense.
A few soldering irons are packaged with a Helping Hand device that can hold
small parts while you are working on them. This combination is worth
considering, as it should cost less than if you buy the items separately. The
Helping Hand device is described below.
If a soldering iron is sold with some solder included, don’t use it unless it is
described as electrical solder that has a rosin core.
Many soldering irons are described as pencil type. The term is not very
informative, because it can be applied either to a 15W or a 30W iron.
However, a pencil-type soldering iron is different in appearance from a pistolgrip soldering iron, such as the Weller Therma-Boost, shown in Figure 3-4.
Some people prefer the ergonomics of this kind of grip, and the Therma-Boost
has a nice quick-start feature that enables it to reach working temperature in less
than a minute, making it ideal for someone who tends to be impatient. However,
pistol-grip irons are all rated at 30W or higher, and tend to be more expensive
than the ordinary pencil-type.

Figure 3-4. A Weller Therma-Boost 30W soldering iron can be useful when working with

heavier wire and larger components.

Essential: Helping Hand
The so-called Helping Hand (sometimes known as a third hand) has two
alligator clips that can hold components or pieces of wire precisely in position
while you join them with solder. Some versions of the Helping Hand also feature
a magnifying lens, a wire spiral in which you can rest your soldering iron, and a
little sponge that you may use to clean the tip of your iron when it becomes dirty.
These additional features are nice but not essential. See Figure 3-5.

Figure 3-5. The Helping Hand, with additional accessories.

Essential: Magnifying Lens

Figure 3-6. Handheld magnification is essential for inspecting solder joints.

No matter how good your eyes are, a small, handheld, powerful magnifying lens
is essential when you are checking solder joints on perforated board. The threelens set in Figure 3-6 is designed to be held close to your eye, and is more
powerful than the large lens on a Helping Hand, which I do not find very useful.
The folding lens in Figure 3-7 stands on your workbench for hands-free
operation. Both are available from hobby stores or sources such as eBay and
Amazon. Plastic lenses are quite acceptable if you are gentle with them.

Figure 3-7. This kind of folding magnifier can stand on your desktop.

Optional: Clip-on Meter Test Leads
In previous experiments I have suggested that you can grab one of your meter
probes with the alligator clip on a test lead, and use the alligator at the other end
of the lead to grip a wire or a component.
A more elegant alternative is to buy a pair of “minigrabber” probes with little
spring-loaded clips at the end. The Pomona model 6244-48-0 (shown in
Figure 3-8) will do the job. However, this is a relatively expensive choice. You
may prefer to look for meter leads that terminate in small alligator clips, such as
those in Figure 3-9. These are usually the cheapest option. Or, you can just
continue to use test leads in the manner that I suggested previously.

Figure 3-8. These “minigrabbers” on meter leads will grip wires or component leads.

Figure 3-9. Meter leads that terminate in miniature alligator clips.

Optional: Heat Gun
If you join two wires with solder, you often need to insulate them. You can use
electrical tape (sometimes called insulating tape), but it tends to come unstuck. A
better option is heat-shrink tubing, which forms a safe, permanent sheath around
a bare-metal joint. To make the tubing shrink, you use a heat gun, which is like a
very powerful hair dryer. See Figure 3-10. They’re available from any hardware
supply source, and I suggest you buy the cheapest one you can find.

Figure 3-10. When a heat gun is applied to heat-shrink tubing, the tubing can create a snug,
insulated sheath around bare wire.

For precise work, you may prefer to use a miniature heat gun, such as the one
shown in Figure 3-11.

Figure 3-11. A miniature heat gun is slightly easier to handle than the full-sized type.

Optional: Desoldering Equipment
A desoldering pump is supposed to suck up hot, melted solder when you are
trying to remove a solder joint that you made in the wrong place. See Figure 312. Some of my readers insist that this should be essential, not optional, but it’s a
matter of taste. Personally if I make a soldering error, I prefer to snip it out and
do it over.

Figure 3-12. To remove a solder joint, you can suck melted solder into this squeezable
rubber bulb.

Desoldering wick, also known as desoldering braid, is intended to soak up solder
in conjunction with the solder pump. See Figure 3-13.

Figure 3-13. An additional option for removing liquid solder is to soak it up in this copper
braid.

Optional: Soldering Stand
You place your hot soldering iron into a stand when you are not using it, in the
same way that you would put a kitchen knife into a rack. See Figure 3-14. If you
don’t want to spend the money on a stand, you can improvise a substitute, such
as a piece of steel electrical conduit or even an old tin can nailed to a piece of
wood. Or, you can rest the soldering iron on the edge of your work bench, and
promise yourself to be veeery careful not to dislodge it. (Been there, done that.)
When—not if—the soldering iron falls onto the floor, it will melt synthetic
carpet or plastic floor tiles. Knowing this, you may attempt to catch it when you
see it fall. If you grab it by the hot end, you will let go of it, so you might as well
let it fall on the floor without the intermediate step of burning yourself.

Perhaps a soldering stand should be considered essential.

Figure 3-14. A safe and simple stand for a hot soldering iron. The yellow sponge can be
wetted with water to clean the tip of the iron.

Optional: Miniature Hand Saw
Sooner or later, you may want to mount a finished electronics project in a
decent-looking enclosure. For this purpose, you are likely to need tools to cut,
shape, and trim thin plastic. For example, you may want to cut a square hole so
that you can mount a square power switch in it.
Power tools are overkill for this kind of delicate work. A miniature handsaw

(a.k.a. a “hobby saw”) is ideal for trimming things to fit. X-Acto makes a range
of tiny saw blades. See Figure 3-15.

Figure 3-15. Useful for cutting small holes to mount components in plastic boxes.

Optional: Deburring Tool
A deburring tool instantly smooths and bevels any rough-sawn plastic or
aluminum edge, and also can enlarge holes slightly. This may be necessary
because some components are manufactured to metric sizes, which don’t fit in
the holes that you drill with American bits. See Figure 3-16.

Figure 3-16. A deburring tool.

Optional: Calipers
These may seem like a luxury, but are very useful for measuring the external
diameter of a round object (such as the screw thread on a switch or a
potentiometer) or the internal diameter of a hole (into which you may want a
switch or potentiometer to fit). See Figure 3-17. If you choose one that has a
digital output powered by a button battery, it will be switchable between metric
and inches.

Figure 3-17. Calipers can measure internal and external diameters.

Supplies
While many of the tools that I listed are optional, supplies tend to be essential—
unless you are absolutely positive that you never want to build a permanent
version of a device. The tools and materials to build permanent projects will cost
about the same as a month of cable TV. I think they’re a worthwhile investment.

Essential: Solder
This is the stuff that you will melt to join components together on a permanent
(we hope) basis. It’s good to have very thin solder, 0.02” to 0.04” (0.5mm to
1mm) in diameter, for very small components. A range of solder thicknesses is
shown in Figure 3-18. For projects in this book, a minimal amount of solder
(half an ounce, or maybe three feet) will be sufficient.
Avoid buying solder that is intended for plumbers, or for craft purposes such as
creating jewelry. The word “electronics” should appear in the manufacturer’s
description of suitable purposes for the solder.

Figure 3-18. Spools of solder in various thicknesses.

There is some controversy about using solder that has lead in it. An experienced
machinist assures me that this older type of solder makes better, easier joints at a
lower temperature, and entails minimal health risk if used sparingly. He points
out that lead-free solder has its own problems, as it contains more rosin, which
creates more fumes. The issue has roused significant debate online, as you can
see if you try this search:
lead tin solder safety
Personally, I lack the specialized knowledge to make a judgment call. I do know
that if you live in the European Union, you’re not supposed to use solder with
lead in it, for environmental reasons.
What you do definitely need is rosin-core solder intended for electronics use.
Whether it contains lead is your choice.

Optional: Heat-Shrink Tubing

For use in conjunction with your heat gun, described previously. It’s good to
have a range of sizes in any colors of your choice. See Figure 3-19. You slide
heat-shrink tubing over a solder joint and then apply heat from a heat gun. The
tube shrinks around the joint, insulating it. The diameter after shrinking is
typically half of the original diameter, but some tubing has a higher shrink ratio.
Different materials offer varying characteristics relating to insulation, abrasion
resistance, and other factors. An amazing range of heat-shrink tubing will be
found at McMaster-Carr, with details about the various properties. For our
purposes, the cheapest tubing should be satisfactory, so long as it is rated for 240
volts (or higher). One bag or box containing an assortment of five or six
diameters will be sufficient. You are more likely to use the small sizes than the
large sizes.

Figure 3-19. A variety of heat-shrink tubing.

Essential: Copper Alligator Clips
These absorb heat when you are soldering delicate components. Don’t be
deceived by steel clips that are copper-plated; you should really get the solid
copper type. Buy as few as possible, as you can reuse them indefinitely. Just two
will be enough.

Figure 3-20. These small copper clips absorb heat to protect components when you’re
soldering them.

Optional: Perforated Board
When you’re ready to move your circuit from a breadboard to a more permanent
location, you’ll want to solder it to a piece of perforated board, often known as
“prototyping board” and also called “perf board.”
The easiest type to use is plated with copper strips on the back in exactly the
same layout as the conductors hidden inside a breadboard. This enables you to
minimize errors by keeping the same layout of your components when they
migrate to the perforated board. See Figure 3-21. Just buy one board, initially.

Figure 3-21. This perforated board has a pattern of copper traces identical to the pattern of
conductors inside a breadboard.

The disadvantage of using the breadboard component layout is that it is not very
space-efficient. To compress a circuit to minimal size, you can try point-to-point
wiring on a plain perforated board—and I’ll show you how this is done in
Experiment 14. You may only require a small piece of board, but you can buy a
larger piece and cut as much as you need. See Figure 3-22.
Another possibility is to use perforated board with a different pattern of copper
traces. Cut-board, for instance, features parallel traces that you can cut with a
knife where you want to break a connection. Everyone who does much soldering
seems to have a favorite type of board configuration, but I think you’ll need to
get acquainted with the soldering process before you start exploring the options.

Figure 3-22. Plain perforated board (with no copper traces) for point-to-point wiring.

Optional: Plywood
When you use a soldering iron, hot drops of solder tend to fall onto your table or
workbench. The solder solidifies almost instantly, can be difficult to remove, and
will leave a scar. Consider using a two-foot square of half-inch plywood to
provide disposable protection. You can buy it precut at any big-box hardware
store.

Optional: Machine Screws
To mount components behind a panel, you need small machine screws (more
commonly referred to as “bolts”). They look nice if they have flat heads that fit
flush against the panel, provided you coutersink the holes. I suggest stainlesssteel machine screws, #4 size, in lengths of 3/8” and 1/2”, with #4 locknuts of
the type that have nylon inserts, so that they won’t work loose.

Essential: Project Boxes
A project box is just a small box (usually plastic) with a removable lid. As its
name implies, its purpose is to hold one of your electronic projects. You mount

your switches, potentiometers, and LEDs in holes that you drill in the lid, and
you attach your circuit on a perforated board that goes inside the box. You can
also use a project box to contain a small loudspeaker.
For the intrusion alarm project in Experiment 15, you can use a box measuring
approximately 6 inches long, 3 inches wide, and 2 inches high.

Essential: Power Connectors
After you finish a project and put it in a box, you’ll need a convenient way to
supply it with power. You can buy the kind of low-voltage DC plug-and-socket
pair pictured in Figure 3-23. They are properly known as “barrel plugs” and
“barrel sockets” but you may also find them described as “6VDC plug” and
“6VDC socket.” They are available in various sizes, but this is unimportant, so
long as your connectors are the same size as each other.

Figure 3-23. The socket on the right can be mounted on a project box to receive power from
the plug on the left, which you can attach to the wire from an AC adapter.

Optional: Headers
After you have soldered a circuit to perforated board, you will need to connect it
with separate switches or pushbuttons. An unpluggable connection is preferable,
in case you ever need to fix a fault on the board.
Sometimes known as single inline sockets and headers, but also known as

boardmount sockets and pinstrip headers, small connectors come in strips of 36
or more, and you can snap off as many as you need.
Figure 3-24 shows headers before and after being snapped into small sections.
Make sure that the interconnects have a terminal spacing of 0.1 inch, to match
your perforated board. (Some interconnects have metric spacing.)

Figure 3-24. Miniature interconnects are often referred to as “headers.”

Components
Again I must remind you that component kits are available. See “Kits”. If you
prefer to buy your own components from online sources, see “Components”. In
addition to the components that I described at the beginning of Chapter Two (see
“Components”), you’re going to need the following.

Diodes
A diode passes electric current in one direction, while blocking it in the opposite
direction. The end of the diode that should be more negative is known as the
cathode. It is marked with a line, as shown in Figure 3-25. The diode on the
right, in this photograph, is a 1N4001, which is rated for slightly more current
than the 1N4148 on the left. They’re cheap, and likely to be useful in the future,
so buy 10 of each. The manufacturer is irrelevant.

Figure 3-25. Two diodes. The more-negative end is marked.

Experiment 12: Joining Two Wires Together
Now you’re ready to begin using everything that I have just described, and the
first item has to be a soldering iron.
Your adventure into soldering begins with the prosaic task of joining one wire to
another, but will lead quickly to creating a full electronic circuit on perforated
board. So let’s get started!

What You Will Need
Hookup wire, wire cutters, wire strippers
30-watt or 40-watt soldering iron
15-watt soldering iron
Thin solder
Optional: medium solder
“Helping Hand” to hold your work
Optional: shrink-wrap tubing, assorted
Optional: heat gun

Optional: a piece of heavy cardboard or plywood to protect your work area
from drops of solder

Caution: Soldering Irons Do Get Hot!
Please take these basic precautions:
Use a proper stand (such as the one incorporated in a Helping Hand) to hold
your soldering iron. Don’t leave the iron lying on a workbench.
If you have infants or pets, remember that they may play with, grab, or snag the
wire to your soldering iron. They could injure themselves (or you).
Be careful never to rest the hot tip of the iron on the power cord that supplies
electricity to the iron. It can melt the plastic in seconds and cause a dramatic
short circuit.
If you drop a soldering iron, don’t be a hero and try to catch it.
Most soldering irons have no warning lights to tell you that they’re plugged in.
As a general rule, always assume that a soldering iron is hot, even if it’s
unplugged. It may retain sufficient heat to burn you for longer than you expect.

Your First Solder Joint
We’ll start with your general-duty soldering iron—the one rated for 30 or 40
watts. Plug it in, leave it safely in its holder, and find something else to do for
five minutes. If you try to use a soldering iron without giving it time to get fully
hot, you will not make good joints, because the solder may not melt completely.
Strip the insulation from the ends of two pieces of 22-gauge solid hookup wire
and clamp them in your Helping Hand so that they cross each other and touch
each other, as shown in Figure 3-26.

Figure 3-26. Ready for your first soldering adventure.

To make sure that the iron is ready, touch a thin piece of solder on the tip of it.
The solder should melt instantly. If it melts slowly, the iron isn’t hot enough yet.
If the tip of your soldering iron is dirty, you should clean it. The usual procedure
is to wet the sponge that is built into your soldering iron stand, and rub the tip of
the iron in the sponge. Personally I prefer not to do this, as I believe that getting
moisture on the tip causes thermal expansion and contraction, which may open
small cracks in the plating of the tip. I rub a piece of crumpled paper over the hot
tip of the soldering iron, quickly enough to avoid charring the paper. Then I
apply a tiny amount of solder and rub the tip again, until it is uniformly shiny.
When the tip of your soldering iron is clean. follow the steps shown in Figure 327, Figure 3-28, Figure 3-29, Figure 3-30, and Figure 3-31.
Step 1. Touch the hot tip of the iron against the intersection of the wires steadily
for three seconds to heat them.

Figure 3-27. Step 1.

Step 2. While maintaining the iron in this position, feed a little solder to the
intersection of the wires, also touching the tip of the soldering iron. Thus, the
two wires, the solder, and the tip of the iron should all come together at one
point.

Figure 3-28. Step 2.

Step 3. At first, the solder may melt slowly. Be patient.

Figure 3-29. Step 3.

Step 4. Now you see the solder forming a nice round blob.

Figure 3-30. Step 4.

Step 5. Remove the iron and the solder. Blow on the joint to cool it. Within 10
seconds, it should be cool enough to touch. The completed joint should be shiny,
uniform, and rounded in shape

Figure 3-31. Step 5.

When the joint has cooled, unclamp the wires and try to tug them apart. Tug
hard! If they defeat your best attempts to separate them, the wires are electrically
joined and should stay joined. If you didn’t make a good joint, you will be able
to separate the wires relatively easily, probably because you didn’t apply enough
heat or enough solder. Figure 3-32 gives you the general idea.

Figure 3-32. Telling the difference between a bad solder joint (left) and a good one (right) is

really not very difficult.

The reason I asked you to begin by using the higher-powered soldering iron is
that it delivers more heat, which makes it easier to use.
The soldering steps can be summarized like this: apply heat to the wires, bring in
the solder while maintaining the heat, wait for the solder to start to melt, wait a
moment longer for it to form a completely molten bead, and then remove the
heat. The whole process should take between four and six seconds.

Background: Soldering Myths
Myth #1: Soldering is very difficult. Millions of people have learned how to do
it, and they can’t all be more competent than you. I have a lifelong problem with
a tremor in my hands that makes it difficult for me to hold small things steadily. I
also get impatient with repetitive detail work. If I can solder components, almost
anyone should be able to do it.
Myth #2: Soldering endangers your health with poisonous chemicals. You
should avoid inhaling the fumes, but that also applies to everyday products such
as bleach and paint. You should wash your hands after handling solder, and to do
a really thorough job, use a nail brush. But if soldering was a significant health
hazard, we should have seen a high death rate among electronics hobbyists
decades ago.
Myth #3: Soldering irons are dangerous. A soldering iron is less hazardous
than the kind of iron that you might use to iron a shirt, because it delivers less
heat. In fact, in my experience, soldering is safer than most activities in a typical
home or basement workshop. Of course, that doesn’t mean you can be careless.
The iron is hot enough to burn your skin if you touch it.

Fundamentals: Eight Soldering Errors
Not enough heat. The joint looks OK, but because you didn’t apply quite
enough heat, the solder didn’t melt sufficiently to realign its internal molecular
structure. It remained granular instead of becoming a solid, uniform blob, and
you end up with a dry joint, also known as a cold joint, which will come apart
when you pull the wires away from each other. Reheat the joint thoroughly and

apply new solder.
Carrying solder to the joint. A leading cause of underheated solder is the
temptation to melt some solder onto the iron alone, and then carry the solder to
the location where you want to apply it. This means that the wires will be cold
when you try to make the solder stick to them. What you should do is touch the
soldering iron to heat the wires first, and then apply the solder. This way, the
wires are hot and help to melt the solder.
Because this is such a universal problem, I’ll repeat myself. You don’t want
to put hot solder on cold wires. You want to put cold solder on hot wires.
Too much heat. This may not hurt the joint, but can damage everything around
it. Vinyl insulation will melt, exposing too much wire and raising the risk of
short circuits. You can easily damage semiconductors, and may even melt the
internal plastic parts of switches and connectors. Damaged components must be
desoldered and replaced, which will take time and is a big hassle. If your attempt
at soldering isn’t working for some reason, pull back, pause, and allow
everything to cool down a little before you try again.
Not enough solder. A thin connection between two conductors may not be
strong enough. When joining two wires, always check the underside of the joint
to see whether the solder penetrated completely.
Moving the joint before the solder solidifies. This may create a fracture that
you won’t necessarily see. It may not stop your circuit from working, but at
some point in the future, as a result of vibration or thermal stresses, the fracture
can separate just enough to break electrical contact. Tracking it down will then
be a chore. If you clamp components before you join them, or use perforated
board to hold the components steady, you can avoid this problem.
Dirt or grease. Electrical solder contains rosin that cleans the metal that you’re
working with, but contaminants can still prevent solder from sticking. If any
component looks dirty, clean it with fine sandpaper before joining it.
Carbon on the tip of your soldering iron. The iron gradually accumulates
flecks of black carbon during use, and they can act as a barrier to heat transfer.
Clean the tip, as described previously.
Inappropriate materials. Electrical solder is designed for electronic
components. It will not work with aluminum, stainless steel, or various other

metals. You may be able to make it stick to chrome-plated items, but only with
difficulty.
Failure to test the joint. Don’t just assume that it’s OK. Always test it by
applying manual force. If you can’t get a grip on the joint, slip a screwdriver
blade under it and flex it just a little, or use small pliers to try to pull it apart.
Don’t be concerned about ruining your work. If your joint doesn’t survive rough
treatment, it wasn’t a good joint.
Of the eight errors, dry/cold joints are by far the worst, because they are easy to
make and can look OK.

Background: Soldering Alternatives
As recently as the 1950s, connections inside electronic appliances such as radio
sets were still being hand-soldered by workers on production lines. But the
growth of telephone exchanges created a need for a faster way to make large
numbers of rapid, reliable point-to-point wiring connections, and wire wrap
became a viable alternative.
In a wirewrapped electronics project, components are mounted on a circuit board
that has long, gold-plated, sharp-cornered square pins sticking out of the rear.
Special silver-plated wire is used, with an inch of insulation stripped from its
ends. A manual or power-driven wirewrap tool twirls the end of a wire around
one of the pins, applying sufficient tension to “cold-weld” the soft silver plating
of the wire to the pin. The wrapping process exerts sufficient pressure to make a
very reliable joint, especially as seven to nine turns of wire are applied, each turn
touching all four corners of the pin.
During the 1970s and 1980s, this system was adopted by hobbyists who built
their own home computers. A wirewrapped circuit board from a hand-built
computer is shown in Figure 3-33. The technique was used by NASA to wire the
computer in the Apollo spacecraft that went to the Moon, but today,
wirewrapping has few commercial applications.

Figure 3-33. This picture shows some of the wirewrapping in Steve Chamberlin’s custombuilt, retro 8-bit CPU and computer. Connecting such a network of wires with hand
soldering would have been unduly time-consuming and prone to faults. Photo credit: Steve
Chamberlin.

The widespread industrial use of “through-hole” components, such as the chips
on early desktop computers, encouraged development of wave soldering, in
which a wave or waterfall of molten solder is applied mechanically to the
underside of a preheated circuit board where chips have been inserted. A
masking technique prevents the solder from sticking where it isn’t wanted.
Today, surface-mount components (which are significantly smaller than their
through-hole counterparts) are glued to a circuit board with a solder paste, and
the entire assembly is then heated, melting the paste to create a permanent
connection.

Your Second Solder Joint
Time now to try your 15W soldering iron. Once again, you must leave it plugged
in for a good five minutes to make sure it’s hot enough. In the meantime, don’t
forget to unplug your other soldering iron, and put it somewhere safe while it
cools.
Use thin solder to make this joint. It will take less heat from the less-powerful
soldering iron.

This time I’d like you to align the wires parallel with each other. Joining them
this way is a little more difficult than joining them when they cross each other,
but it’s a necessary skill. Otherwise, you won’t be able to slide heat-shrink
tubing over the finished joint to insulate it.
Five steps to create this joint are shown in Figure 3-34, Figure 3-35, Figure 3-36,
Figure 3-37, and Figure 3-38. At the beginning, the two wires do not have to
make perfect contact with each other; the solder will fill any small gaps. But as
before, the wires must be hot enough for the solder to flow, and this can take an
extra few seconds when you use the low-wattage iron.
Be sure to feed the solder in as shown in the pictures. Remember: don’t try to
carry the solder to the joint on the tip of the iron. Heat the wires first, and then
touch the solder to the wires and the tip of the iron, while keeping it in contact
with the wires. Wait until the solder liquifies, and you will see it running eagerly
into the joint. If this doesn’t happen, be more patient and apply the heat for a
little longer.

Figure 3-34. Step 1: Align the wires.

Figure 3-35. Step 2: Heat the wires.

Figure 3-36. Step 3: While continuing to heat the wires, apply the solder. Wait for it to start
melting. Be patient.

Figure 3-37. The solder is now melting into the joint.

Figure 3-38. The finished joint is shiny, and the solder has spread across the copper wires.

The finished joint has enough solder for strength, but not so much solder that it
will prevent heat-shrink tubing from sliding over it. I’ll get to that in a moment.

Theory: Heat Transfer
The better you understand the process of soldering, the easier it should be for
you to make good solder joints.
The tip of the soldering iron is hot, and you want to transfer that heat into the
joint that you are trying to make. For this reason, you should adjust the angle of
the soldering iron so that it makes the widest possible contact. See Figure 3-39
and Figure 3-40.

Figure 3-39. A small contact area between the iron and the working surface allows
insufficient heat transfer.

Figure 3-40. A larger area of contact increases the heat transfer.

Once the solder starts to melt, it broadens the area of contact, which helps to
transfer more heat, so the process accelerates naturally. Initiating it is the tricky
part.
The other aspect of heat flow that you should consider is that it can suck heat
away from the places where you want it, and deliver it to places where you don’t
want it. If you’re trying to solder a very heavy piece of copper wire, the joint
may never get hot enough to melt the solder, because the heavy wire conducts
heat away from the joint. You may find that even a 40-watt iron isn’t powerful
enough to overcome this problem. At the same time, while the copper doesn’t
get hot enough to melt the solder, it can be quite hot enough to melt insulation
off the wire.
As a general rule, if you can’t complete a solder joint in 10 seconds, you aren’t
applying enough heat.

Insulating the Solder Joint
After you’ve succeeded in making a good inline solder connection between two
wires, it’s time for the easy part. Choose some heat-shrink tubing that is just big
enough to slide over the joint with a little bit of room to spare.

Of course, you do need to plan ahead. Usually you need to slip some tubing over
one of the wires before you join them together. You’ll see how this works when I
get to the step-by-step procedure, below.
Assuming you have heat-shrink tubing on one of the wires, slide it along until
the joint is centered under it. Hold it in front of your heat gun, and switch on the
gun (keeping your fingers away from the blast of superheated air). Turn the wire
so that you heat both sides. The tubing should shrink tight around the joint
within half a minute. If you overheat the tubing, it may shrink so much that it
splits, at which point you must remove it and start over. As soon as the tubing is
tight, your job is done, and there’s no point in making it any hotter. Note that
while tubing mostly shrinks at right angles to its length, a little shrinkage also
occurs along its length.
Figure 3-41, Figure 3-42, and Figure 3-43 show the desired result. I used white
tubing because it shows up well in photographs. Different colors of heat-shrink
tubing all perform the same way.

Figure 3-41. Slip the tubing over your wire joint.

Figure 3-42. Apply heat to the tubing.

Figure 3-43. Leave the heat on the tubing until it shrinks to firmly cover the joint.

Caution: Heat Guns Do Get Hot!
Notice the chromed steel tube at the business end of a full-sized heat gun. Steel
costs more than plastic, so the manufacturer must have put it there for a good
reason—and the reason is that the air flowing through it becomes so hot that it
would melt a plastic tube.

The metal tube stays hot enough to burn you for several minutes after you’ve
used it. And, as in the case of soldering irons, other people (and pets) are
vulnerable, because they won’t necessarily know that the heat gun is a hazard.
Most of all, make sure that no one in your home ever makes the mistake of using
a heat gun as a hair dryer (see Figure 3-44).

Figure 3-44. Members of your family should understand that a heat gun isn’t quite the same
as a hair dryer.

This tool is just a little more hazardous than it appears. A mini heat gun may
entail slightly less risk, but still should be treated with respect.

Wiring Your Power Source
The next application for your soldering skills will be more practical. You can add
color-coded, solid-core wires to your AC adapter—or if you don’t have an

adapter, you can add extensions to the thin wires from a 9V battery connector.
Either way, your extended 22-gauge wires will plug conveniently into a
breadboard.
You can use your larger soldering iron for this, as no heat-sensitive components
are involved.
If you have acquired an AC adapter, I’m assuming it is a little plastic module
that plugs straight into the wall. A pair of wires emerges from it, carrying the low
DC voltage that you need, and they terminate in some kind of miniature plug.
The plug is suitable for a device such as a media player or a phone that has a
matching socket, but for the purposes of this book, the plug is not useful,
because you will want to apply the power to a breadboard.
How can this be done? I will show you.

Step One: Cut and Measure
First, let’s make sure your AC adapter is doing what it’s supposed to do.
Do not plug the adapter into the wall just yet. Begin by cutting the little plug off
the end of the low-voltage wire, as shown in Figure 3-45. (You may notice that
this photograph is of a RadioShack adapter. Ah, memories.)

Figure 3-45. The first step in customizing an AC adapter.

Separate the two conductors, using wire cutters or a utility knife, and strip about
1/4” of insulation off each one. See Figure 3-46. The wires should be of unequal
lengths, to reduce the risk of them touching.

Figure 3-46. The stripped wires.

If the bare ends do touch each other while the adapter is plugged in, they may
overload it or blow a fuse inside it. You may also get a spark that will be
disconcerting, although I doubt it will hurt you. Not a big deal, but inconvenient.
Now set your meter to measure volts DC and attach it to the two wires from the
AC adapter, preferably using alligator test leads to keep everything under
control. After double-checking to make sure that your red meter lead is in the
volts socket on the meter, not the mA socket, plug the AC adapter into the wall
and measure how much voltage it is providing.
If you get a confusingly high reading, it could be because the voltage delivered
by AC adapters is often greater when the adapter is not powering anything. The
internal resistance of your meter is so high, the adapter will behave as if it isn’t
being loaded at all.
For a more meaningful test, select a resistor with a value of 680 ohms and clip it
across the output from the adapter, in parallel with your meter. This will pull the
voltage from the adapter down to a more appropriate level. Now you should get
a value that makes sense.
It’s not a good idea to use a resistor of much less than 680 ohms because the

resistors on your shopping list are only rated at 1/4 watt, and if you try to push
more power through them than that, they will overheat. If the 680-ohm resistor is
attached to a 9-volt supply, Ohm’s Law tells us that the current flowing through
it will be about 13mA, and therefore the power dissipation will be about 120mW,
or 0.12W, which is well within the rated maximum of a 0.25W resistor.
If you want to see how the voltage output from your AC adapter varies with a
load of lower resistance, you can clip several 680-ohm resistors together in
parallel. This could be an interesting test—but let’s get back to the primary
purpose here, which is to obtain power for your breadboard.

Step Two: Soldering
Use your meter to make absolutely sure there is no minus sign in front of the
voltage that it measures on the wires from your AC adapter. If there is a minus
sign, reverse the leads from your meter.
If the reading on your meter is positive, not negative, you know that the red wire
from your meter is clipped to the positive side of your AC adapter. This is
important, as you don’t want your adapter to destroy components in your circuits
by applying power to them the wrong way around.
The next steps will be the same regardless of whether you are adding solid 22gauge wires to an AC adapter or a 9V battery connector.
Cut two pieces of solid-conductor 22-gauge wire—one of them red, the other
black or blue. Each should be about 2 inches long. Strip 1/4” of insulation from
both ends of each piece of wire.
Solder the 22-gauge wires to the wires from the AC adapter or the battery
connector, using the technique that you practiced previously. Naturally, you
attach the red wire to the positive side of your power supply.
If you have heat-shrink tubing and a heat gun, use it as you did in the practice
session. The result should look like Figure 3-47. Once again the wires should be
of unequal lengths, to reduce the risk of them touching each other. When the job
is done, you can plug the ends of the 22-gauge wires into your breadboard.

Figure 3-47. The 22-gauge wires can be plugged into a breadboard, to supply it with power.

Pruning a Power Cord
What else can you do with your newly acquired soldering skills? Here’s a
suggestion. Those of us who don’t use Apple products may find ourselves with a
laptop power supply that has a detachable AC power cord for plugging into the
wall, in addition to the low-voltage DC wire that plugs into the computer. A
typical power cord is shown in Figure 3-48.

Figure 3-48. A detachable AC power cord for a non-Apple laptop computer.

What if you are an Apple fan? Maybe you have detachable power cords for other
devices, such as a printer or a scanner. The purpose of this exercise is to reduce
the length of a power cord so that it is exactly what you want, instead of lying
around in a tangle. And if, like me, you have a laptop power cord that is longer
than it needs to be, and you like to travel as light as possible, this exercise could
be useful.

Twelve Steps to a Shorter Cord
In Figure 3-49 we see the first step, in which you boldly apply your wire cutters
to chop a power cord. Needless to say, all of these steps require that the power
cord should not be plugged in while you are working on it.

Figure 3-49. Step 1 of 12, to shorten a power cord.

Figure 3-50 shows the ends that you want to keep. You can store the rejected
middle section of the power cord for some other purpose in the future.

Figure 3-50. Step 2 of 12, to shorten a power cord.

In Figure 3-51, a utility knife on a cutting mat is an easy way to separate the two
conductors in each segment of the power cord.

Figure 3-51. Step 3 of 12, to shorten a power cord.

In Figure 3-52, the segments of the power cord have been trimmed so that the
conductors are of matching but unequal lengths. This way they will take up less
room when you rejoin them, and there will be less risk of a short circuit if one of
the joints fails for some reason.
Note that one conductor will be always marked, either with print or with molded
ridges. Be sure that the marked conductors match each other when you join
them.

Figure 3-52. Step 4 of 12, to shorten a power cord.

Strip off a minimal amount of insulation. Just 1/8” (3mm) will be enough. Then
cut some pieces of heat-shrink tubing, if you have it. Each smaller piece must be
just large enough to slide over each individual conductor in the power cord,
while the bigger piece, about 2” long, will cover the whole joint. See Figure 353.
Note that some heat-shrink tubing is rated only for low voltages. It should not be
used for this project.

Figure 3-53. Step 5 of 12, to shorten a power cord.

Now for the most difficult part: activating your human memory. You have to
remember to slide the tubing onto the wire before you make your solder joint,
because the plugs on the ends of the wires will prevent you from adding any
heat-shrink tubing later. If you’re as impatient as I am, it’s very difficult to
remember to do this every time. See Figure 3-54.

Figure 3-54. Step 6 of 12, to shorten a power cord.

Use your Helping Hand to align the first joint. Push the two pieces of wire
together so that the strands intermingle, and then squeeze them tight between
finger and thumb, so that there are no little bits sticking out. A stray strand of
wire can puncture heat-shrink tubing when the tubing is hot and soft and is
shrinking around the joint. See Figure 3-55.

Figure 3-55. Step 7 of 12, to shorten a power cord.

The wire that you’re joining is much heavier than the 22-gauge wire that you
worked with previously, so it will suck up more heat, and you must touch the
soldering iron to it for a longer time. Make sure that the solder flows all the way
into the joint, and check the underside after the joint is cool. Most likely you’ll
find some bare copper strands there. The joint should become a nice solid,
rounded, shiny blob. See Figure 3-56.
Be careful to keep the heat-shrink tubing as far away from the joint as possible
while you’re using the soldering iron, so that heat from the iron doesn’t shrink
the tubing prematurely, preventing you from sliding it over the joint later.

Figure 3-56. Step 8 of 12, to shorten a power cord.

Slide a section of heat-shrink tubing over the solder joint, and apply the heat
gun, as shown in Figure 3-57. Don’t allow the other pieces of heat-shrink tubing
to pick up stray heat.

Figure 3-57. Step 9 of 12, to shorten a power cord.

In Figure 3-58, the heat-shrink tubing has now shrunk.

Figure 3-58. Step 10 of 12, to shorten a power cord.

Get ready to solder the other pair of conductors. See Figure 3-59.

Figure 3-60 shows that the second joint has been made. After you protect it with
its own piece of heat-shrink tubing, you’ll be ready to slide the larger section of
tubing over the whole assembly. Er—you did remember to put the large tubing
onto the wire at the beginning, didn’t you?

Figure 3-59. Step 11 of 12, to shorten a power cord.

Figure 3-60. Step 12 of 12, to shorten a power cord.

Figure 3-60 shows the finished shortened power cord.

Figure 3-61. The power cord, shortened.

What’s Next?
If you have completed the soldering exercises so far, you have sufficient basic
skills to build your first soldered electronic circuit. Although—maybe first we
should just run through a quick demonstration of the consequences of
unintentionally excessive heat. I’d hate for you to take a lot of trouble soldering
things together, only to discover that you melted a transistor or an LED.
Unsoldering damaged parts is much less fun than soldering them.

Experiment 13: Roasting an LED
In Experiment 4, you discovered how easy it is to burn out an LED. What really
happened, in that little adventure, is that excessive current passing through the
LED created excessive heat, and the heat killed the component.

If heat caused by electricity can destroy an LED, do you think heat from a
soldering iron can do the same thing? It sounds plausible, but there’s only one
way to make absolutely sure.

What You Will Need
9V battery and connector, or 9V AC-DC adapter
Long-nosed or sharp-nosed pliers
30-watt or 40-watt soldering iron
15-watt soldering iron
LEDs, generic (2)
470-ohm resistor (1)
Helping Hand to hold your work
One large or two small pure-copper alligator clips
The purpose of the experiment is to study the effects of heat. This means we
need to know where the heat is going.
For this reason, you’re not going to use a breadboard. The contacts inside the
board would absorb an unknown amount of heat. I don’t want you to use test
leads, either, because they too will absorb heat.
Instead, please use some sharp-nosed pliers to bend each of the leads from an
LED into little hooks, and do the same thing with the wires on a 470-ohm
resistor. See Figure 3-62, where you will see that the wires from a 9-volt battery
have been bent the same way. To make them maintain the hook shape, you may
need to strip off a little extra insulation and apply a little solder.

Figure 3-62. Measuring the heat tolerance of an LED. An AC adapter can substitute for the
9-volt battery.

To minimize heat loss through conduction, the resistor dangles from one of the
leads on the LED, and the power-supply wire hangs from that, a little farther
down. Gravity should be sufficient to make this work.
Grip the plastic body of the LED in your Helping Hand. Plastic is not a good
thermal conductor, so the lens of the LED should not allow much heat to be
conducted away through the Helping Hand.

Apply the 9 volts, and your LED should be shining brightly. I used a white LED
in this experiment, because it’s easier to photograph.
You’ll need your low-powered 15W soldering iron, and the higher-powered one,
too. Plug them in and wait at least five minutes, to make sure they are really hot.
Now hold the tip of the 15W iron firmly against one of the leads on your
glowing LED, while you check the time with a watch. Figure 3-63 shows the
setup.

Figure 3-63. Applying heat with a 15-watt soldering iron.

I’m betting that you can sustain this contact for a full three minutes without
burning out the LED. Now you know why a 15-watt soldering iron is
recommended for delicate electronics work.
Allow your LED wire to cool, and then apply your more powerful soldering iron
in the same location as before. I think you’ll find that the LED will go dark after
as little as 10 seconds (note that some LEDs can survive higher temperatures
than others). This is why you don’t use a 30-watt soldering iron for delicate

electronics work.
The large iron doesn’t necessarily reach a higher temperature than the small one.
It just has a larger heat capacity. In other words, a greater quantity of heat can
flow out of it, at a faster rate.
Your LED has been sacrificed to satisfy the need for knowledge. It was an
honorable death. Lay it to rest in your trash, and substitute a new LED, which we
will try to treat more kindly. Connect it as before, but this time add a full-size
copper alligator clip (or two small clips) to one of the leads near the body of the
LED, as shown in Figure 3-64. Press the tip of your 30-watt or 40-watt soldering
iron against the lead just below the alligator clip. This time, you should be able
to hold the powerful soldering iron in place for a full two minutes without
burning out the LED.

Figure 3-64. Using a copper alligator clip as a heat sink to protect an LED.

Where the Heat Goes

At the end of your experiment, if you touch the clip, you’ll find that it’s
relatively hot, while the LED remains not so hot. Imagine the heat flowing out
through the tip of your soldering iron, into the wire that leads to the LED—
except that the heat meets the alligator clip along the way, as shown in Figure 365. The clip is like an empty container waiting to be filled. The heat prefers to
flow into the copper clip, leaving the LED unharmed.
The alligator clip functioned as a heat sink. It works better than an everyday
nickel-plated steel alligator clip, because copper is such a good conductor of
heat.
Going back to the first part of this experiment, you saw that a 15-watt soldering
iron failed to harm the LED, with no heat sink needed. Does this mean that a 15watt iron is completely safe?

Figure 3-65. A copper alligator clip conducts heat away from an LED.

Well, maybe. The problem is, you don’t really know whether some
semiconductors may be more heat-sensitive than LEDs.
Because the consequences of burning out a component can be so annoying, I
suggest you should consider playing it safe and use a heat sink in these
circumstances:
If you apply a 15-watt iron extremely close to a semiconductor for 20 seconds
or more.
If you apply a 30-watt iron within half an inch of resistors or capacitors for 10
seconds or more. (Never use it near semiconductors.)
If you apply a 30-watt iron near anything meltable for 20 seconds or more.
Meltable items include insulation on wires, plastic connectors, and plastic
components inside switches.

Rules for Heat Sinking
Full-size copper alligator clips work best, but may not fit into tight corners.
Ideally you should have small ones available too.
Clamp the alligator clip as close as possible to the component and as far as
possible from the solder joint that you are trying to make. The joint does need
to get hot. Divert heat from the component, not from the joint.
Make sure there is a metal-to-metal connection between the alligator clip and
the wire to promote good heat transfer.
If you keep these points in mind, we can proceed with the fascinating challenge
of point-to-point wiring.

Experiment 14: A Wearable Pulsing Glow
Until now, I’ve encouraged you to start putting things together without much of
a theory or a plan. That’s what Learning by Discovery tends to be like.
Sometimes, though, a plan can be essential, and this is one of those times. I’m
going to outline the requirements of this project, and then I will take you step by
step through the process of building it.

What You Will Need
9V battery and connector, or 9V AC-DC adapter
Hookup wire, wire cutters, wire strippers, multimeter
15-watt soldering iron
Thin solder (0.022 inches)
Plain perforated board (no copper plating necessary)
Helping Hand
Resistors: 470 (2), 100K (1), 4.7K (2), 470K (2)
Capacitors: 3.3µF (2), 220µF (1)
Transistors: 2N2222 (3)
Generic LED (1)

Fluctuations Revisited
Please turn back to Figure 2-116 to refresh your memory of that circuit. The task,
now, is to make it as small as possible, so that someone could wear it.
Imagine that the leads of the components are interconnected with rubber bands,
allowing you to shuffle them around on a tabletop without them losing their
connections with each other. When the rubber bands are stretched as little as
possible, the circuit is as small as possible, and you can link the parts with bare
wires, supporting everything with a piece of perforated board.
The only problem is that bare wires under the board cannot cross each other. The
idea is that after you have verified the function of your circuit, you could send
the specification to a service that etches circuit boards.
Of course, modern printed circuits are double-sided, at the very least, and many
have intermediate layers, allowing multiple conductors to cross each other
without making electrical contact. But it’s always good to start on a simple,
traditional basis, and the simplest board has components on one side and
connections on the other. Components on top of the board can bridge the
conductors beneath, because the insulating material of the board separates them.
But conductors cannot cross each other.

My best attempt to reduce the size of this circuit is shown in Figure 3-66, on a
piece of plain perforated board measuring 0.9” x 1.3”. If you can come up with a
design that is significantly smaller, I’d love to see it. Here are some ideas:
Use smaller resistors rated for 1/8 watt instead of 1/4 watt.
Mount resistors vertically.
Thread two leads through one hole, if the holes in your board are big enough.

Figure 3-66. The oscillator circuit, reduced to occupy minimal space on perforated board.

Where are the connections between the components? They’re under the board. In
Figure 3-67 I grayed out the components and disappeared the board, so that you
can see the wiring.

Figure 3-67. Connections in black are wires beneath the circuit board, which is transparent
in this view.

If you compare this diagram very carefully with the schematic in Figure 2-116,
you should find that the connections between components are the same—unless
I made an error. (I sure hope not. I don’t want to have to redraw everything.)

Figure 3-68 shows yet another view, this time omitting the components while
including the board, so that you can see how the connections fit the 0.1” x 0.1”
grid of holes in the board.

Figure 3-68. In this view, only the board and the connections are shown. Every circular dot
indicates a connection that comes through a hole in the board.

Finally, Figure 3-69 shows the board flipped over, left to right, so that you are
viewing it from behind. This will help you to make the connections when you’re
putting the components together. You are going to give this a try, aren’t you?

Figure 3-69. The previously shown connections are flipped left to right, so that this is the
way the board should look from the underside.

Bend Wires, Add Solder
Now that you’ve seen the plan for this project, how are you supposed to make all
those connections?
It’s not so difficult. Resistors, capacitors, and transistors have wire leads that are
usually at least 1/2” long. So, you can push them through the holes in the
perforated board, and then bend the leads over to touch each other. While they

are touching, you solder them together. Snip off any surplus, add a battery
connection, and you’re done.
There are three main issues to watch out for.
Holding the board steady while you work on it requires some care and
patience. Your Helping Hand will be necessary.
The components and the solder joints that you make will be very close
together. Use your copper alligator clips to provide heat protection.
Flipping between the top side of the board and the bottom side is confusing.
You can easily put a wire in the wrong place. I think this is actually the
hardest part.
Perhaps you have seen perforated board on which a little circle of copper has
been added around each hole. Would that be suitable for this project? The copper
circles have the advantage of anchoring components securely, but they can also
create a short circuit between wires that are close together. I think bare board is
easier for a small project like this. A sample was shown in Figure 3-22. Some
perforated board has holes that are larger, but this does not make a significant
difference.

Step by Step
Here’s the specific procedure for building the circuit:
Cut a piece of perfboard measuring 0.9” by 1.3” out of a plain sheet. (You don’t
need a ruler calibrated in tenths of an inch. Just count the rows of holes in the
board.) You can use a miniature hobby saw, or you may be able to snap the board
along its lines of holes, if you’re careful. A hacksaw will also work. I suggest
you should not use a good wood saw, because perforated board often has glass
fibers in it, and they can blunt a saw.
Gather all the components and carefully insert three or four of them through
holes in the board, counting the holes to make sure everything is in the right
place. Flip the board over and bend the wires from the components to anchor
them to the board and create the connections shown in Figure 3-69. If any of the
wires isn’t long enough, you’ll have to supplement it with an extra piece of 22-

gauge wire from your supply. Remove the insulation, which just gets in the way.
Trim the wires approximately with your wire cutters.
Make the joints with your soldering iron.
Now, the important part: check each joint using a close-up magnifying glass, and
wiggle the wires with pointed-nosed pliers. If there isn’t enough solder for a
really secure joint, reheat it and add more. If solder has created a connection that
shouldn’t be there, use a utility knife to make two parallel cuts in the solder, and
scrape away the little section between them.
Generally, I deal with just three or four components at a time, because I get
confused if there are more than that. If I solder one component in the wrong
location, undoing the error is not too difficult—unless I have already added more
components to it by the time I discover the error.

Caution: Flying Wire Segments
The jaws of your wire cutters exert a powerful force that peaks and then is
suddenly released when they cut through wire. This force can be translated into
sudden motion of the snipped wire segment. Some wires are relatively soft, and
don’t pose a risk, but transistors and LEDs tend to have harder wires. Little
segments can fly in unpredictable directions at high speed, creating a real hazard
for your eyes when you are doing close-up work.
Everyday eyeglasses can protect you when trimming wires. If you don’t use
eyeglasses, plastic safety glasses are really a good idea.

Finishing the Job
I always use bright illumination. This is not a luxury; it is a necessity. Buy a desk
lamp, if you don’t already have one. It doesn’t have to be expensive; a thriftstore item is okay.
I use a daylight-spectrum LED desk lamp, because it helps me to identify the
colored bands on resistors more reliably. I stopped using a fluorescent desk lamp
when I discovered that any small imperfection in the coating inside the tube can
allow ultraviolet light to escape. This constitutes a hazard when you are working
so close to the light.

No matter how good your vision is, you need to examine each joint with a
magnifier. You’ll be surprised how imperfect some of them are. Hold the
magnifier as close as possible to your eye, then pick up the board and bring it
closer until the joint that you are inspecting comes into focus.
Finally, you should end up with a working circuit that pulses like a heartbeat. Or
does it? If you have difficulty making it work, retrace every connection and
compare it with the schematic. If you don’t find an error, apply power to the
circuit, attach the black lead from your meter to the negative side, and then go
around the circuit with the red lead, checking the presence of voltage. Every part
of this circuit should show at least some voltage while it’s working. If you find a
dead connection, you may have made a bad solder joint, or missed one entirely.
When you’re done, now what? Well, now you can stop being an electronics
hobbyist and become a crafts hobbyist. You can try to figure out a way to make
this thing wearable.
First you have to consider the power supply. Because of the components that I
used, you really need 9 volts to make this work well. How are you going to make
this 9-volt circuit wearable, with a bulky 9-volt battery?
I can think of three answers:
You can put the battery in a pocket, and mount the flasher on the outside of
the pocket, with a thin wire penetrating the fabric.
You could mount the battery inside the crown of a baseball cap, with the
flasher on the front.
You can put three 3-volt button batteries in a stack, held in some kind of
plastic clip. I’m not sure how long they’ll last, though.
I have to note that the 2N2222 transistors in this project are not ideal, because
they tend to use more power than field-effect transistors, also known as
MOSFETS. However, I made a decision in this book that I only had space for
one transistor family, and bipolar NPNs are the most fundamental type.
Regarding your choice of LED, those with a clear lens create a defined beam of
light, which may not be appropriate for this project. Those that are diffused
create a more pleasing glow. You can diffuse the light more by embedding the
LED in a piece of transparent acrylic plastic, at least 1/4 inch thick, as shown in
Figure 3-70. Roughen the front of the acrylic with fine sandpaper, ideally using

an orbital sander that won’t make an obvious pattern. This will make the acrylic
translucent rather than transparent.

Figure 3-70. This cross-sectional view shows a sheet of transparent acrylic in which a hole
has been drilled part of the way from the back toward the front. Because a drill bit creates a
hole with a conical shape at the bottom, and because the LED has rounded contours,
transparent epoxy or silicone caulking can be injected into the hole before mounting the
LED.

Drill a hole slightly larger than the LED in the back of the acrylic. Don’t drill all
the way through the plastic. Remove all fragments and dust from the hole by
blasting some compressed air into it, or by washing it if you don’t have an air
compressor. After the cavity is completely dry, get some transparent silicone
caulking or mix some clear five-minute epoxy and put a drop in the bottom of
the hole. Then insert the LED, pushing it in so that it forces the epoxy to ooze
around it, making a tight seal.
Try illuminating the LED, and sand the acrylic some more if necessary. Finally,
you can decide whether to mount the circuit on the back of the acrylic, or
whether you want to run a wire to it elsewhere.
You can choose the resistors in the oscillator circuit to make the LED flash at
about the speed of a human heart while the person is resting. This may make it
look as if it’s measuring your pulse, especially if you mount it on the center of
your chest or in a strap around your wrist. If you enjoy hoaxing people, you can

suggest that you’re in such amazingly good shape, your pulse rate remains
constant even when you’re taking strenuous exercise.
To make a good-looking enclosure for the circuit, I can think of options ranging
from embedding the whole thing in clear epoxy to finding a Victorian-style
locket. I’ll leave you to consider alternatives, because this is a book about
electronics rather than craft projects. However, there is one craft-related issue
that I want to mention, and this is a good moment to do so.

Background: Maddened by Measurement
Throughout this book, I’ve mostly used measurements in inches. Sometimes,
though, I’ve ventured into the metric system, as when referring to “5mm LEDs.”
This isn’t inconsistency on my part; it reflects the conflicted state of the
electronics industry, where you’ll find inches and millimeters both in daily use,
often in the very same datasheet. For instance, the pin spacing of surface-mount
chips tends to be measured in millimeters, but through-hole chips still have pins
0.1” apart, and probably always will.
To complicate matters further, where inches are used, there are two different
systems for dividing them into fractional amounts. Drill bits, for instance, are
measured in multiples of 1/64ths of an inch. Metal shims are graded in
1/1,000ths of an inch (0.001”, 0.002”, and so on). To make things even more
confusing, the thickness of sheet metal is often measured by “gauge,” as in 16gauge steel, which happens to be about 1/16” thick.
Why doesn’t the US move to the metric system, since it’s so much more
rational?
We can debate whether it really is rational. When it was formally introduced in
1875, the meter was defined as being 1/10,000,000 of the distance between the
North Pole and the equator, along a line passing through Paris. Why Paris?
Because the French came up with the idea. Since then, the meter has been
redefined three times, in a series of efforts to achieve greater accuracy in
scientific applications.
As for the usefulness of a 10-based system, moving a decimal point is certainly
simpler than doing calculations in 1/64ths of an inch, but the only reason we
count in tens is because we happen to have evolved with that number of digits on

our hands. A 12-based system would really be more convenient, as numbers
would be evenly divisible by 2 and 3.
This is all very hypothetical. The fact is, we’re stuck with conflicts in length
measurement, so I’ve created four charts to assist you in converting from one
system to another. From these you will see that when you need to drill a hole for
a 5mm LED, a 3/16-inch bit is about right. (In fact, it results in a tighter fit than
if you drill an actual 5mm hole.)
Figure 3-71 will help you to convert between 1/64ths and 1/100ths of an inch.
The gray column is divided into 1/64ths, the blue column is in 1/32nds, the green
column is in 1/16ths, and the orange column is in 1/8ths. Customarily, if a value
can be precisely expressed in larger units, we use that option; thus instead of
referring to 8/64ths of an inch, we would express this as 1/8th of an inch. This
causes some confusion when you’re trying to figure out whether one
measurement is larger than another—for instance, are 11/32nds of an inch larger
than 5/8ths of an inch? Check the diagram to make sure.
Because datasheets often express dimensions using decimal fractions of an inch,
a second chart in Figure 3-72 converts between decimals and 64ths. I think
you’re quite likely to find a measurement such as 0.375”, and if you know that
this is the same as 3/8”, the knowledge can be useful.
Many datasheets provide measurements in both millimeters and inches, but some
now use millimeters only. If you are still thinking in inches, or if you want to
know if a component will fit the 1/10” hole spacing in a breadboard or
perforated board, it’s helpful to remember that 1/10” is equivalent to 2.54mm.
Provided a component is small, pin spacing in multiples of 2.5mm is acceptable.
However, when pins are 25mm or more apart, they may not fit into holes that are
25.4mm apart (that is, one inch or more).
Figure 3-73 enables conversion between millimeters, 1/100ths of an inch, and
1/64ths of an inch.
Figure 3-74 is a magnified version of the previous chart, showing tenths of
millimeters and 1/1,000ths of an inch.
Some progress has been made during the past four decades toward adopting the
metric system in the United States, but more decades will pass before this
transition is complete. In the meantime, anyone using parts or tools

manufactured or sold in the United States should be familiar with both systems.
There’s no way around it.

Figure 3-71. For conversion between 64ths of inch and 100ths.

Figure 3-72. For conversion between decimal inch values and 64ths.

Figure 3-73. For conversion between US measurements and metric (millimeters).

Figure 3-74. For conversion between smaller values of US measurements and metric (tenths
of millimeters).

Experiment 15: Intrusion Alarm, Part One
Time now for an experiment that takes the knowledge you have acquired and
applies it to a simplified but workable consumer product. You may not feel you
need an intrusion alarm, but figuring out how to build one will be an excellent
introduction to the process of creating circuits to perform tasks in the real world.
I should warn you that designing a circuit from scratch usually leads to
unexpected problems and errors. It would be misleading to pretend otherwise.
Consequently, in the sequence of steps described below, you’ll find at least one
setback and reversal—until we finally end up with a solid, workable system.

What You Will Need
9V battery and connector, or 9V AC-DC adapter (your choice)
Breadboard, hookup wire, wire cutters, wire strippers, multimeter
Generic LED (1)
Transistor, 2N2222 (1)
DPDT 9VDC relay (1)
1N4001 diode (1)
Resistors: 470 ohms (1), 1K (1), 10K (1)

Wish List
This experiment is sufficiently complex; it requires a plan. But before I can
develop a plan, I need to know what I want. This entails writing what I call a
“wish list.” Along the way, I will also try to visualize how each requirement can
be satisfied with the components that have been mentioned in previous
experiments.
So, what does an intrusion alarm require?
1. Triggering system. The device has to detect if someone has entered the
property. A sophisticated system using laser beams or ultrasound would be cool
—but too difficult. Because this is a first attempt, I’ll stick with widely available

magnetic sensor switches for windows and doors.
2. Sound. The alarm should make some kind of distinctive, attention-getting,
fluctuating sound.
3. Tamper-proof. No one should be able to kill the alarm by cutting a wire. In
fact, tampering should actually make the alarm go off.
4. Sensors in series. To tamper-proof the system I can run a very small but
constant current through a lot of sensor switches that are normally closed, and
are wired in series. If any one switch opens, or if the wire itself is broken, this
interrupts the current, which will start the alarm. I think most wired alarms are
designed on this principle.
5. Off-to-on. If I use sensors in series, an “off” event, caused by opening a
switch or breaking the circuit, has to turn the alarm on. Maybe a double-throw
relay could do this. Current through the relay coil holds a pair of contacts open,
until the flow of current stops, at which point the contacts close by default. But
the relay would draw significant power while it’s holding its contacts open. I
want my alarm system to draw very little current while it’s in “ready” mode, so
that it can be powered by a battery. Alarm systems should never depend entirely
on AC house current.
6. Maybe use a transistor? If I don’t use a relay, a transistor could switch on
the alarm when the circuit is interrupted. The base of the transistor can be held at
a relatively low voltage until the circuit is broken. Then the voltage goes up, and
the transistor switches on.
7. Arming the alarm. I need a little light that comes on when all the doors and
windows are closed. This tells me that the alarm can be used. Then I want to
press a button that starts a one-minute countdown, giving me time to leave. After
a minute, the alarm is armed.
8. Self-sustaining. Once the alarm starts, I don’t want it to stop easily. If
someone opens a window, the alarm should continue to make a noise even if the
person closes the window again. Maybe the transistor can trigger a relay, and
when the relay switches on, it keeps itself powered? Or can a transistor do this?
9. Initial delay. I don’t want the alarm to start whooping immediately, each time
I walk into the protected area. I want it to wait for a minute, to give me time to
reach it and switch it off. If I fail to deactivate it within that time window, then it

can start making noise.
10. Deactivation with a code. Some kind of secret-code keypad would be good,
to switch off the alarm.

Implementing the Wish List
This wish list sounds a bit ambitious, bearing in mind that the only thing you
have built so far is a small oscillator using three transistors. But in fact most of
the functions can be implemented fairly easily. I will leave some of the harder
ones until later in the book, when I have established a broader knowledge base.
In the end, I will be able to deal with everything on the list, and the components
will all fit on a single breadboard (with the exception of a noisemaking circuit,
which will be optional).

Magnetic Sensor Switches
Let’s start with the component that triggers the alarm. A typical sensor switch
consists of two modules: the magnetic module and the switch module. These are
shown side by side in Figure 3-75.

Figure 3-75. A typical alarm sensor consists of a magnet in a plastic pod (bottom left), and a
magnetically activated reed switch in a similar pod (top right).

The magnetic module contains a permanent magnet, and nothing else. The
switch module contains a reed switch, which makes or breaks a connection (like
a contact inside a relay) under the influence of the magnet.
You attach the magnetic module to the moving part of a door or window, and
attach the switch module to the window frame or door frame. When the window
or door is closed, the magnetic module is almost touching the switch module.
The magnet keeps the switch closed—until the door or window is opened, at
which point the switch opens. See Figure 3-76 for a cutaway diagram of the
magnet-switch combination.

Figure 3-76. This cutaway diagram shows the two components in a typical sensor for an
alarm system: a reed switch (bottom) and the magnet that activates it (top).

The switch consists of two flexible magnetized strips terminating in electrical
contacts. Each strip connects with an external screw to which a wire can be
attached.
When the magnet approaches the switch, it magnetizes the flexible strips,
causing them to attract each other until the contacts close.
From my description, you can see that the reed switch is normally open
(abbreviated NO), but is kept closed by the magnetic field. If you decide to buy
alarm sensors, you should know that some of them contain reed switches that
work the other way around. They are normally closed (abbreviated NC), but are
opened by the magnetic field. Those are not the ones you want for this project.

A Break-to-Make Transistor Circuit
Now, how can we switch on the noisemaking part of the alarm? Remember, we
will have a series of switches that are all normally closed, and when any one of
them opens, the alarm must start.
Recall how an NPN transistor works. When the base is not so positive, the
transistor blocks current between its collector and emitter. When the base is
more positive, the transistor passes current.
Take a look at the schematic in Figure 3-77, which is built around our old friend
the 2N2222 NPN transistor. For testing purposes, I have shown a normally
closed pushbutton to represent an alarm sensor. I realize that you don’t have a
normally closed pushbutton in your supply of parts to build this circuit, but just
use your imagination until we’re ready to breadboard it.
So long as the pushbutton remains closed, it connects the base of the transistor to
the negative side of the power supply through a 1K resistor. At the same time,
the base is connected with the positive side of the power supply through a 10K
resistor. Because of the difference in resistances, the base is closer to zero volts
than nine volts, holding the transistor below its turn-on threshold. As a result, the
transistor will not pass much current, and the LED should not have enough
voltage to light up.

Figure 3-77. A basic circuit in which an LED lights up when a normally closed pushbutton is
opened.

Now what happens when the pushbutton is opened? The base of the transistor
loses its negative power supply and has only a positive power supply. It becomes
much more positive, and tells the transistor to lower its resistance and pass more
current. The LED now glows brightly. Thus, when the pushbutton breaks the
connection, the LED is turned on.
This seems to be a workable system. Multiple sensors will be needed, for various
doors and windows, but that’s OK—we can wire as many as we like in series, as
shown in Figure 3-78, where an alarm sensor can be substituted for each
pushbutton. The wiring can be laid all around the house, as its total resistance
should be low relative to the 10K resistor.

Figure 3-78. In a network of sensors, wired in series, any one sensor will break continuity
and trigger the transistor.

While all the sensors remain closed, the transistor is drawing very little current
—probably about 1mA. For development and demonstration purposes, you can
run it with a 9-volt battery. For actual use, you would really want a 12-volt alarm
battery that is maintained by an automatic charging system. That’s outside the
scope of this book, but bear in mind that alarm batteries and chargers are widely
available if you ever want them.
Now suppose we swap out the LED and put a relay in there instead, as shown in
Figure 3-79. (I’ve shown a double-pole relay, even though we have no use for
the second pole right now.) So long as all the pushbuttons remain closed, the
base of the transistor is held at a relatively low voltage, so the transistor does not
apply power to the coil of the relay, and its contacts remain in the state shown.
When any sensor is opened, the higher voltage on the base of the transistor
causes it to conduct current to the relay coil, which starts the alarm, as in

Figure 3-80. (It’s OK to use a relay in this mode, because the relay will not be
“always on.” It will normally be off, and will draw power only when the alarm is
triggered.) Note that I eliminated the 470-ohm resistor from the circuit, because
the relay doesn’t need any protection from the power supply.

Figure 3-79. In this circuit, the relay will be activated when any switch in the sensor network
is opened.

Figure 3-80. Now that a sensor in the circuit is open, the relay is activated by the transistor.

You can build this circuit yourself, using the same relay that you used in
Experiment 7 (see “Experiment 7: Investigating a Relay”). But maybe you
should wait until I develop it a little further.
A couple of things that you may want to consider:
Will the relay overload the transistor? You can find the answer by looking at
the datasheets for these two components.
Remember that a transistor imposes a small voltage drop, even when it is
“on.” Will the voltage still be sufficient to activate a 9-volt relay? The
datasheet for the relay will tell you the minimum operating voltage for its
coil. You can verify this by testing it.

Self-Locking Relay
The circuit that I have developed so far will activate the alarm when any sensor
is opened. That’s good, but what happens if the sensor goes back into its closed

state? The low voltage is reapplied to the base of the transistor, so it switches off
the alarm. This is not good.
According to item #8 on my wish list, the alarm should be self-sustaining. It
must continue making noise even after someone who has opened a door or
window closes it again quickly. Therefore, the relay must lock itself on,
somehow.
One way to do this would be by using a latching relay, which remains in either
of two states, and only requires power to flip from one to the other. But a
latching relay has two coils, and would require extra circuitry to unlatch it when
you want to turn the alarm off. Really, it’s easier to use a nonlatching relay, and I
can think of a way to keep the relay switched on indefinitely, after it has received
just one jolt of power.
The secret is revealed in Figure 3-81. In this view, the far-right pushbutton has
closed again after being open, so the transistor has switched off—but the relay is
still on, because a wire now connects its contacts back to its own coil. When the
relay activates the alarm, it also activates itself.

Figure 3-81. The sensor has closed again. The transistor is no longer active, but the alarm is
locked on.

Figure 3-82 clarifies this concept by showing the path that current can take. So
long as the contacts of the relay are closed, the coil of the relay is energized via
its own contacts. In this way, it keeps itself switched on.

Figure 3-82. Close-up from the previous schematic, showing how the relay keeps itself
switched on.

Blocking Bad Voltage
This looks promising, but there’s a problem. The picture in Figure 3-81 was not
totally accurate. Take a look at Figure 3-83. The top part of this figure is another
close-up of the relevant part of the circuit. When the alarm has locked itself on,
but the transistor has turned off, current can run back from the relay coil to the
emitter of the transistor. I should have colored this section of wire red, as it will
be relatively positive.
Applying power backward through a transistor is not a nice thing to do. It can
cause damage. What should be done about this? Maybe I can use something to
block this reverse flow: a rectifier diode. This is shown in the bottom half of

Figure 3-83.

Figure 3-83. A diode can be added to prevent current from forcing its way back into the
transistor when the alarm has locked itself on and the transistor switches off.

A new version of the full circuit, including the diode, is shown in Figure 3-84.
But what exactly is a diode? Is it the same as a light-emitting diode (LED)?
Well, yes and no.

Figure 3-84. The full circuit, now including the diode.

Fundamentals: All About Diodes
A diode is a very early type of semiconductor. It allows electricity to flow in one
direction, but blocks it in the opposite direction. Like its more recent cousin, the
LED, a diode can be damaged by reversing the voltage and applying excessive
power, but most diodes generally have a much greater tolerance for this than
LEDs. In fact, they are designed to block reverse voltage, up to a limit specified
by the manufacturer.
The end of the diode that stops positive voltage is always marked, usually with a
circular band, as shown in Figure 3-25. The marked end is called the cathode.
The other end is the anode, and remains unmarked. Diodes are sometimes useful
in logic circuits, and can also convert alternating current (AC) into direct current
(DC). If a diode isn’t strong enough to withstand the current that you want it to
block, you simply use a bigger diode. They come in many sizes.
It’s good practice to use diodes at less than their rated capacity. Like any

semiconductor, they can overheat and burn out if they are subjected to
mistreatment.
The symbol for a diode looks like the heart of an LED, with the circle and the
arrows removed. Three variants are shown in Figure 3-85.

Figure 3-85. Three schematic symbols that are used to represent a diode. They are
functionally identical.

One Problem Creates Another
Previously, I had to solve the problem of how to make the relay keep itself
switched on. I solved that problem by adding an extra wire, but the wire created
a new problem, in which current could flow back to the transistor. I solved that
problem by adding a diode, but this creates yet another problem.
We have to pay a fee for the service that the diode provides, just as we have to
pay a fee for the service that the transistor provides. In fact, because both of
these components are semiconductors, the fee is very similar. It consists of a
reduction in voltage.
When the relay is off, current must switch it on by passing through the transistor
and then through the diode. After the relay is on, it keeps itself on, and that’s not
a problem. But a transistor imposes a penalty of around 0.7V, and the diode
imposes an additional penalty of about 0.7V, making 1.4V total. This voltage
penalty is fixed, regardless of the supply voltage.
I think 9-volt relays should work reliably at 7.6V. My Omron datasheet tells me
that the G5V-2 series, which I have recommended, needs 75% of its supply
voltage, which would be only 6.75V. That seems like a reasonable margin of
error.
But what if someone substitutes a different relay? Some have narrower
specifications than others. Or what if someone is using a battery to power the

circuit, and its voltage drops below 9V? A designer should always expect the
unexpected, and as a general principle, should use components as close to their
rated values as possible.
A couple of readers wrote to me about the issue of voltage reduction when the
circuit appeared in the first edition of the book. (Yes, I do pay attention to reader
feedback.) At that time, I had specified a 12VDC power source, and felt that the
1.4V penalty imposed by the transistor and the diode would be acceptable. But in
this edition, I decided that all the experiments should work with 9VDC power
supplies, so that you don’t have to buy an AC adapter and can just use 9V
batteries if that’s what you prefer. Unfortunately a deduction of 1.4V from 9V is
not so acceptable.
You see how a decision leads to consequences. Now that I am using a 9VDC
power supply, I think I need a better way to make the relay lock itself on.

Solving the Problem
The first step to solving a problem is to be very clear about what’s happening.
The task of controlling the alarm is shared by two components: the transistor and
the relay. The transistor starts the alarm. After that, the transistor doesn’t do
anything. It switches off, and the relay has the task of keeping itself locked on.
The weakness in this system is that when a task is shared by two components,
they can interfere with each other. A better plan would be to have one
component in charge of everything. I should maintain the transistor in a
controlling role. It should keep itself turned on, and so long as it is on, it will
keep the relay on.
Ah—now I see how to fix it. All I need is to use the second pole of the relay
(which is the same relay that you already used in Experiment 7). I can use the
contacts in the second pole, which are normally closed, to ground the chain of
sensors, as shown in Figure 3-86.

Figure 3-86. The chain of sensors is now grounded through the right-hand contacts in the
relay, which are normally closed.

Here’s how it will work:
The base of the transistor now connects to the negative side of the power supply
through all the sensors, and the 1K resistor, and the right-hand relay contacts
(which are normally closed). So long as this chain of connections is unbroken,
the base of the transistor is at a low enough voltage to stop the transistor from
passing current.
Now someone opens a sensor. The base of the transistor isn’t grounded anymore,
so the transistor activates the relay. The relay closes the left-hand contacts,
which start the alarm. But the relay also opens the right-hand contacts.
Now if someone re-closes the sensor, it makes no difference anymore, because
the right-hand contacts of the relay are open, and have cut off the connection to
the negative side of the power supply. The transistor continues to pass current,
and the relay remains active. This is shown in Figure 3-87.

Figure 3-87. Now that a sensor has been opened, the transistor remains energized even if the
sensor is subsequently closed.

This solves the problem.

Protection Diode
As you saw above, I eliminated the diode from the circuit. But if you take a look
at Figure 3-88 (which I promise is the last version, at least for now) you will
notice that the diode has found its way back in again, although it’s doing
something very different. It is now in parallel with the coil of the relay. What’s it
doing there, of all places?

Figure 3-88. The diode has returned, now serving a function as a protection diode.

Much later in the book, I’ll be discussing coils. One thing I can tell you right
now is that a coil of wire stores energy when you apply power, and releases the
energy when you disconnect the power. The release of energy creates a surge of
current that can harm some types of components, especially semiconductors.
Therefore, it is standard procedure to add a protection diode across a relay coil.
The diode is oriented so that it blocks the normal flow of current, forcing it to go
through the coil, which is where we want it. But when the flow stops, and the
coil tries to release its energy, the diode is there, saying to the relay, “I have a
very low resistance in that direction. Why don’t you shunt the current through
me, instead of hassling the other components with it?”
And that is precisely what happens.
If you’re only using a small relay with a small coil that doesn’t take much
current, you can get by without using a protection diode. Still, it’s good practice,

and you should always be in the habit of using one.

Time to Breadboard
I’ve given you a lot of explanations in this experiment, which is not what I
normally like to do. But I had to show how a circuit is developed from the
ground up. Now, finally, I’d like you to build it—otherwise, how will you know
if it really works?
Figure 3-89 shows a breadboard layout. Instead of a noisemaker for the alarm,
I’ve used an LED for demonstration purposes. I’ll discuss noisemaking options
in a moment.

Figure 3-89. Breadboarded alarm circuit, final version.

Figure 3-90 shows an x-ray view of the breadboarded circuit
To simulate the alarm sensors on the breadboard, I should have used normally
closed pushbuttons. But I wanted to minimize the component costs, and if you
actually decide to use this alarm circuit, you’ll want magnetic sensors, not
pushbuttons. Consequently, as a substitute, I used two normally closed pieces of

wire. This is adequate for testing. I will call them the “sensor wires.” You can
see them crossing over each other below the relay.

Figure 3-90. X-ray view of the breadboarded alarm circuit.

Make sure the wires are touching each other when you apply power to the
circuit. Initially, nothing should happen.
Now disconnect the sensor wires. The LED comes on, and if you build the next
version of this circuit, a noisemaker will sound, showing that the alarm has been
triggered.
Now reconnect the sensor wires, imitating a situation where an intruder opened a
window, heard the alarm, and quickly closed the window again. If you wired

your circuit correctly, the LED will stay on.
So far so good. We have a functional circuit here. The alarm locks itself on.
But in that case—how do you ever get it to stop?
No problem. Just disconnect the power. The relay relaxes back to its default
position, and the next time you apply the power, it will be in standby mode
again. In a finished version of this project, you should have to enter some kind of
secret code on a keypad to turn the alarm off. In Experiment 21, I’ll be
suggesting a way to create a passcode-protected system. You’ll need to use logic
chips, which we haven’t dealt with yet.

Adding the Sound
For the alarm sound, you could use the oscillator circuit and loudspeaker from
Experiment 11. Really, though, there is a better way. A little integrated circuit
chip known as a 555 timer is a better tool for the job—and it just happens to be
the next thing that I want to tell you about, in Experiment 16.
The 555 timer can also satisfy items #7 and #9 on my wish list, which require a
delay before the alarm starts. Therefore, I’m going to put the alarm project on
hold, and we’ll finish it completely in Experiment 18.

Reference: Take-Home Messages
Even though the alarm project isn’t finished yet, it raised several important
points. I’m going to summarize them here, for future reference.
You can use a transistor to provide a high output in response to a low input,
and vice versa.
You can wire a relay to lock itself into “on” mode, simply by feeding current
back to its own coil.
A diode can stop current from flowing into places where you don’t want it to
go.
When forward current passes through a diode, the voltage is reduced by about
0.7V.
A transistor also reduces voltage by about 0.7V.

Voltage reduction imposed by semiconductors remains the same regardless of
the supply voltage. Consequently, the reduction is more significant when the
supply voltage is lower.
A relay coil can create back-EMF (a pulse of reverse current) when it is
switched off.
A protection diode in parallel with a relay coil can suppress back-EMF. The
diode should be oriented so that it blocks the normal flow of current but
passes the reverse pulse created by the coil.

Chapter 4. Chips, Ahoy!
Before I get into the fascinating topic of integrated circuit chips (often referred
to as ICs or simply chips), I have to make a confession. Some of the things I
asked you to do in previous experiments could have been done a bit more
simply, if we had used chips.
Does this mean you have been wasting your time? Absolutely not! I firmly
believe that by building circuits with individual components such as transistors
and diodes, you acquire the best possible understanding of the principles of
electronics. Still, you are going to find that chips containing dozens, hundreds, or
thousands of transistor junctions will enable some shortcuts.
You may also find chips curiously addictive to play with—although you may not
become quite as excited as the character in Figure 4-1.
The tools, equipment, components, and supplies described below will be useful
in Experiments 16 through 24, in addition to items that have been recommended
previously.

Figure 4-1. My role model.

Necessary Items for Chapter Four
The only new tool that you might consider using in conjunction with chips is a
logic probe. This tells you whether a single pin on a chip has a high or low
voltage, which can be helpful in figuring out what your circuit is doing. The
probe has a memory function so that it will light its LED, and keep it lit, in
response to a pulse that may have been too quick for the eye to see.
Some of my readers disagree with me, but I regard the logic probe as optional,
not essential. Search online and buy the cheapest one you can find. I don’t have
any specific brand recommendations.

Components
As before, if you want kits containing components, see “Kits”. If you prefer to
buy your own components from online sources, see “Components”. For supplies,
see “Supplies”.

Fundamentals: Choosing Chips
Figure 4-2 shows two integrated circuit chips. The one at the top is of the oldschool, through-hole design, with pins spaced at 1/10” so that they will fit
through the holes in your breadboard or perforated board. These are the chips I
will be using exclusively, because they’re easy to handle. The smaller chip is a
surface-mount design, which I will not be using, because they don’t fit
breadboards or perforated boards and are difficult to handle.
Many through-hole and surface-mount chips are functionally identical. The only
difference is the size (although some surface-mount versions use a lower
voltage).
The body of a chip is usually made of plastic or resin and is often referred to as
the package. The traditional chip is usually sold in a dual-inline package,
meaning that it has two (i.e., dual) rows of pins. The acronym for this package is
DIP or (when it is made of plastic) PDIP.

Figure 4-2. A through-hole chip (top) and surface-mount chip (bottom).

Surface-mount packages often are identified with acronyms beginning with letter
S, as in SOIC, meaning small-outline integrated circuit. Numerous surfacemount variants exist, with different pin spacing and other specifications. They
are all outside the scope of this book, and if you buy your own components, you
should be careful not to select them by mistake.
Inside the package, the circuit is etched on a tiny wafer of silicon, which is
where the term “chip” comes from, although the whole component is now
usually referred to as a chip, and I will follow that convention here. Tiny wires
inside the package link the circuit with the rows of pins that protrude on either
side.
The PDIP chip in Figure 4-2 has seven pins in each row, making a total of 14.
Other chips may have 4, 6, 8, 16, or more pins.
Just about every chip has a part number printed on it. Notice in the photograph
that even though the chips look quite different from each other, they both have
“74” in their part numbers. This is because both of them are members of the
family of logic chips that were assigned part numbers from 7400 and upward
when they were introduced several decades ago. This is often referred to as the
74xx family, and I’ll be using these chips a lot.

Take a look at Figure 4-3. The initial letters identify the manufacturer, which you
can ignore, as it really makes no difference for our purposes. (If you are
wondering why “SN” identifies Texas Instruments, it’s because the company
used to call their chips “semiconductor networks” in the early days.)
Skip the letters until you get to the “74.” After that, you find two more letters,
which are important. The 7400 family has evolved through many generations,
and the letter(s) inserted after the “74” tell you which generation you’re dealing
with. Generations have included: 74L, 74LS, 74C, 74HC, and 74AHC. There are
many more.

Figure 4-3. How to decode the part number of a chip in the 74xx family.

Generally speaking, later generations tend to be faster or more versatile than
earlier generations. In this book, I am using the HC generation of the 7400
family exclusively, because almost all 7400 chips are available in it, the cost is
moderate, and the chips don’t use a lot of power. For our purposes, the extra
speed offered by later generations is not relevant—although you can certainly
use the HCT generation if you prefer.

Following the letters identifying the generation, you’ll find a sequence of two,
three, four, or (sometimes) five digits. These identify the specific function of the
chip. Following the digits is another letter, or two letters, or more. For our
purposes, those terminating letters are not important.
Looking back at Figure 4-2, the DIP chip part number, M74HC00B1, tells you
that it is a chip made by STMicroelectronics, in the 74xx family, HC generation,
with its function identified by numerals 00.
The purpose of this long explanation is to enable you to interpret catalog listings
if you go chip shopping. You can search for “74HC00” and the search engines at
online vendors are usually smart enough to show you appropriate chips from
multiple manufacturers, even though there are letters preceding and following
the term that you’re searched for.
Just be sure that they will fit your breadboard. Limit your search results to DIP,
PDIP, or through-hole packages. If the part number begins with SS, SO, or TSS,
it’s absolutely definitely surface-mount, and you don’t want it. For a lot more
information on searching and shopping, see “Searching and Shopping Online”.
All the chips needed for the experiments in this chapter of the book are listed in
Figure 6-7. You will need a few other types of components, which I will list
here.

Optional: IC Sockets
If you plan to immortalize any of your circuits in solder, I suggest you avoid
soldering chips directly, because if you make a wiring error or damage the chip,
you have to desolder multiple pins in order to remove it. This is very difficult. To
avoid the problem, buy some DIP sockets, solder the sockets onto the board, and
then plug the chips into the sockets. You can use the cheapest sockets you can
find (you don’t need gold-plated contacts for our purposes). You will need 8-pin,
14-pin, and 16-pin sockets. Quantity of each: 5 minimum. Two sockets are
shown in Figure 4-4.

Figure 4-4. To avoid the risk of damaging a chip by soldering it directly, it can be mounted
in an IC socket after the socket has been soldered into a circuit board.

Essential: Subminiature Slide Switch
A slide switch has a tiny lever that you slide to and fro with the tip of your
finger, making and breaking an electrical contact inside the switch, as shown in
Figure 4-5. It has three pins spaced 0.1” apart (2.54mm in metric). If you buy
your own components, see “Other Components” and go down to the subhead
“Components for Chapter Four” for more information about switches.

Figure 4-5. The subminiature slide switch recommended for projects in this book.

Caution: Switching Overload
A very small slide switch is not designed to switch significant currents or
voltages. It is designed for low-powered circuits. A limit may be as low as
100mA at 12VDC. This is sufficient for our purposes. Check the manufacturer’s
datasheet if you want a slide switch to do more than this.

Essential: Low-Current LEDs
HC series logic chips are not designed to deliver current much beyond 5mA. You
can take as much as 20mA from them to drive an LED, but this will pull down
the output voltage, making it unsuitable as an input to other logic chips. I am
suggesting low-current LEDs for all your experiments with logic chips.
Remember that low-current LEDs require higher-value series resistors, because
they don’t tolerate as much current as generic LEDs. I will mention this
wherever it is important.

Essential: Numeric Displays

One of the chip projects will display its output using seven-segment numeric
displays—the simple kind of digits that you still find on digital clocks and
microwave ovens. See Figure 4-6. For purchasing information, see “Other
Components” and go down to the subhead “Components for Chapter Four.”

Figure 4-6. Seven-segment displays are the cheapest way to show a numeric output and can
be driven directly by some CMOS chips.

Essential: Voltage Regulator
Because many logic chips require precisely 5 volts DC, you need a voltage
regulator to guarantee this. The LM7805 does the job. The chip number will be
preceded or followed with an abbreviation identifying the manufacturer and
package style, as in the LM7805CT from Fairchild. Any manufacturer will do,
but the regulator should look like the one in Figure 4-7. (This is known as the
TO220 package style.) You need them in any logic circuit, so five would be a
good number to have available.

Optional Extras
To complete the alarm system in Experiment 18, you will require magnetic
sensors that you can apply to doors or windows, such as the Directed model

8601, available from dozens of sources online.
If you expect to move a project from a breadboard to a permanent enclosure, the
tactile switches that you have been using will be insufficiently sturdy or
accessible. For Experiment 18, you will need a full-size DPDT pushbutton
switch, ON-(ON) type, with solder terminals. If you search eBay for “DPDT
pushbutton” there will be no shortage of options.

Figure 4-7. Many integrated circuit chips require a controlled power supply of 5 volts, which
can be delivered by this regulator from a supply of 7.5 to 12 volts.

Background: How Chips Came to Be
The concept of integrating solid-state components into one little package
originated with British radar scientist Geoffrey W. A. Dummer, who talked about
it for years before he attempted, unsuccessfully, to build one in 1956. The first
true integrated circuit wasn’t fabricated until 1958 by Jack Kilby, working at
Texas Instruments. Kilby’s version used germanium, as this element was already
in use as a semiconductor. (You’ll encounter a germanium diode when I deal
with crystal radios in Experiment 31.) But Robert Noyce, pictured in Figure 4-8,
had a better idea.

Figure 4-8. Robert Noyce, who patented the integrated circuit chip and cofounded Intel.

Born in 1927 in Iowa, Noyce moved to California in the 1950s, where he found
a job working for William Shockley. This was shortly after Shockley had set up
a business based around the transistor, which he had coinvented at Bell Labs.
Noyce was one of eight employees who became frustrated with Shockley’s
management and left to establish Fairchild Semiconductor. While he was the
general manager of Fairchild, Noyce invented a silicon-based integrated circuit
that avoided the manufacturing problems associated with germanium. He is
generally credited as the man who made integrated circuits possible.
Early applications were for military use, as Minuteman missiles required small,
light components in their guidance systems. These applications consumed almost
all chips produced from 1960 through 1963, during which time the unit price fell
from around $1,000 to $25 each, in 1963 dollars.
In the late 1960s, MSI (medium-scale integration) chips emerged, each
containing hundreds of transistors. LSI (large-scale integration) enabled tens of
thousands of transistors on one chip by the mid-1970s, and today’s computer

chips can contain several billion transistors.
Robert Noyce eventually cofounded Intel with Gordon Moore, but died
unexpectedly of a heart attack in 1990. You can learn more about the fascinating
early history of chip design and fabrication at the Silicon Valley Historical
Association.

Experiment 16: Emitting a Pulse
I’m going to begin our experiments with chips by introducting you to the most
successful one ever made: the 555 timer. You can find numerous guides to it
online, so why do I need to discuss it here? I have three reasons for doing so:
It’s unavoidable. You simply have to know about this chip. Some sources
estimate that more than 1 billion are still being manufactured annually. It will be
used in one way or another in most of the remaining circuits in this book.
It’s useful. The 555 is probably the most versatile chip that exists, with endless
applications. Its relatively powerful output (rated at up to 200mA) is extremely
useful, and the chip itself is hard to damage.
It’s misunderstood. After reading literally dozens of guides, beginning with an
early Signetics datasheet and making my way through various hobby texts, I
concluded that the inner workings of the chip are seldom explained on an
introductory level. I want to give you a graphic understanding of what’s
happening inside it, because if you don’t have this, you won’t be in a good
position to use the chip creatively.

What You Will Need
Breadboard, hookup wire, wire cutters, wire strippers, multimeter
9VDC power supply (battery or AC adapter)
Resistors: 470 ohms (1), 10K (3)
Capacitors: 0.01µF (1), 15µF (1)
Trimmer potentiometers: 20K or 25K (1), 500K (1)
555 timer chip (1)

Tactile switches (2)
Generic LED (1)

Know Your Chips
The pins of a 555 timer are numbered counterclockwise (seen from above), as
shown in Figure 4-9. The package has a notch, or a dimple, or both, at the end
which is considered the top. The pin spacing is 1/10”.
All other through-hole chips have the same specification, although they may
have more pins. Usually (not always) the horizontal spacing between the two
rows of pins is 3/10”, which means that the chip neatly straddles the channel
down the middle of a breadboard, and the conductors inside the breadboard
allow you to have access to each pin of the chip. Yes, that’s why the breadboard
is designed that way.

Figure 4-9. The package design of an eight-pin chip. While virtually all chips have a
semicircular notch at the top, some do not have a dimple beside pin 1.

Monostable Test
The pins on a 555 timer also have names, as shown in Figure 4-10. A diagram
like this tells you the pinouts of the chip. I’ll be explaining the function of each
pin—but as usual, I prefer you to make a preliminary investigation of your own.

Figure 4-10. The pinouts of the 555 timer chip.

The schematic of a test circuit for the timer is shown in Figure 4-11.

Figure 4-11. A circuit to assist in your investigation of the 555 timer chip.

You can set up this circuit on a breadboard as shown in Figure 4-12. Note that
near the bottom-left corner there is a short red jumper connecting the top section
of the positive bus to the section immediately below it. The jumper is there in
case your breadboard is the type that has a break in its bus.
The component values are shown in Figure 4-13. To assist you in visualizing the
connections, an x-ray version is shown in Figure 4-14.
Apply some power, and nothing happens. The timer is waiting for you to trigger
it. Set it up by turning the 500K trimmer to the middle of its range.
Now rotate the 20K trimmer all the way counterclockwise, and press button A. If
still nothing happens, rotate the 20K trimmer all the way clockwise, and try
again. One of these settings or the other should create a pulse from the LED,
depending on which way around you plugged in your trimmer. If you don’t get
anything, there is an error in your circuit.
Check the schematic, and you see that pin 2 of the timer—the trigger pin—is
hardwired through a 10K resistor to the positive side of the power supply. But a
purple wire also connects with the trigger pin, and runs down, through a tactile
switch, to the trimmer. If the trimmer is rotated so that the wiper connects
directly to the negative ground side of the power supply, this will allow the
tactile switch to overwhelm the 10K resistor and apply low voltage to pin 2. This
triggers the timer.

Figure 4-12. Breadboarded version of the timer test circuit.

If the 20K trimmer is turned all the way in the opposite direction, button A will
apply positive voltage directly to pin 2, and because pin 2 already has positive
voltage through the 10K resistor, an additional positive voltage through button A
makes no difference.
Positive voltage on the trigger pin is ignored by the chip.
A drop in voltage on the trigger pin will trigger the chip.
But, how positive is positive, and how much of a drop will be low enough to act
as a trigger? Let’s find out.

Figure 4-13. Component values for the timer test circuit.

Get out your meter, set it to measure DC volts, and measure the voltage between
pin 2 and negative ground while you adjust the 20K trimmer to various settings
and press button A. I’m betting that when you press the button to apply a voltage
below 3 volts to pin 2, the timer will flash the LED. Above 3 volts, I doubt that
anything will happen.
The timer is triggered by a voltage on its trigger pin that is one-third of the
supply voltage (or less).
The LED will continue to glow after you release the button.
You can press the button for any length of time that is less than the timer’s
cycle time, and the LED always emits the same length of pulse.

Figure 4-14. Connections inside the breadboard wired for the timer test.

Figure 4-15 shows how the timer is behaving, in graphical format. The 555
converts the imperfect world around it into a precise and dependable output. It
doesn’t switch on and off absolutely instantly, but is fast enough to appear
instant.
Now try triggering the timer while you turn the 500K trimmer to different
positions. You will find that this adjusts the length of the pulse.
The resistance between pin 7 and the positive side of the power supply
determines how long the pulse from the timer will last (in conjunction with

the capacitor on pin 6).

Figure 4-15. How a 555 timer responds to different durations and voltages on its trigger pin.

Here’s another thing to try. Set the 500K trimmer to give a long pulse. Press
button A, and then quickly press button B, which will stop the pulse before it
completes. Hold down button B while you try to trigger the timer again with
button A, and nothing happens.
Pin 4 is the reset pin. When you ground it, you force the timer to interrupt
whatever it is doing, and it is immobilized until you release pin 4 from its
connection with negative ground.
Lastly, let go of button B, hold down button A, and continue to hold it down.
This prolongs the pulse from the timer, until you let go of button A.
Maintaining a low voltage on the trigger pin of the timer will retrigger it
indefinitely.
Regarding the 10K resistors attached to pins 2 and 4—these are known as pullup
resistors, because they hold the pins at a positive level. A more direct connection
to negative ground will overwhelm the pullup resistor.

The concept of a pullup resistor is important when you are dealing with chips,
because you must never allow an input pin to remain unconnected. An
unconnected pin is said to be floating, and can cause trouble, as it may pick up
stray electromagnetic fields, and we won’t know what voltage is on it from one
moment to the next.
Is there such a thing as a pulldown resistor? Absolutely. But the 555 timer needs
pullup resistors, because pin 2 or pin 4 is kept in a normal state by positive
voltage, and is activated by a low voltage.
The 555 timer is triggered or reset by negative voltages on pins 2 and 4
respectively.

Timing the Pulse
If you study the schematic in Figure 4-11, you can see that positive current
reaches pin 7 (the discharge pin) by passing through a 10K resistor and a 500K
trimmer. (The 10K resistor is there because pin 7 should not be connected
directly to the positive side of the power supply.)
You can also see that after passing through the 500K trimmer, the current can
reach a 15µF capacitor. Hmmmm, a resistor followed by a capacitor—does this
look like an RC network? Is the timer using the combination of the resistance
and the 15µF capacitor to determine the length of the output pulse?
Yes, that’s exactly what is going on. Inside the timer chip, some clever
electronics are sensing the voltage on the 15µF capacitor, and the timer uses this
to terminate its output pulse.
You can measure this yourself. Set the 500K trimmer to create a long pulse, and
use your meter to measure the voltage on the left side of the 15µF capacitor. You
should see it climbing up—until it reaches about 6 volts. The timer uses this as a
signal to stop its output pulse, and the voltage quickly goes down again, because
the timer is grounding it internally. This is why pin 7 is known as the discharge
pin: the timer discharges the capacitor through it.
When the voltage on the timing capacitor reaches two-thirds of the supply
voltage, the timer ends its output pulse.
But why are the discharge pin and the threshold pin tied together? You’ll learn
about that in the next experiment, when the timer is rewired to deliver a series of

pulses, instead of just one. At that time, the timer will be running in astable
mode. Currently, you are using it in monostable mode.
In monostable mode, the timer delivers only one pulse in response to a
triggering event.
In astable mode, the timer delivers a continuing series of pulses.
Finally, you may be wondering about the purpose of the 0.01µF capacitor
attached to pin 5. This pin is the “control” pin, which means that if you apply a
voltage to it, you can control the sensitivity of the timer. Because we are not
using this function yet, it’s good practice to put a capacitor on pin 5 to protect it
from voltage fluctuations and prevent it from interfering with normal
functioning.

Caution: Beware of Pin-Shuffling!
In all of the schematics in this book, chips are shown exactly as you would see
them on a breadboard, with the pins in numerical sequence.
Other schematics that you may find, on websites or in books, do things
differently. For convenience in drawing circuits, people often resequence the pin
numbers. Also, there is no attempt to replicate a breadboard layout with a
positive bus and a negative bus at each side. To give you an example, in
Figure 4-16 the circuit is identical to that in Figure 4-11, but the pins have been
shuffled to simplify connections and minimize wiring crossovers.

Figure 4-16. This circuit is identical in function to the test circuit shown previously, but pins
on the chip have been resequenced to simplify the schematic.

Pin shuffling can create a circuit that is easier to understand in some ways
(especially if positive power is at the top and ground at the bottom), but you
have to convert the layout, often using pen and paper, before you can build it on
a breadboard.

Fundamentals: Timer Duration
When you made your own RC network in Experiment 9, some annoying
calculations were necessary to figure out how long a capacitor would take to
reach any particular voltage. Using a 555 timer, everything is much easier. You
just look up the duration of its output pulse in a table such as the one in Figure 417. The resistance between pin 7 and the positive side of the power supply is
shown along the top of the table, the value of the timing capacitor is shown
down the left side, and the numbers in the table tell you the approximate pulse
duration in seconds.

Figure 4-17. Pulse duration, in seconds, of a 555 timer running in monostable mode, for
values of the timing resistor and timing capacitor. Times are rounded to two digits.

Resistor values below 1K should not be used.
Resistor values below 10K are undesirable, as they increase power
consumption.
Capacitor values above 100µF may produce inaccurate results because
leakage in the capacitor becomes comparable with its charging rate.
What if you want a time longer than 1,100 seconds or shorter then 0.01 seconds?
Or what if you want a pulse duration that falls somewhere between the values in
the table?
You can use this simple formula, where T is the pulse time in seconds, R is the

resistance in kilohms, and C is the capacitance is microfarads.
T = R × C × 0.0011
Bear in mind that the result may not be exact, because resistor and capacitor
values can be inaccurate, and because of other factors such as ambient
temperature.

Theory: Inside the 555 in Monostable Mode
The plastic body of the 555 timer contains a wafer of silicon on which are etched
dozens of transistor junctions in a pattern that is too complex to be explained
here. However, I can summarize their function by dividing them into groups, as
shown in Figure 4-18.

Figure 4-18. Simplified representation of internal functions of a 555 timer, wired in
monostable mode.

The negative and positive symbols inside the chip are power sources that
actually come from pins 1 and 8, respectively. I omitted the internal connections
to those pins for the sake of clarity.
The two yellow triangles are comparators. Each comparator compares two
inputs (at the base of the triangle) and delivers an output (from the apex of the
triangle) depending on whether the inputs are similar or different. FF is a flipflop, a logic component that can rest in one state or the other. I have depicted it
as a double-throw switch, although in reality it is solid-state.
Initially when you power up the chip, the flip-flop is in its “up” position, which
delivers low voltage through the output, pin 3. If the flip-flop receives a signal
from comparator A, it flips to its “down” state, and flops there. When it receives
a signal from comparator B, it flips back to its “up” state, and flops there. The
“Up” and “Down” labels on the comparators will remind you how each one
changes the switch when it is activated. Some people feel that the term “flipflop” is derived from it having two states named “flip” and “flop.” But I prefer to
think of it flipping and flopping.
Notice the external wire that connects pin 7 with capacitor C. As long as the flipflop is “up,” it sinks the positive voltage coming through resistor R to pin 7, and
prevents the capacitor from charging positively.
If the voltage on pin 2 drops to 1/3 of the supply, comparator A notices this, and
flips the flip-flop to its “down” position. This sends a positive pulse from pin 3,
the output pin, and also disconnects the negative power from pin 7. Now the
capacitor can start charging through the resistor. While this is happening, the
positive output from the timer continues.
As the voltage increases on the capacitor, comparator B monitors it through pin
6. When the capacitor accumulates 2/3 of the supply voltage, comparator B
sends a pulse to the flip-flop, flipping it back into its original “up” state. This
discharges the capacitor through pin 7. Also, the flip-flop ends the positive
output through pin 3 and replaces it with a negative voltage. This way, the 555
returns to its original state.

I’ll sum up this sequence of events:
Initially, the flip-flop grounds the capacitor and grounds the output (pin 3).
A drop in voltage on pin 2 to 1/3 of the supply voltage or less makes the
output (pin 3) positive and allows capacitor C to start charging through
resistor R.
When the capacitor reaches 2/3 of the supply voltage, the chip discharges the
capacitor, and the output at pin 3 goes low again.

Fundamentals: Pulse Suppression
When power is first applied to a timer that is configured in monostable mode,
the timer tends to emit one pulse spontaneously before going dormant and
waiting to be triggered again. This can be annoying in many circuits.
One way to prevent it is by putting a 1µF capacitor between the Reset pin and
negative ground. The capacitor sinks current from the Reset pin when the power
is first turned on, and holds the pin low for a fraction of a second—just long
enough to stop the timer from emitting its waking-up pulse. After the capacitor is
charged, it doesn’t do anything more, and a 10K resistor holds the reset pin
positive, so it won’t interfere with the running of the timer.
I’ll be using the pulse-suppression concept in subsequent experiments.

Fundamentals: Why the 555 Is Useful
In its monostable mode, the 555 will emit a single pulse of fixed (but
programmable) length. Can you imagine some applications? Think in terms of
the pulse from the 555 controlling some other component. A motion sensor on an
outdoor light, perhaps. When an infrared detector “sees” something moving, the
light comes on, but only for a specific period—which can be controlled by a 555.
Another application could be a toaster. When someone lowers a slice of bread, a
switch will close, triggering the toasting cycle. To change the length of the cycle,
you could use a potentiometer and attach it to the external lever that determines
how dark you want your toast. At the end of the toasting cycle, the output from
the 555 would pass through a power transistor, to activate a solenoid (which is
like a relay, except that it has no switch contacts) to release the toast.

Intermittent windshield wipers could be controlled by a 555 timer—and on
earlier models of cars, they were. The repeat rate of keys on a rather basic
computer keyboard could be controlled by a 555 timer—and on the Apple II, it
was.
What about the intrusion alarm in Experiment 15? One of the features on my
wish list was that it should wait long enough for you to shut it off, before it starts
to make a noise. The output from a 555 timer can take care of that.
The experiment that you just performed seemed trivial, but it implies a huge
range of possibilities.

Fundamentals: Bistable Mode
There’s another way to use the timer, known as bistable mode. This entails
disabling its fundamental features. Why would you want to do this? I will
explain.
Figure 4-19 shows a circuit that you can build in just a few minutes. Give it a try.
The two resistors on the left are pullup resistors, 10K each. The resistor at the
bottom is 470 ohms, to protect the LED. Add two tactile switches, and the timer
chip itself, and you’re done.

Figure 4-19. Breadboard circuit to make the 555 timer function as a flip-flop.

Once you have it on your breadboard, press and release the top button, and the
LED lights up. For how long? For as long as you supply power to the circuit.
The output from the timer continues indefinitely.
Now press and release the bottom button, and the LED goes off. For how long?
For as long as you like. It won’t come back on until you press the top button
again.
I mentioned that there is a flip-flop inside the timer. This circuit makes the timer
into one big flip-flop. It flips into its “on” state when you ground pin 2—and it
flops there. It flips into its “off” state when you ground pin 4—and it flops there.
Flip-flops are very important in digital circuits, as I will explain a bit later, but
right now, how does this work, and why would you need it?
Take a look at the schematic in Figure 4-20. You may notice that there is no
resistor or capacitor on the righthand side. The RC network is missing. So—this

timer circuit has no timing components! Normally, when you trigger the timer,
its output pulse ends when the timing capacitor on pin 6 accumulates 2/3 of
supply voltage. But pin 6 is grounded, so it can never reach the 2/3 value.
Consequently, when you trigger the timer, the output pulse will never end.

Figure 4-20. A test circuit for the 555 timer in bistable mode.

Of course, you can stop the output by applying a low voltage to the reset pin. But
once the output stops, it will remain stopped, so long as you don’t trigger the
timer again.
This configuration is called bistable because it is stable when the output is high,
and it is stable when the output is low. A simple flip-flop like this can also be
called a latch.
A negative pulse to pin 2 turns the output positive, and latches it.
A negative pulse to pin 4 turns the output negative, and latches it.
You do have to keep pins 2 and 4 high when you are not triggering them. That’s
what the pullup resistors in the schematic are for.
It’s OK to leave pin 5 of the timer unconnected, because we’re pushing it into
extreme states where any random signals from those pins will be ignored.

As for why you would need to use a timer in this way—you’ll be surprised how
useful it can be. I’m going to use it in three experiments in the remainder of this
book. The 555 was not really designed to function in bistable mode, but it can be
convenient.

Background: How the Timer Was Born
Back in 1970, when barely a half-dozen corporate seedlings had taken root in the
fertile ground of Silicon Valley, a company named Signetics bought an idea from
an engineer named Hans Camenzind (pictured in Figure 4-21). It wasn’t a huge
breakthrough concept—just 23 transistors and a bunch of resistors that would
function as a programmable timer. The circuit would be versatile, stable, and
simple, but these virtues paled in comparison with its primary selling point.
Using the emerging technology of integrated circuits, Signetics could reproduce
the whole thing on a silicon chip.

Figure 4-21. Hans Camenzind, inventor, designer, and developer of the 555 timer chip for
Signetics.

This entailed some trial and error. Camenzind worked alone, building the whole
thing initially on a large scale, using off-the-shelf transistors, resistors, and
diodes on a breadboard. It worked, so then he started substituting slightly

different values for the various components to see whether the circuit would
tolerate variations during production, and other factors such as changes in
temperature when the chip was in use. He made at least 10 different versions of
the circuit. This took months.
Next came the crafts work. Camenzind sat at a drafting table and used a
specially mounted X-Acto knife to scribe his circuit into a large sheet of plastic.
Signetics then reduced this image photographically by a ratio of about 300:1.
They etched it into tiny wafers, and embedded each of them in a half-inch
rectangle of black plastic with the product number printed on top. Thus, the 555
timer was born.
It turned out to be the most successful chip in history, both in the number of
units sold (tens of billions and counting) and the longevity of its design (not
significantly changed in almost 40 years). The 555 has been used in everything
from toys to spacecraft. It can make lights flash, activate alarm systems, put
spaces between beeps, and create the beeps themselves.
Today, chips are designed by large teams and tested by simulating their behavior
using computer software. Thus, the chips inside a computer enable the design of
new chips. The heyday of solo designers such as Hans Camenzind is long gone,
but his genius lives inside every 555 timer that emerges from a fabrication
facility. If you’d like to know more about chip history, visit the Transistor
Museum.
A personal note: in 2010, when I was writing Make: Electronics, I looked up
Hans Camenzind online and found that he maintained his own website, which
included a phone number. On impulse, I called him. This was a strange moment,
to be talking to the man whose chip design I had used for more than 30 years. He
was friendly (although he didn’t waste words), and readily agreed to review the
text of my book. Even more kindly, after he read it, he gave it a strong
endorsement.
Subsequently I bought his own short history of electronics, Much Ado About
Almost Nothing, which is still available online, and which I highly recommend. I
felt honored to have had the opportunity to talk to one of the pioneers in
integrated circuit design. I was sad when I heard of his death in 2012.

Fundamentals: 555 Timer Specifications

The 555 can run from a reasonably stable voltage source ranging from 5VDC
to 16VDC. The absolute maximum is 18VDC. Many datasheet specifications
are measured at 15VDC. The voltage does not have to be controlled by a
voltage regulator.
Most manufacturers recommend a range from 1K to 1M for the resistor
attached to pin 7, but values below 10K draw a more significant amount of
current. It’s a better idea to reduce the value of the capacitor than to reduce
the value of the resistor.
The capacitor value can go as high as you like, if you want to time really long
intervals, but the accuracy of the timer will diminish because leakage in the
capacitor becomes comparable with its charge rate.
The timer imposes a voltage drop that is greater than the drop created by a
transistor or a diode. The difference between supply voltage and output
voltage will be 1V or more.
The output is rated to source or sink 200mA, but an output current above
100mA will pull down the voltage and can affect the timing accuracy.

Caution: Not All Timers Are Equal
Everything I have said so far applies to the old original “TTL” version of the 555
timer. TTL is an acronym for transistor–transistor logic, which preceded modern
CMOS chips that use much less power. The TTL version of the timer is also
referred to as the bipolar version, as it contains bipolar transistors.
The advantage of the original 555 is that it is cheap and robust. You can’t
damage it easily, and its output is powerful enough to connect directly with a
relay coil or a small loudspeaker. However, the 555 is not efficient, and tends to
generate voltage spikes that sometimes interfere with the operation of other
chips.
To address these disadvantages, a newer version of the 555 timer was developed
using CMOS transistors, which draw less power. This chip also doesn’t create
voltage spikes. But its output is more limited. How much more? That depends on
the particular manufacturer.
Unfortunately, there is a lack of standardization among CMOS versions of the
555 timer. Some claim to deliver 100mA while others are limited to 10mA.

Confusingly, the CMOS versions have a variety of part numbers. The 7555 is
clearly identified as a CMOS chip, but others merely precede the 555 number
with a different group of letters, and it’s up to you to notice, and to understand
what they mean.
In this book, to avoid confusion and keep things simple, I am only using the TTL
version of the 555 timer, also known as the bipolar version. If you are buying
your own, see “Other Components” and go down to the subhead “Components
for Chapter Four” where you will find timer buying advice.

Experiment 17: Set Your Tone
Now that you’re familiar with the 555 timer in monostable mode and bistable
mode, I want you to get acquainted with it in astable mode—so called because
the output fluctuates constantly between high and low, and does not remain
stable in either of those states.
This resembles the output of the transistor oscillator that you built in Experiment
11, except that it is much more versatile and easier to control, and instead of
requiring two transistors, four resistors, and two capacitors to create the
oscillation, you only need one chip, two resistors, and one capacitor.

What You Will Need
Breadboard, hookup wire, wire cutters, wire strippers, multimeter
9-volt power supply (battery or AC adapter)
555 timer chips (4)
Miniature loudspeaker (1)
Resistors: 47 ohms (1), 470 ohms (4), 1K (2), 10K (12), 100K (1)
Capacitors: 0.01µF (8), 0.022µF (1), 0.1µF (1), 1µF (3), 3.3µF (1), 10µF (4),
100µF (2)
1N4148 diode (1)
Trimmer potentiometer, 100K (1)
Tactile switch (1)

Generic LEDs (4)

Astable Test
A generic astable circuit is shown in Figure 4-22. I’ve put a loudspeaker on the
output, because the timer will be running at an audio frequency. The loudspeaker
is driven through a resistor, to limit the current, and a coupling capacitor, which
passes audio frequencies while blocking DC. You’ll see the values for these
components in the next schematic. Right now I just want you to see the general
layout.

Figure 4-22. A basic, generic circuit that runs a 555 timer in astable mode.

The components labeled R1, R2, and C1 control the speed of the timer. These
labels are always used in manufacturers’ datasheets and other sources, so I’m
following the same convention.
C1 does the same thing as the timing capacitor in the monostable circuit in
Figure 4-11. The need for two resistors, instead of one, will be explained below.
See if you can get a sense of how this circuit may work, using the knowledge
that you gained in Experiment 16. The first thing you may notice is that there’s

no input. Pin 2 (the trigger pin) is connected back to pin 6 (the threshold pin).
Can you see how that’s going to work? C1 will accumulate a charge, as it did
when the timer was in monostable mode, until it reaches 2/3 of the power supply,
at which point it will discharge through R2 into pin 7, and its voltage will drop.
Its connection with pin 2 will mean that the trigger pin senses the drop in voltage
on C1. And what does the trigger pin do when the voltage on it drops suddenly?
It triggers the timer. So, in this configuration, the timer will retrigger itself.
How fast will that happen? I think you should build a test version of the circuit
to find out. In Figure 4-23 I have suggested values for the components and have
redrawn the schematic to include a trimmer potentiometer, so that you’ll see (or,
rather, hear) the effect of varying this resistance. The trimmer, plus the 10K
resistor that precedes it, add up to R2. The timing capacitor, C1, is 0.022µF, and
R1 is 10K.
Figure 4-24 shows the breadboard layout, while Figure 4-25 shows the
component values.

Figure 4-23. This test circuit allows you to adjust the performance of the timer in astable
mode.

Now what happens when you apply power? Immediately, you should hear noise

through the loudspeaker. If you don’t hear anything, you almost certainly made a
wiring error.
Notice that you don’t have to activate the chip with a pushbutton anymore. The
555 timer is triggering itself, as predicted.

Figure 4-24. Breadboard layout for the astable timer test.

Figure 4-25. Component values for the astable timer test.

Rotate the screw on the trimmer potentiometer, and the pitch of the sound varies.
The trimmer adjusts how quickly C1 charges and discharges, and this determines
the length of one “on” cycle relative to the next “off” cycle in the audio signal.
With these component values, the stream varies between approximately 300 and
1,200 pulses each second. These pulses are sent by the timer to the loudspeaker.
They move its cone up and down, creating pressure waves in the air, and your
ear responds to those waves, hearing them as sound.

Theory: Output Frequency
The frequency of a sound is its number of full cycles per second, including the
high-pressure pulse and the low-pressure pulse that follows.

The term hertz is a unit of frequency, meaning the same thing as “cycles per
second.” It was introduced in Europe, named after yet another electrical pioneer,
Heinrich Hertz. The abbreviation for hertz is Hz, so the output of your 555 timer
in its test circuit will range approximately between 300Hz and 1,200Hz.
As in most standard units, a k can be inserted to mean “kilo,” so 1,200Hz is
normally written as 1.2kHz.
How do the values for the timing capacitor and the resistors determine the
frequency of the timer? If R1 and R2 are measured in kilohms, and C1 is
measured in microfarads, the frequency f, in hertz, is given by:
f = 1,440 / ( ( ( 2 × R2 ) + R1 ) × C1 )
Doing this calculation is a hassle, so I have provided you with a lookup table in
Figure 4-26. In this table, I am assuming that the value for the resistor labeled
R1 in the schematic is fixed at 10K. The values across the top of the table are for
R2. The values on the left side of the table are for the timing capacitor, C1.
You may remember than the abbreviation pF means “picofarad,” which is onemillionth of a microfarad. Nanofarads are halfway between microfarads and
picofards, but the term is not used so frequently in the US, so I didn’t use it in
the table.

Figure 4-26. For a 555 timer running in astable mode, values across the top refer to R2 in a
standard circuit, so long as R1 has a fixed value of 10K. Numbers in the table show the
frequency of the timer in Hz (cycles per second).

Theory: Inside the 555 in Astable Mode
To gain a better understanding of what happens when the timer runs in astable
mode, take a look at Figure 4-27. The internal configuration is exactly the same
as in monostable mode, but the external connections are different.

Figure 4-27. Internal view of the 555 timer with external connections running it in astable
mode.

Initially, the flip-flop grounds C1, the timing capacitor, as before. But now the
low voltage on the capacitor is connected from pin 6 to pin 2 through an external
wire. The low voltage tells the chip to trigger itself. The flip-flop obediently flips
to its “on” position and sends a positive pulse to the loudspeaker, while
removing the negative voltage from pin 6.
Now C1 starts charging, as it did when the timer was in monostable mode,
except that it is being charged through R1 + R2 in series. Because C1 has a low
value, it charges quickly. When it reaches two-thirds of full voltage, comparator
B takes action as before, discharging the capacitor and ending the output pulse
from pin 3.

The capacitor discharges through R2 to pin 7, the discharge pin. While the
capacitor is discharging, its voltage diminishes. The voltage is still linked to pin
2. When it drops to one-third of full power or less, comparator A kicks in and
sends another pulse to the flip-flop, starting the process all over again.

Fundamentals: Unequal On-Off Cycles
When the timer is running in astable mode, C1 charges through R1 and R2 in
series. But when C1 discharges, it dumps its voltage into the chip through R2
only. Because the capacitor charges through two resistors but discharges through
only one of them, it charges more slowly than it discharges. While it is charging,
the output on pin 3 is high; while it is discharging, the output on pin 3 is low.
Consequently the “on” cycle is always longer than the “off” cycle. Figure 4-28
shows this as a simple graph.

Figure 4-28. High pulses are always longer than gaps between them in the output from a
555 timer chip, when the chip is wired in the standard way for astable operation.

If you want the on and off cycles to be equal, or if you want to adjust the on and
off cycles independently (for example, because you want to send a very brief
pulse to another chip, followed by a longer gap until the next pulse), all you need
to do is add a diode, as shown in Figure 4-29. (Because a diode deducts some
voltage, this circuit works best with a supply voltage greater than 5VDC.)

Figure 4-29. Adding a diode to bypass R2 allows the high and low output cycles of a timer to
be adjusted independently.

Now when C1 charges, the electricity flows through R1 as before but takes a
shortcut around R2, through the diode. When C1 discharges, the diode blocks the
flow of electricity in that direction, and so the discharge goes back through R2.
R1 now controls the charge time on its own, while R2 controls the discharge
time. The formula for calculating the frequency is now approximately:
Frequency = 1,440 / ( ( R1 + R2 ) × C1 )
where R1 and R2 are in kilohms and C1 is in microfarads. (I use the word
“approximately” because the diode adds a small amount of effective resistance to
the circuit, which is not factored into the formula.)
If you set R1 = R2, you should get almost equal on/off cycles.

Astable Modifications
Instead of using a potentiometer to vary the value of R2, the frequency of the
timer can be changed to a limited extent by using pin 5, the control pin. This is
shown in Figure 4-30.

Figure 4-30. A circuit that demonstrates the function of pin 5, the control pin, on the 555
timer.

Disconnect the capacitor that was attached to that pin and substitute the series of
resistors shown. They ensure that pin 5 always has at least 1K between it and the
positive side or the negative side of the power supply. Connecting it directly to
the power supply won’t damage the timer, but will prevent it from generating
audible tones. As you turn the potentiometer, the frequency will vary. This
happens because you are changing the reference voltage on comparator B inside
the chip.

Chaining Chips
Timer chips can be chained together in four possible ways. Note that these
configurations are workable regardless of whether each timer is running in
monostable or astable mode, except where noted.

If you are using 9V to power a 555 timer, the output from that timer can be
sufficient to power another 555 timer.
The output from one timer can trigger the input of another timer. This only
works if the second timer is running in monostable mode. In astable mode, it
would be self-triggering.
The output from one timer can unlock the reset pin of another timer.
The output from one timer can be connected through a suitable resistor to the
control pin of another timer.
These options are illustrated in Figure 4-31, Figure 4-32, Figure 4-33, and
Figure 4-34.

Figure 4-31. One timer powering another.

Figure 4-32. One timer triggering another.

Figure 4-33. One timer setting or resetting another.

Figure 4-34. One timer controlling the frequency of another.

Why would you want to chain timers together? Well, you might want to have a
couple of them running in monostable mode, so that the end of a high pulse from
the first one triggers the start of a high pulse in the second one, and vice versa. In
fact, you could chain together as many timers as you like, with the last one
feeding back and triggering the first one, and they could flash a series of LEDs
in sequence, like Christmas lights.
Figure 4-35 shows four timers chained in this way. They are linked through
coupling capacitors, because we only want a brief pulse from one to trigger the
next. Without the capacitors, the end of the pulse from the first timer in the chain
would trigger the second timer, but the output from the first timer would remain
in its low state, which would continue triggering the second timer indefinitely.
In addition, each timer must have a 10K pullup resistor on its trigger pin to hold
it normally high.

Figure 4-35. Four timers wired to trigger each other in a recirculating sequence.

An interesting question comes to mind when monostable timers are chained
together. That is: how do they start? I mentioned in Experiment 16 that a 555
timer in monostable mode will usually emit one spontaneous pulse when it is
first powered up. When multiple timers are chained together, they will all try to
do this at about the same time, and because of small manufacturing differences,
the outcome will be unpredictable. Sometimes they will settle down to a nice
orderly sequence, but other times they will end up flashing in pairs.
The way to deal with this is to use the concept of pulse suppression that I
mentioned in Experiment 16 (see “Fundamentals: Pulse Suppression”).
A 1µF capacitor between the reset pin and negative ground will hold the reset
pin in a low state just long enough to suppress the timer’s initial pulse. A 10K
pullup resistor sharing the reset pin will then keep it stable while the timer is
running.
In my experience, this works well, although timers from a different manufacturer
could conceivably behave differently, as the behavior of the reset pin is not well
documented. If you have trouble with pulse suppression, try substituting a larger
or smaller capacitor.
In a chain of timers, the only remaining problem is that pulse suppression works
too well. You apply power, and—nothing happens, because all the timer outputs
have been suppressed.
The way around this is to omit pulse suppression from just one timer. It will
almost certainly emit an initial pulse when it receives power, and that will trigger
the rest in sequence. This setup is illustrated in Figure 4-35.
But—wait a minute. What is this “almost certainly” phrase? Electronic circuits
should always work, all the time, not “almost” all the time.
I agree. But I can’t control the tendency of 555 timers to do unpredictable things
when they are powered up. Therefore I also added a button, at the top of the
circuit, that can be used to start the cascade if it doesn’t start itself.
There is an alternative, which is for the first timer in the chain to run in astable
mode. It sends a series of pulses that ripple down through the others configured

in monostable mode, and the last one does not feed back to the first. In
electronics terms, we say that the first one is the master and the others are the
slaves.
I like this arrangement because it is totally predictable. The trouble is, you have
to adjust the speed of the master timer so that it emits its next pulse exactly when
the last slave in the chain has just finished emitting its pulse. Otherwise, the first
timer will emit another pulse before the last pulse has ended, or there will be a
gap between the last pulse and the next first pulse.
Whether this is important will depend on the application. Flashing lights won’t
be a problem, but if you increase the speed to drive a stepper motor, getting the
timing right will be difficult.

Sounding Like a Siren
The fourth option that I listed for chaining chips, in Figure 4-34, is of special
interest, because it can create a siren sound very like the noise made by a typical
burglar alarm. In fact, this could be used for the audio output in the alarm project
that I left unfinished in Experiment 15.
The circuit is shown in Figure 4-36. Timer 1 is wired in a basic astable circuit,
which you can recognize as being similar to the circuit in Figure 4-22. The
component values are larger, so the timer oscillates more slowly, around 1Hz.
You can compare this circuit with the one that I suggested in Figure 2-120. The
principle is similar.
Timer 2 is also wired in a basic astable circuit, running around 1kHz. The idea is
that the slow fluctuations in voltage from Timer 1 are applied to the control pin
of Timer 2, forcing it to modulate its sound up and down in that annoying way
which we associate with alarm systems.
I encourage you to build this circuit, because you may want to use it in the final
version of the intrusion alarm coming right up in Experiment 18. The breadboard
layout for the siren circuit is in Figure 4-37, and the component values for the
layout are shown in Figure 4-38.
Once you get it running, you may find it interesting to remove and then replace
the 100µF capacitor connected between pin 6 and ground. The capacitor makes
the frequency slide higher and lower instead of switching sharply up and down.

I’m using it in the same way that I used a capacitor to make an LED fade
smoothly in and out in Experiment 11.

Figure 4-36. When one timer runs relatively slowly, modulating another through its control
pin (pin 5), the result is a wavering sound like an alarm siren.

You can modify the sound in other ways. Here are some suggestions:
Vary the 0.1µF timing capacitor to raise or lower the pitch of the basic sound.
Double the value of the 100µF capacitor on pin 6, or divide it by two.
Substitute a 10K potentiometer for the 1K resistor.

Change the value of the 3.3µF capacitor.
Part of the pleasure of building things is to customize them, to make them your
own. Once your siren sound satisfies you, make a note of the component values
for future reference.
Incidentally, you can reduce the chip count (the number of chips) by using a 556
timer instead of two 555 timers. The 556 contains a pair of 555 timers in one
package. Because you still have to make the same number of external
connections (other than the power supply), I haven’t bothered to use this variant.

Figure 4-37. The siren circuit, breadboarded.

Figure 4-38. Component values for the siren circuit.

Experiment 18: Intrusion Alarm (Almost)
Completed
Now that you’ve seen what the 555 timer can do, you can fulfill the remaining
requirements on the intrusion-alarm wish list.

What You Will Need
Breadboard, hookup wire, wire cutters, wire strippers, multimeter
9-volt power supply (battery or AC adapter).

555 timers (2)
DPDT 9VDC relay (1)
Transistors, 2N2222 (2)
LEDs: Red, green, yellow (1 of each)
Slide switch, SPDT, for breadboard (2)
Tactile switch (1)
Capacitors: 0.01µF (1), 10µF (2), 68µF (2)
Resistors: 470 ohms (4), 10K (4), 100K (1), 1M (2)
Diode, 1N4001 (1)
Optional (for audio output):
Components shown in Figure 4-36
Optional (for permanent fabrication of this project):
15-watt soldering iron
Thin solder
Perforated board plated with copper in a breadboard layout
SPDT or DPDT toggle switch (1)
Pushbutton, SPST (1)
Project box, at least 6” × 3” × 2” (1)
Power jack and matching power socket (1 each)
Magnetic sensor switches, in pairs, quantity sufficient for your home
Alarm network wiring, sufficient for your home

Three Steps to a Functional Device
This is a larger and more complicated circuit than anything you have tackled so
far, but it’s relatively easy to build, because you can assemble it in three parts
that you can test individually. Eventually you’ll end up with a breadboard
looking like Figure 4-45, with component values in Figure 4-46. The equivalent
schematic is shown in Figure 4-47. But we’ll begin with just a small timer
circuit.

Step 1
Take a careful look at Figure 4-39. Notice there are no timing components on the
righthand side of the 555 timer. You may conclude that this is a version of the
bistable circuit that I described in Experiment 16 (see Figure 4-20). When the
timer is triggered, its output will go on indefinitely—which seems appropriate
for an alarm system.

Figure 4-39. Schematic equivalent of the bottom section of the breadboard layout.

But there’s more to it than that. This circuit also gives you a one-minute grace
period in which to disable the alarm before it starts to sound, when you enter the
area. (You may remember that this was #9 on the wish list of features that I
compiled in Experiment 15.)
To see how it works, you can assemble the components shown in Figure 4-40.
Their values are shown in Figure 4-46, and you’ll see their placement at the
bottom of the board in Figure 4-45.
The placement is important, because you have to leave room for the additional
sections of the circuit that you’ll be adding. One of those sections will be

switching on the power to this one.
To make sure that you have everything in the right place, the 1M resistor on the
right is on the 29th row in the board, counting down from the top. Also note that
power is being applied near the components, not at the top of the board, and the
positive bus is not being used, yet.
Don’t power up the circuit just yet. Set your meter to measure at least 10VDC
and attach it at the points shown in Figure 4-40, with the negative probe on the
negative bus and the positive probe at the left end of the 1M resistor.

Figure 4-40. Placement of components at the bottom of the breadboard for testing.

Now apply power to the circuit, and you should see your meter slowly counting

down from 9V. When it gets to one-third of the supply voltage, this triggers the
555 timer, and the red LED comes on. The LED is included for testing purposes;
in the final version, you would substitute a noisemaking circuit.
The large 68µF capacitor delays the response of the timer. When you first apply
power to the circuit, the capacitor passes the initial pulse to the point between it
and the 1M resistor. The green wire runs from this point to the trigger pin of the
timer. So, the pin starts off high, and you’ll remember (I hope) that the timer
does nothing until the trigger pin goes low.
Voltage on the righthand side of the capacitor leaks out very slowly through the
1M resistor. Eventually, it goes low enough to trigger the timer.
As for the rest of the circuit, in Experiments 16 and 17 I explained how to do
“pulse suppression” to stop the timer from emitting a pulse when it is first
powered up. This is why I have a 10µF capacitor and a 10K resistor applied to
pin 4, the reset pin. I’m using a 10µF capacitor this time, instead of a 1µF
capacitor, because this circuit reacts a bit more slowly than the one in
Experiment 17.
You can use a 555 timer with these components any time you want to delay
the timer output in response to a trigger pulse.
Use a larger or smaller value for the 68µF capacitor if you want to make the
delay longer or shorter.
So far, so good. This part of the circuit will introduce a delay when it is powered
up, and after the delay, it will activate the alarm for an indefinite period.

Step 2
Figure 4-41 and Figure 4-42 show the next step in building the circuit. The
components that you placed previously are still there, but they have been grayed
out to focus your attention on the new additions.
Don’t forget to install S2, the slide switch at the bottom, and the 470-ohm
resistor beside it, and the two long yellow wires. This slide switch is included for
testing purposes. It represents the alarm sensors that you would use in an actual
application.
The relay has the same function as in Experiment 15. In fact if you trace the

connections in the circuit, you’ll find that it works the same way as the one in
Figure 3-88, with a couple of minor revisions. The only differences are that a
470-ohm resistor has been substituted for a 1K resistor, and I have added switch
S1 at the top, with a green LED. Why? I’ll get to that in a moment.
Place all the components carefully. Don’t overlook the three red wires on the left
and the three blue wires on the right. Make sure the pins of the relay are aligned
with the wires that serve them.
Double-check that S1 is in the down position, and S2 is in the up position. For
testing purposes, remove the 68µF capacitor so that the red LED will respond
right away instead of waiting for a minute.
Attach power—and if you made all the connections correctly, nothing should
happen. Switch S2 represents the alarm sensors, and in its up position, it
simulates them being closed. Slide it down to simulate a sensor being opened,
and the test LED at the bottom of the circuit should light up immediately. Slide
the switch up, and the LED stays on. The circuit has locked the alarm on,
regardless of a sensor being reset.

Figure 4-41. The second step in building this circuit incorporates the relay configuration
that was used in Experiment 15.

Figure 4-42. Schematic equivalent of the breadboarded second stage in the circuit.

Disconnect the power, keep S2 in its up position (simulating the sensors being
closed), and reapply the power. Now move S1, at the top, to its up position, and
the green LED comes on. This is a circuit-testing feature. It checks that all the
sensors are closed. When you use the alarm, you will want to conduct this test
before you leave the area. This satisfies the first part of item #7 in the wish list
from Experiment 15.
Keep S1 in its up position while you move S2 to its down position, to simulate
an open sensor. The green LED goes out. Move S2 to its up position, and the
green LED comes back on. So, the testing procedure works.
Here’s how you would actually use this circuit. You leave S1 in the up (test)
position. When you are ready to leave the area, you apply power to the circuit. If
the green LED doesn’t come on, there is a door or window open somewhere.
Find the source of the problem, and correct it. When the green LED is on, you
know that all the sensors are closed. Now you can arm the alarm. Move S1
down. The green LED goes out, and the alarm is now armed. When you come
home, the 555 timer gives you one minute to disable the alarm, to prevent it
from going off (so long as you have replaced the 68µF capacitor in the circuit).
You can disable the alarm by moving S1 to its up (test) position.
Now, how and why does the circuit work?
The 10K resistor at top-left connects with the base of transistor Q1 through
switch S1, when the switch is in its down position. Meanwhile, the righthand
pole contact inside the relay is connected to negative ground. This connection
runs through the yellow wire on the right, through a 470-ohm resistor, through
switch S2 (which simulates the sensors), and back up through the other long
yellow wire. It holds the base of the resistor at a low voltage (through the orange
wire). So long as the base is low, the transistor doesn’t conduct.
If a sensor opens, the base of the transistor isn’t held low anymore, and the 10K
resistor pulls it up so that the transistor starts to conduct. It triggers the relay,
through the long curving orange wire. The relay will supply power to the
bistable timer, which will eventually activate the alarm. At the same time, the
relay breaks the negative-ground connection on the right, so now the transistor is
going to continue conducting even if the sensor is closed again.
This is exactly the same circuit concept that I ended up with in Figure 3-88. The
significant difference is the green LED. When you move S1 to its “test” position,

it cuts off positive power to the transistor (so that the transistor cannot start the
alarm). If all the sensors are closed, the LED connects through them, and the
470-ohm resistor, to negative ground, and it lights up to tell you that the system
is ready.

Step 3
What else could we need in this project? Well, imagine you are using the alarm
system. You want to set it before leaving the area. At this point, you suddenly
realize that if you set it, and then open a door to leave, you will trigger the alarm.
The bistable timer with its 68µF capacitor added a feature to suppress the alarm
for a minute, to give you time to turn it off when you arrive. Now we need
another timer to suppress the alarm for a minute when you leave.
This is a little more difficult to arrange. The key is to have the extra timer pull
down the voltage on transistor Q1, so that it can’t trigger the relay.
The problem is, a timer output goes high, not low, during its “on” cycle. I’ll have
to add another transistor to convert the high output so that it pulls down the
voltage on the base of transistor Q1.
Figure 4-43 and Figure 4-44 show the components that will make it happen.
Once again I have grayed out the components that you placed previously.

Figure 4-43. Third and final step in building the alarm circuit.

Figure 4-44. The schematic version of the third step in building the circuit.

The new 555 timer, labeled T1, has a pulse-suppression circuit on pin 4, its reset
pin, like the other timer, so that it won’t emit a pulse when you power up the
circuit. You press the button to start T1. The button works by grounding the
trigger pin of the timer.
While the output of the timer is high, the current flows out of pin 3 (the output
pin) and lights up the yellow LED. This tells you that the alarm system is
counting down to being armed. So long as you see the LED, the alarm will
ignore any activity that opens a sensor switch.
Pin 3 also connects through a green wire, on the left, which is like an elongated
letter C. This curls around to a 100K resistor, which is attached to the base of
Q2, a second transistor. The output from the timer, through the 100K resistor, is

enough to make Q2 conduct. Its emitter is grounded through a 470-ohm resistor,
while its collector is attached to the base of Q1. So long as Q2 is conducting, it
grounds the base of Q1, and prevents Q1 from triggering the relay and starting
the alarm.
In this way, timer T1 stops the alarm from going off. When the one-minute grace
period ends, T1 stops conducting, doesn’t pull down the voltage on the first
transistor anymore, and the alarm can go off—provided you remembered to
move the switch at the top out of “test” mode, of course.
You would now use the circuit like this.
1. First put switch S1 into its “test” position and close all the doors and
windows until the green LED comes on.
2. Move S1 into its lower position, so that the alarm is ready.
3. Press the button, and leave, closing the door behind you, while the yellow
LED is on.
Does your version do what it is supposed to do? It should, so long as you wired
it carefully. Timer T1 should light the yellow LED under any circumstances,
making it easy to test. You can also touch your meter probe on the base of Q1, to
verify whether the voltage is relatively high or low. So long as the voltage is
relatively low, the alarm will not be triggered. When the voltage goes high, the
alarm is triggered.
Don’t forget to replace the 68µF capacitor in the circuit, just below the relay, to
reactivate the delay timer, when your alarm is ready for prime time.
The complete breadboarded circuit is shown in Figure 4-45, the component
values are in Figure 4-46, and the schematic is in Figure 4-47.

Figure 4-45. Breadboard layout for the complete alarm circuit.

Figure 4-46. Component values in the breadboard layout.

Figure 4-47. Schematic equivalent of the breadboarded alarm circuit.

What About the Noise?
When you want the alarm to make noise, you’ll need to substitute an audio
circuit or device for the red LED that you have been using for testing purposes.
The easy way to do this is to use an off-the-shelf item. Hundreds of sirens are
available cheaply, ready to make an annoying sound if you simply apply power.
Many of them require 12VDC, but they deliver almost as much noise at 9VDC.
Just remember that timer T2 cannot deliver much more than 150mA.
If you prefer to have a sound that’s all your own, you can use the circuit that I
showed in Figure 4-36. Just use the output from your relay to power this circuit,
and you have your own sound.

What About On and Off?
You’ve been testing the circuit by applying and removing power. You can add an
on-off switch, but a numeric code to switch off the alarm would be more
desirable.
Right now, I can’t show you how to implement that, because it requires logic
chips that I have not dealt with yet. But Experiment 21 will show you how it can
be done.

Finalizing
Meanwhile, since the alarm circuit does actually work in its current form, I want
to talk about finalizing it. By this I mean soldering it to a board, mounting the
board in a box, and making everything look nice. My main concern in this book
is electronics, but still, finalizing a project is an important part of the making
experience, so I’ll give you some suggestions.
Soldering the circuit can be easier than the procedure in Experiment 14, where I
explained point-to-point wiring. You can mount the components on the type of
perforated board that has copper traces on the back, in a configuration identical
to the connectors inside a breadboard. Simply move each component to its
comparable position, and solder it to the copper conductor underneath. No wire-

to-wire soldering is necessary.
Guidance for finding and buying this kind of board is in “Supplies” near the end
of the book.
Now, how to proceed:
Carefully note the position of a component on your breadboard, then move it to
the same relative position on the perforated board, poking its wires through the
little holes.
Turn the perforated board upside down, make sure that it’s stable, and examine
the hole where the wire is poking through, as shown in Figure 4-48, which
shows the underside of the board (the component is on the other side). A copper
trace surrounds this hole and links it with others. Your task is to melt solder so
that it sticks to the copper and also to the wire, forming a solid, reliable
connection between the two of them.

Figure 4-48. The underside of perforated board, with a wire sticking through.

Clamp the perforated board or rest it on a surface where it won’t skid around
easily. Take your low-wattage soldering iron in one hand and some solder in
your other hand. Hold the tip of the iron against the wire and the copper, and
feed some thin solder to their intersection. After two to four seconds, the solder
should start flowing.
Allow enough solder to form a rounded bump sealing the wire and the copper, as
shown in Figure 4-49. Wait for the solder to harden thoroughly, and then grab
the wire with pointed-nosed pliers and wiggle it to make sure you have a strong
connection. If all is well, snip the protruding wire with your cutters. See
Figure 4-50.

Figure 4-49. Ideally, your solder joint should look something like this.

Figure 4-50. After the solder has cooled and hardened, you snip off the projecting wire.

Because solder joints are difficult to photograph, I’m using drawings to show the
wire before and after making a reasonably good joint. The solder is shown in
pure white, outlined with a black line.
The process of actually soldering components into perforated board is illustrated
in Figure 4-51 and Figure 4-52.

Figure 4-51. This photograph was taken during the process of transferring components from
breadboard to perforated board. Two or three components at a time are inserted from the
other side of the board, and their leads are bent over to prevent them from falling out.

Figure 4-52. After soldering, the leads are snipped short and the joints are inspected under a
magnifying glass. Another two or three components can now be inserted, and the process
can be repeated.

Most Common Perfboarding Errors
1. Too much solder. Before you know it, solder creeps across the board, touches
the next copper trace, and sticks to it, as depicted in Figure 4-53. When this
happens, you can either try to suck it up with a desoldering kit, or carve it away
with a knife. Personally I prefer to use a knife, because if you suck it up with a
rubber bulb or solder wick, some of it will tend to remain.

Figure 4-53. If you use too much solder, it will tend to end up in places where you don’t want
it.

Even a microscopic trace of solder is enough to create a short circuit. Check the
wiring with a magnifying glass while turning the perforated board so that the
light strikes it from different angles.
2. Not enough solder. If the joint is thin, the wire can break free from the solder
as it cools. Even a microscopic crack is sufficient to stop the circuit from

working. In extreme cases, the solder sticks to the wire, and sticks to the copper
trace around the wire, yet doesn’t make a solid bridge connecting the two,
leaving the wire encircled by solder yet untouched by it, as shown in Figure 454. You may find this undetectable unless you observe it with magnification.

Figure 4-54. Too little solder (or insufficient heat) can allow a soldered wire to remain
separate from the soldered copper on the perforated board. Even a hair-thin gap is sufficient
to prevent an electrical connection.

You can add more solder to any joint that may have insufficient solder, but be
sure to reheat the joint thoroughly.
3. Components incorrectly placed. It’s very easy to put a component one hole
away from the position where it should be. It’s also easy to forget to make a
connection.
I suggest that you print a copy of the schematic, and each time you make a
connection on the perforated board, you eliminate that wire on your hardcopy,

using a highlighter.
4. Debris. When you’re trimming wires, the little fragments that you cut don’t
disappear. They start to clutter your work area, and one of them can easily get
trapped under your perforated board, creating an electrical connection where you
don’t want it.
Clean the underside of your board with an old toothbrush before you apply
power to it. Dip the toothbrush in rubbing alcohol to remove flux residues. Keep
your work area as neat as possible. The more meticulous you are, the fewer
problems you’ll have later.
Once again, be sure to check every joint with a magnifying glass.

Fundamentals: Perforated Board Fault Tracing
If the circuit that worked on your breadboard doesn’t work after you solder it to
perforated board, your fault tracing procedure is a little different from that which
I outlined previously.
First look at component placement, because this is the easiest thing to verify.
If all the components are placed correctly, flex the board gently while applying
power. If you now get an intermittent response from the circuit, you can be
virtually certain that solder didn’t stick where it was supposed to stick, or a joint
has a tiny crack in it.
Anchor the black lead of your meter to the negative side of the power supply,
then switch on the power and go through the circuit point by point, from top to
bottom, checking the voltage at each point with the red lead of the meter while
you continue to flex the board. In most circuits, almost every part should show at
least some voltage. If there is a dead zone, or if your meter responds
intermittently, you can zero in on a joint that has something wrong with it, even
though it looks good superficially.
A bright desk lamp and a magnifier are indispensable for this procedure. A gap
of 1/1,000” or less is quite sufficient to stop your circuit from working. But
you’ll have difficulty detecting it without magnification, and even then,
sometimes the light has to be exactly right.
Dirt, water, or grease can prevent solder from sticking properly to wires or

copper traces. This is just another reason to be as meticulous as possible in your
work habits.

The Project Box
The easiest way to enclose your perforated board is to put it in a project box. (I
mentioned this item in the list of components and supplies at the beginning of
Chapter 3). Hundreds of variants are available. Aluminum boxes look cool and
professional, but you have to protect the circuit board from short-circuiting itself
on the inside of the box. Plastic boxes are easier, and cheaper, too.
To make everything look professional, you should not just start drilling holes
arbitrarily for your switches and LEDs. You should draw a layout on paper (or
use a drawing program, and then print the image on paper). Just make sure
there’s room for the components to fit together, and try to place them similarly to
the schematic, to minimize the risk of confusion.
Tape your sketch to the inside of the top panel, as shown in Figure 4-55, and
then use a sharp, pointed tool (such as an awl or a needle) to press through and
mark the plastic at the center of each hole. The indentations will help to center
your bit when you drill the holes.

Figure 4-55. A printed layout for the switches, LEDs, and other components has been taped

to the underside of the lid of the project box. An awl is pressed through the paper to mark the
center of each hole to be drilled in the lid.

If you’re using an audio circuit driving a loudspeaker (instead of a ready-made
siren) you’ll need to make multiple holes to vent the sound from the loudspeaker,
which will be beneath the top panel of the box. The panel that I made is shown
in Figure 4-56.

Figure 4-56. The exterior of the panel after drilling. A small handheld cordless drill can
create a neat result if the holes were marked carefully.

I placed all the switches and LEDs on the top panel. The power input jack is
positioned at one end of the box. Naturally, each hole has to be sized to fit its
component, and if you have calipers, they’ll be very useful for taking
measurements and selecting the right drill bit. Otherwise, make your best guess,
too small being better than too large. A deburring tool is ideal for slightly
enlarging a hole so that a component fits snugly. This may be necessary if you
drill 3/16-inch holes for your 5-inch mm LEDs. Fractionally enlarge each hole,
and the LEDs should push in very snugly.
If your loudspeaker lacks mounting holes, you’ll have to glue it in place. I used
five-minute epoxy to do this. Be careful not to use too much. You don’t want any
of the glue to touch the speaker cone.
Drilling large holes in the thin, soft plastic of a project box can be a problem.

The drill bit tends to dig in and create a mess. You can approach this problem in
one of three ways:
Use a Forstner drill bit if you have one. It creates a very clean hole. A hole
saw can also be used.
Drill a series of holes of increasing size.
Drill a smaller hole than you need, and enlarge it with a deburring tool.
Regardless of which approach you use, you’ll need to clamp or hold the top
panel of the project box with its outside surface face-down on a piece of scrap
wood. Then drill from the inside, so that your bit will pass through the plastic
and into the wood.
Finally, mount the components in the panel, as shown in Figure 4-57, and turn
your attention to the underneath part of the box.

Soldering the Switches
Your first step is to decide which way up the switch should be. Use your meter to
find out which terminals are connected when the switch is flipped. You’ll
probably want the switch to be on when the toggle is flipped upward. The
underside of my control panel is shown in Figure 4-57. I used a DPDT switch
because I just happened to have one. You only need a SPST switch for the
project.

Figure 4-57. Components have been added to the control panel of the project box (seen from
the underside). The loudspeaker has been glued in place. Spare glue was dabbed onto the
LEDs, just in case.

Remember, the center terminal of any double-throw switch is almost always the
pole of the switch.
Stranded wire is appropriate to connect the circuit board with the components in
the top panel, because the strands flex easily and impose less stress on solder
joints. Twisting each pair of wires together helps to minimize the mess.
When you connect wires or components with the lugs on the switches, your

pencil-style soldering iron may not deliver enough heat to make good joints. You
can use your higher-powered soldering iron in these locations, but you
absolutely must apply a good heat sink to protect the LEDs when you attach
them, and don’t allow the iron to remain in contact with anything for more than
10 seconds. It will quickly melt insulation, and may even damage the internal
parts of the switches.
In projects that are more complex than this one, it would be good practice to link
the top panel with the circuit board more neatly. Multicolored ribbon cable is
ideal for this purpose, with plug-and-socket connectors that attach to the board.
For this introductory project, I didn’t bother. The wires just straggle around, as
shown in Figure 4-58.

Figure 4-58. Twisted wire pairs have been connected on a point-to-point basis, without much
concern over neatness, as this is a relatively small project.

Fixing the Board
The circuit board will sit on the bottom of the box, held in place with four #4size machine screws (bolts) with washers and nylon-insert locknuts. I prefer
using nuts and bolts, rather than glue, in case I ever need to remove the circuit to
make a repair. You need to use locknuts to eliminate the risk of a nut working
loose and falling among components, where it can cause a short circuit.
You’ll have to cut the perforated board to fit, taking care not to damage any of
the components on it. I use a band saw for cutting, but a hacksaw will work.
Remember that perforated board often contains glass fibers that can blunt a
wood saw.
Check the underside the board for loose fragments of copper traces after you
finish cutting.
Drill bolt holes in the board, taking care again not to damage any components.
Then mark through the holes to the plastic bottom of the box, and drill the box.
Countersink the holes (i.e., bevel the edges of a hole so that a flat-headed screw
will fit into it flush with the surrounding surface), push the little bolts up from
underneath, and install the circuit board. Because you’re using locknuts, which
will not loosen, there’s no need to make them especially tight. Indeed, excessive
tightness must be avoided.
After mounting the board, test the circuit again, just in case.

Caution: Avoid Board Stress
Be extremely careful not to attach the circuit board too tightly to the project box.
This can impose bending stresses, which may break a joint or a copper trace on
the board.

Final Test
When you’ve completed the circuit, if you don’t have your network of magnetic
sensor switches set up yet, you can just use a piece of wire instead. I used a pair

of binding posts on my box, just for convenience. You can equally well run a
pair of wires from the circuit board out through a small hole in the lid of the box.
If everything works the way it should, it’s time to screw the top of the box in
place, pushing the wires inside. Because you’re using a large box, you should
have no risk of metal parts touching each other accidentally, but still, proceed
carefully. My finished product is shown in Figure 4-59.

Figure 4-59. The completed alarm box.

Alarm Installation
If you are going to complete this project with magnetic sensor switches, you
should test each one by moving the magnetic module near the switch module
and then away from it, while you use your meter to test continuity between the
switch terminals. The switch should close when it’s next to the magnet, and open
when the magnet is removed.
Now draw a sketch of how you’ll wire your switches together. Always
remember that they have to be in series, not in parallel! Figure 4-60 shows the
concept in theory. The two terminals are the binding posts on top of your control
box (which is shown in green), and the dark red rectangles are the magnetic
sensor switches on windows and doors. Because the wire for this kind of
installation usually has two conductors, you can lay it as I’ve indicated but cut
and solder it to create branches. The solder joints are shown as orange dots. Note
how current flows through all the switches in series before it gets back to the
control box.

Figure 4-60. Dual-conductor, white insulated wire can be used to connect the terminals on
the alarm control box with magnetic sensors (shown in dark red). Because the sensors must
be in series, the wire is cut and joined at positions marked with orange dots.

Figure 4-61 shows the same network as you might actually install it in a situation
where you have two windows and a door. The blue rectangles are the magnetic

modules that activate the switch modules.
You’ll need a large quantity of wire, obviously. The type of white, stranded wire
that is sold for doorbells or furnace thermostats is good. Typically, it is 20-gauge
or larger.
After you install all the switches, clip your meter leads to the wires that would
normally attach to the alarm box. Set your meter to test continuity, and open
each window or door, one at a time, to check whether you’re breaking the
continuity. If everything is OK, attach the alarm wires to the binding posts on
your project box.
Now deal with the power supply. Use your AC adapter, with its output set to 9
volts, hooked up to your DC power plug, or attach the power plug to a 9-volt
battery. The circuit will run off a 12-volt alarm battery too, but you will have to
substitute a 12-volt relay for the one that I specified.

Figure 4-61. In an installation involving two windows and a door, the magnetic components
of the sensors (blue rectangles) could be placed as shown, while the switches (dark red) are
located alongside them.

The only remaining task is to label the switch, button, power socket, and binding
posts on the alarm box. You know that the switch puts the alarm in and out of
continuity testing mode, and the button gives you a minute to leave before the
system alarms itself, but no one else knows, and you might want to allow a guest
to use your alarm while you’re away. For that matter, months or years from now,
you may forget some details yourself.

Conclusion

The alarm project has taken you through the basic steps that you will usually
follow any time you develop something:
Make a wish list.
Decide which types of components are appropriate.
Draw a schematic and make sure that you understand it.
Modify it to fit the pattern of conductors on a breadboard.
Install components on the breadboard and test the basic functions.
Modify or enhance the circuit, and retest.
Transfer to perforated board, test, and trace faults if necessary.
Add switches, buttons, a power jack, and plugs or sockets to connect the
circuit with the outside world.
Mount everything in a box (and add labeling).

Experiment 19: Reflex Tester
Because the 555 timer can run at thousands of cycles per second, you can use it
to measure human reflexes. You can compete with friends to see who has the
fastest response—and note how your response changes depending on your
mood, the time of day, or how much sleep you got last night.
This circuit is not conceptually difficult, but requires quite a lot of wiring, and
will only just fit on a breadboard that has 60 rows of holes (or more). Still, it can
be tested in sections, like the circuit in Experiment 18. If you avoid making
errors, the whole project can be assembled in a couple of hours.

What You Will Need
Breadboard, hookup wire, wire cutters, wire strippers, multimeter
9-volt power supply (battery or AC adapter)
4026B chips (3)
555 timers (3)
Resistors: 470 ohms (2), 680 ohms (3), 10K (6), 47K (1), 100K (1), 330K (1)

Capacitors: 0.01µF (2), 0.047µF (1), 0.1µF (1), 3.3µF (1), 22µF (1), 100µF
(1)
Tactile switches (3)
Generic LEDs: one red, one yellow
Trimmer potentiometer, 20K or 25K (1)
Single-digit numeric LED displays, height 0.56”, low-current red preferred,
able to function at 2V forward voltage and 5mA forward current (3) (Avago
HDSP-513A preferred, or Lite-On LTS-546AWC, or Kingbright SC56–
11EWA, or similar)

Caution: Protecting Chips from Static
The 555 timer is not easily damaged, but in this experiment you will also be
using a CMOS chip (the 4026B counter), which is more vulnerable to static
electricity.
Whether you are likely to zap a chip by handling it depends on factors such as
the humidity in your location, the type of shoes you wear, and the type of floor
covering in your work area. Some people seem to accumulate a charge of static
more easily than others, and I don’t have an explanation for this. Personally, I
have never damaged a chip with static, but I know people who have.
If static is a risk for you, you’ll probably know about it, because you’ll suffer
from sudden little jolts when you reach for a metal door handle or a steel faucet.
If you really feel you need to protect chips from this kind of discharge, the most
thorough precaution is to ground yourself. The best way to do this is by using an
anti-static wrist strap. The conductive strap is secured to your wrist with velcro
and connects through a high-value resistor (typically 1M) to an alligator clip that
can be attached to any large metal object.
When you receive chips via mail order, they are usually shipped in channels of
conductive plastic, or with their legs embedded in conductive foam. The plastic
or the foam protects the chips by insuring that all the pins have an approximately
equal electrical potential. If you want to repackage your chips, but you don’t
have any conductive foam, you can poke their legs through aluminum foil.

Caution: Be Careful When Grounded
The resistor built into an anti-static wrist strap protects you from electrocuting
yourself if you happen to touch a source of relatively high voltage with your
other hand. This is an important feature, as an electric shock that travels from
one hand to the other will pass through your chest and can stop the heart.
If you use just a plain piece of wire to ground yourself, you lose this protection.
The small cost of a proper wrist strap is a sensible investment.
Now, back to the experiment.

A Quick Demo
In the previous edition of this book I suggested using a single three-digit display
for this project. In this edition, I have switched to three individual digits. The
cost is fractionally higher, but the wiring is much simpler, and the project can be
built more easily. Also, I believe there is a better chance of single LED digits
remaining available for many years to come.
I am specifying digits that are 0.56” high because this is an industry standard,
with pinouts that are also standardized. If you use a smaller size, the pinouts will
be different. If you use a larger size, they won’t fit with the other components on
the breadboard.
Let’s begin by getting acquainted with one of the numerals, and the 4026B chip
that will be driving it.
The first module of this circuit is shown in Figure 4-62. (If you feel that a
schematic is easier to understand, see Figure 4-63, which shows the same
components.)

Figure 4-62. The first module of the reflex tester demonstrates how a timer can run a
counter chip that powers a single-digit LED display.

Figure 4-63. The first module shown in schematic form.

In addition, component values are shown in Figure 4-64.
You’re going to be adding a lot more components to the board (in fact, it will be
packed full by the time you’re finished), so you need to position everything
exactly as I have shown it in the figure. Count the rows of holes carefully! You’ll
see some wires that don’t make sense right now (all those red pieces—what are
they for?) but they will enable you to add and activate a couple more 555 timers
as you proceed.

Figure 4-64. Component values for the first module of the circuit.

Apply power from a 9-volt battery or AC adapter, and you should see the
numeric display counting repeatedly from 0 through 9.

If you don’t see any numerals at all, set your meter to measure DC volts, clip the
black probe to the negative side of the power supply, and use the red probe to
test for voltages at key locations in the circuit, such as the power input pins of
the chips. If the voltages look okay, make sure the resistor at bottom-right is 680
ohms (not 68K or 680K, which are colored similarly).
If the display shows fragments of numerals, or numerals that are not counting
sequentially, you made an error in the green wires connecting with the 4026B
chip.
If the display shows a 0 that does not change, you wired the 555 timer wrongly,
or failed to connect the timer with the 4026B chip correctly.
Once you have the numbers counting upward, hold down the tactile switch, and
notice that it forces the counter back to 0. As soon as you let go of the tactile
switch, the numbers start counting again.
We have the basis for a reflex tester right here. We just need to add a couple
more digits, increase the counting speed, and make some more refinements.
First, however, I’ll explain what’s going on.

Fundamentals: LED Displays
The term “LED” is slightly confusing. The type of component that you have
used in previous experiments is properly known as a standard LED, a throughhole LED, or an LED indicator: a little rounded component with two long leads
sticking out of the base. These became so common, people started calling them
simply “LEDs.” But LEDs are used in other components, too, such as the
glowing numeral currently plugged into your breadboard. It is properly known as
an LED display. More precisely, it is a seven-segment single-digit LED display.
In Figure 4-65 the dimensions of the display are shown, along with the pin
positions that are hidden underneath it. The important things to notice are that
the numeral does consist of seven segments, plus a decimal point; and the pin
spacings are all measured in multiples of 0.1”, which is helpful for your
breadboard.

Figure 4-65. Dimensions and pin locations of a standard 0.56” seven-segment LED display.

Now take a look at Figure 4-66. This shows you the internal connections
between the pins and the segments of the digit. Notice that pins 3 and 8 have
blue centers, indicating that they should be connected with negative ground. All
the other pins are designed to receive positive power to activate the LED
segments. This is called a common cathode type of LED, because the negative
sides of the internal diodes (the cathodes) are all tied together.

Figure 4-66. The scheme that is used for pin numbering, and the internal connections that
are hidden inside the component.

In a common anode display, the situation is reversed, and you activate the
segments by applying negative power to each one, while they all share a positive
internal connection. You can choose whichever type of display is convenient in a
circuit, but common cathode displays are more widely used.
Note that the segments are identified with lowercase letters a through g, plus dp
for the decimal point. This system is common on almost all datasheets (although
a few use the letter h for the decimal point).
So far so good, but I have left out a crucial piece of information: like all LEDs,
the segments in the numeral must be protected with series resistors. This is a
hassle, and you may wonder why the manufacturer doesn’t build resistors in.
The answer is that the display must be usable on a wide variety of voltages, and
the values of the resistors will depend on the voltage.
Well—why can’t we use just one resistor that all the segments share, perhaps
between pin 3 and negative ground? Actually we can do that, but the resistor will

be dropping the voltage and restricting the current for different numbers of
segments, depending on which numeral is being displayed. A numeral 1 lights up
only two segments, while a numeral 8 uses all seven of them. Consequently,
some numerals will be brighter than others.
Does this really matter? I’m thinking that for this demo, simplicity may be more
important than perfection. If you look at Figure 4-62 you’ll see that I have, in
fact, put just one 680-ohm resistor at bottom-right, between the LED display and
the negative bus. This is not the correct procedure, but you are going to install
three of the seven-segment displays in this project, and I think you’ll be happy to
use only three series resistors instead of 21.

Fundamentals: The Counter
The 4026B chip is known as a decade counter, because it counts in tens. Most
counters have a coded output, meaning that they output the numbers in binarycoded format (which I will discuss in a later project). This counter doesn’t do
things this way. It has seven output pins, and it powers them in patterns that just
happen to be correct for a seven-segment display. While other counters require a
driver to convert a binary output to the seven-segment patterns, the 4026B gives
you everything in one package.
This is very convenient, except that the 4026B is an old-fashioned CMOS chip
that has limited power. The datasheet advises you to draw less than 5mA from
any one pin when powering the chip with 9 volts.
Ideally you should pass the outputs from the counter through an array of
transistors, to amplify them. You can buy a chip containing seven transistor pairs
for exactly this purpose. It’s called a Darlington array. (What if you want to
display the decimal point? No problem. You can buy a different Darlington array
containing eight transistor pairs.)
I could have used three Darlington-array chips to drive the three LED displays in
this project, but that would have added to the complexity and expense, and I
would have needed two breadboards. Therefore I decided it was acceptable to
use low-current LED displays that can be driven directly by a counter. They’re
not as bright, but they do the job. I chose the 680-ohm resistor because it should
limit the current to less than 5mA from any single pin on the counter chip, and it
imposes a voltage drop of around 2V across the LEDs (which varies depending

how many segments are lit up).
Now I’ll give you some details about the internal workings of the 4026B.
Counter chips always have several useful features built in. Take a look at
Figure 4-67, which shows the pinouts of the chip. The pins with labels such as
“To segment a” are easy to understand. You simply run a wire from each pin to
the appropriate pin on your LED display. If you look at Figure 4-62 you’ll see
each of the green wires connecting the output pins from the counter with the
input pins on the numeral.

Figure 4-67. Pinouts for a 4026B counter chip, which has decoded outputs to drive a sevensegment single-digit LED display.

Pins 8 and 16 of the chip are for negative-ground and positive power,
respectively. Almost all digital chips apply power to opposite corners in this way
(with the exception of the 555 timer—although, really, it is classified as an

analog chip).
Because Figure 4-67 contains information that you may not need and is just
included for future reference, I have also created a simplified view of the counter
and the display in Figure 4-68, ignoring the pins that we won’t be using, and
showing the relationship of output pins with the pins on the display.

Figure 4-68. A simplified view of the chip and the display, in the style that they will be shown
on the breadboard.

Look at pin 15, the reset pin. Now look at Figure 4-62. The pushbutton, more
properly known as a tactile switch, is placed so that it will apply positive voltage
to pin 15 when you press the button. (The voltage makes its way across the

board to the pushbutton via the red segments of wire that I mentioned a moment
ago.)
When you’re not pressing the button, no positive voltage is applied to the reset
pin of the counter. However, a 10K resistor permanently connects pin 15 to the
negative bus on the breadboard. This is a pulldown resistor. It pulls the voltage
on the pin to near zero—until you press the button, at which point the positive
input overwhelms the negative power supplied through the resistor. Remember,
if you don’t apply a defined voltage to each input pin of a digital chip, you will
get random, inexplicable, and confusing results. I’ve mentioned this before, but I
have to emphasize the topic, because it’s such a common cause of errors.
To keep an input pin normally high, connect it to the positive bus through a
10K resistor (at least, for the circuits in this book). When you need to pull it
low, use a switch or other device that overrides the resistor by making a more
direct connection to the negative bus.
To keep an input pin normally low, connect it to the negative bus through a
10K resistor. When you need to push it high, use a switch or other device that
overrides the resistor by making a more direct connection to the positive bus.
All the inputs on a counter chip must have some kind of connection. Never
allow any floating input pins!
Unused output pins should be left unconnected.
One more thing. Sometimes a chip has an input that we won’t need at all. The
4026B, for instance, tells us that pin 3 is a display enable input. I want the
display to be enabled all the time, so I connected pin 3 directly to the positive
bus on a set-it-and-forget-it basis.
If you won’t be using an input pin, it must still have a defined state. You can
deal with it by wiring it directly to the positive or negative side of the power
supply.
Now I’ll run through the remaining features of the 4026B.
The clock input (pin 1) accepts a stream of high and low pulses. The chip doesn’t
care how long the pulses are. It just responds by adding 1 to its count, each time
it senses the input voltage rising from low to high.
The clock disable (pin 2) tells the counter to block the clock input. Like all the

other pins on the chip, this one is active-high, meaning it performs its function
when it has a high state. On your breadboard, I ran in a temporary blue wire and
yellow wire to hold pin 2 low. In other words, I disabled the clock disable pin.
This is confusing, so I will summarize the situation:
When the clock disable pin is in a high state, it stops the counter from
counting.
When the clock disable pin is pulled down to negative ground, it allows the
counter to count.
The display enable (pin 3) I already mentioned.
The display enable out (pin 4) will not be used here. It takes the state of pin 3
and connects it with pin 4 so that you can pass it along to other 4026B timers.
The carry out (pin 5) is essential if you want to count higher than 9. The pin
state shifts from low to high when the counter has reached 9 and goes back to 0.
If you take this output and connect it with the clock input pin of a second 4026B
timer, the second timer will count in tens. You can use its carry output pin to
signal a third timer, which will count in hundreds. I will be using this feature at
the end of this project.
Lastly, Pin 14 can be used to restart the counter after it counts through 0, 1, and
2. This is useful in a digital clock that only counts up to 12 hours, but not
relevant to us here. It is an output pin that we will not use, so it can be left
unconnected.
Perhaps all the features seem confusing, but if you ever find yourself confronted
with a counter chip that you’ve never seen before, you can figure it out (if you
are patient and methodical) by looking up the manufacturer’s datasheet. Then
you can test it with LEDs and tactile switches, to make sure there are no
misunderstandings. In fact, this is how I figured out the 4026B, myself.

Pulse Generation
Because the 555 timer accepts a power supply ranging from 5 to 15 volts, just
like the 4026B, the output from the timer, on pin 3, can be connected directly to
the input of the 4026B. That’s the function of the purple wire in the breadboard
layout. The 555 supplies pulses, and the 4026B counts them.

The rest of the wiring around the 555 timer should look familiar to you by now.
You can see that it’s running in astable mode. Your only question may be why
it’s running so slowly. We’re not going to measure someone’s reflexes at that
speed.
True, but for this demo, I didn’t want the digits to look like a featureless blur.
We’ll crank up the speed a bit later.

Time for a Plan
How should the reflex timer work? Here’s my wish list:
1. I need a start button.
2. After the start button is pressed, there is a delay in which nothing happens.
Suddenly there is a visual prompt, asking the player to respond.
3. Simultaneously, the count starts from 000, in 1/1,000ths of a second.
4. The user has to press a button to stop the counting process.
5. The count freezes, showing how much time elapsed between the prompt
and the stop time. This measures the user’s reflexes.
6. A reset button sets the count back to 000.
You already installed a reset button on the breadboard, which is necessary. But
before that, we need a button that stops the counting process.
The counter’s clock disable pin will freeze the display, but if you want to keep
the display frozen, the pin has to be held in a continuing high state. In other
words, it has to be latched.
Hmmm, that sounds as if we could use another 555 timer, wired in bistable
mode.

A Control System
In Figure 4-69 the bistable timer has been added, with two new buttons. The
diagonal blue wire in Figure 4-62 has been removed (to make room for the new
timer). The other parts that you installed previously are still there, but are shown
in gray.
Figure 4-70 shows the new part of the circuit in schematic form, and values of

the additional parts are shown in Figure 4-71.

Figure 4-69. A bistable 555 timer has been added. Previously wired components are grayed
out.

Figure 4-70. This schematic shows the second timer and its associated components.
Previous components are grayed out.

Figure 4-71. Values of the parts that have been added in this module of the project.

After you build this new section of the circuit, you can try it. You should find
that the two new buttons start and stop the counting process. Do you see how
they work?
Press the start button, and it grounds the reset pin of the bistable timer. The timer
output on pin 3 goes low, and is connected to the clock disable pin on the
counter. Remember, a low state on the disable pin means that the counter is not
disabled. So, the counter starts counting. And it goes on counting, because once
you trigger the bistable timer, its output is latched, and continues indefinitely.
But, you can stop it. Just press the stop button. This grounds the input pin of the
bistable timer, triggering it. Consequently, the output from the timer goes high,
and because the timer is working in bistable mode, the output is latched and
stays high indefinitely. The high output goes to the clock disable pin, which
stops the counter.
When you press the button at lower-right, which you installed initially, it still
resets the timer to 000. But the timer remains latched in its disabled mode until
you restart it with the start button.

The bistable 555 was exactly what we needed to run this circuit.

Progress Report
Let’s see how far we’ve proceeded in satisfying the wish-list. It looks to me as if
we’re almost there. You press a button to start it, press a second button to stop it,
and then once it’s stopped, you press another button to set it to zero.
The only thing missing is the element of surprise. Really the person using it
shouldn’t know when the count will start. The idea is to measure the speed of his
reflexes when he responds.
Why not add yet another timer, in monostable mode, to insert a delay before the
action begins? This way, the start will be unexpected.

The Delay
First remove the start button, and the diagonal piece of blue wire connecting it
with the negative bus. Leave the vertical yellow piece of wire where it is.
Now assemble some additional components as shown in Figure 4-72. The start
button has been relocated to trigger the input of a third timer, which will insert a
preliminary delay. The output from this timer will go high for 5 or 10 seconds,
and then when it goes low it triggers the bistable timer, sending its output low, to
suppress the clock disable feature of the 4026B, so that it starts counting.

Figure 4-72. The upper part of the reflex timer circuit is now complete.

Be careful when installing the red and yellow LEDs. The red one is the opposite
way around from what you might expect, because it is tied in to a positive
source. So, its long, positive lead is at the bottom, not the top.
A schematic version of the new part of the circuit appears in Figure 4-73.

Figure 4-73. Schematic for the new and final addition to the control circuit.

The values of the parts that you added to the breadboard are shown in Figure 474.

Figure 4-74. The values of parts that have been added to the breadboard.

Testing
When you apply power to this circuit, the counter immediately starts counting,
without you asking it to. This is annoying, but easily dealt with. Press the stop
button to stop the count. Press the bottom-right pushbutton to reset the timer to
zero. Now you’re ready for action.
Press the new start button, which creates an initial delay. During this delay, the
yellow LED lights up. The delay lasts for about seven seconds, at which point
the yellow LED goes out and the red LED comes on. Simultaneously, the
counter starts counting—until you press the stop button.
The 100µF capacitor at the top of the breadboard looks like an afterthought, but
is actually quite important. The 555 timer has a bad habit of creating voltage
spikes when it switches its output, and in this circuit, the spikes can trigger the
second timer without waiting for the delay. The 100µF capacitor suppresses this
unfortunate tendency.
We now have all the features installed, except for the need to increase the
counter speed and add a couple more counters and displays for fractions of a
second.

How Does It Work?
Figure 4-75 shows you how the components are communicating with each other.

Figure 4-75. Interaction between the components in the timer control circuit.

I’ll describe this figure from top to bottom. The start button (at the top,

connected with Timer 3) pulls the input of the timer low to trigger it.
The output of Timer 3 goes high for about seven seconds. This creates your
initial delay.
At the end of the delay, the output from Timer 3 drops back down. This
transition passes through a 0.1µF coupling capacitor to Timer 2, which is
bistable. The capacitor allows only a brief pulse to reach the reset pin of Timer 2.
The pulse sends the output of Timer 2 low. This low output goes to the clock
disable pin of the 4026B counter. A low state enables the counter, and the count
begins.
Now we wait for the user to respond. The user presses the stop button for Timer
2, connected with its input on pin 2. The brief low input to Timer 2 sends its
output high, which enables the clock disable pin on the counter, and stops the
count.

Background: Development Issues
This project created a problem. When I built the original circuit several years
ago, it ran fine. When some interns at Make: magazine built the circuit, it ran
fine. Little did we know that the reset pin of a 555 timer behaves slightly
differently on different brands. This is not documented on the datasheet.
After my book had been in print for literally years, I received notification from a
reader that his version of the circuit functioned erratically, and sometimes not at
all. I rebuilt the circuit, connected it with an oscilloscope, and saw that the
coupling capacitor was transmitting a pulse faithfully from Timer 3 to the reset
pin of Timer 2. But, sure enough, Timer 2 sometimes didn’t recognize the pulse.
What was the problem? Either the pulse was too brief, or it didn’t go low
enough. Either way, the solution was to apply a lower pullup voltage to pin 4 of
Timer 2. This is why you see two resistors attached to pin 4. They function as a
voltage divider, applying slightly less than 2V to pin 4. This is enough to keep it
functional, but allows the reset voltage to go down lower to enable the reset.
This now works fine—for me. We’ll test the circuit again before this edition of
the book goes into print. If it doesn’t work for you, try applying a different
voltage to pin 4 of Timer 2, using a substitute for the 47K resistor, either lower
or higher. You can also try a larger coupling capacitor. And let me know.

Obviously I want all the circuits in this book to work properly, every time. But I
can’t foresee all the manufacturing variations that may affect the outcome.

Extra Digits
Adding two more digits is pretty easy, as each will be controlled by its own
4026B counter, and all the counters and digits will be wired in basically the same
way. This is shown in Figure 4-76.

Figure 4-76. The completed reflex timer barely fits on one 60-row breadboard.

Notice the purple wires on the left. Each of them connects the carry output from
one counter to the clock input of the next.
The yellow wires down the right side connect all the reset inputs of the counters
together, so that when you reset one, you reset them all.
In the second and third counters, blue wires have been added to ground pin 2 of
each. Remember, pin 2 is the clock disable pin. We never need to stop the second
and third counters from counting, because they are completely under the control
of the first counter. When it stops, they stop.
Don’t forget to supply positive voltage to pin 16 (the power input pin) of the
second counter and the third counter, by running a red wire across each chip, as
shown.

Calibration
How do you make the circuit run at the right speed?
Begin by substituting a 10K resistor for the 100K resistor on the first timer that
you installed, and replace the 3.3µF capacitor with a 47nF capacitor (0.047µF).
In theory this should create a timer frequency of 1,023Hz, which is very close to
the 1,000Hz that you want.
To fine-tune it, you’ll have to substitute a trimmer potentiometer for one of the
10K resistors on the first timer that you installed. This circuit is so densely
packed, there’s barely enough room, but I figured out a way to squeeze in a
trimmer. This is shown in Figure 4-77, which is a close-up of the immediate area
around the lowest of the three timers.

Figure 4-77. How to squeeze in a trimmer to enable adjustment of your reflex tester.

First move the blue wires up by one row. Snake the vertical red wire around the
righthand side. Extend the lead from the remaining 10K resistor, taking care not
to allow it to touch any other exposed conductors. You can now insert a trimmer,
with its wiper pin making contact with the positive supply and another pin
connecting with pin 7 of the timer. The third trimmer pin plugs into a vacant row
on the breadboard, and can be ignored.
You should use a trimmer rated at 20K or 25K and start with it around the
middle of its range. You now have three options to fine-tune the circuit so that it
runs at 1kHz.
If you happen to have a multimeter with a setting on its dial to measure kHz,
simply ground the black meter probe, touch the red probe to pin 3 of the first
timer that you installed, and turn the trimmer until the meter shows 1kHz. Job
done!
If you don’t have a meter than measures frequency, perhaps you have a digital

guitar tuner. They only cost a few dollars on eBay. Attach a loudspeaker to the
output from the 555 timer (including a 10µF coupling capacitor and a 47-ohm
series resistor), and the tuner should tell you the frequency of the note being
generated by the timer.
If you don’t have a suitable meter or guitar tuner, you can use any watch, clock,
or phone that will display whole seconds. When the timer is running at 1kHz, the
second counter will advance every 1/100th of a second, and the third counter
will advance every 1/10th of a second. The third counter goes through 10 digits
before repeating, which means it will display a zero once each second.
The problem is, each digit is illuminated so briefly, you’ll have a hard time
seeing precisely when the zero comes up. So here’s what you do.
Cover all the segments of the slowest display except the segment at its bottomright corner. This is illuminated all the time except when a 2 is displayed, at
which point it blinks off. You’ll have a much easier time counting the blinks of
this single segment than if you try to recognize whole numbers. Adjust the
trimmer potentiometer that you added, and gradually you should be able to
synchronize the slowest display with a timekeeping device.

Enhancements
Whenever I finish a project, I see opportunities to improve it. Here are some
ideas:
No counting at power-up. It would be nice if the circuit begins in its “ready”
state, rather than already counting. I’m going to leave you to think about this.
Audible feedback when the red LED lights up. Not essential, but might be a nice
feature.
A random delay interval before the count begins. Making electronic components
behave randomly is very difficult, but one way to do it would be to require the
user to hold his finger on a couple of metal contacts. The skin resistance of the
finger would determine the delay. Because the finger pressure would not be
exactly the same each time, the delay would vary.

Next?

A counter such as the 4026B is technically a logic chip. It contains logic gates
that enable it to count. Every digital computer works on similar principles.
Because logic is so fundamental in electronics, I’m going to delve into it at much
greater depth, beginning with the next experiment. The magic words AND, OR,
NAND, NOR, XOR, and XNOR will open a whole new world of digital
intrigue.

Experiment 20: Learning Logic
When you deal with logic gates individually, they’re extremely easy to
understand. When you chain them together, they become more challenging. So
I’ll start with them one at a time.
This experiment contains a significant amount of explanation. I don’t expect you
to remember it all. The purpose here is to provide a store of information that you
can refer back to, later.

What You Will Need
Breadboard, hookup wire, wire cutters, wire strippers, test leads, multimeter
9-volt power supply (battery or AC adapter)
SPDT slide switch (1)
74HC00 quad 2-input NAND chip (1)
74HC08 quad 2-input AND chip (1)
Low-current LEDs (2)
Tactile switches (2)
LM7805 voltage regulator (1)
Resistors: 680 ohms (1), 2.2K (1), 10K (2)
Capacitors: 0.1µF (1), 0.33µF (1)

The Regulator
Logic gates are much fussier than the 555 timer or the 4026B counter that you
used previously. The versions that we will be using demand a precise 5VDC,

with no fluctuations or “spikes” in the flow of current.
This is easy and inexpensive to achieve. Just set up your breadboard with an
LM7805 voltage regulator. It delivers a well-controlled voltage of 5 volts if you
supply it with a DC voltage of 7 volts or more.
For a diagram of the regulator showing its three pin functions, see Figure 4-78.
For a schematic showing how to use the regulator, see Figure 4-79. For a
suggestion of how to place the regulator and its two capacitors at the top of a
breadboard, to occupy minimum space, see Figure 4-80. I have added a
miniature on-off slide switch at top-left, and a low-current LED to show when
power is connected. I think a visual indicator is useful to provide assurance that
the power is on, especially when you’re searching for a fault in a circuit. The
high-value 2.2K resistor for the LED is chosen to consume as little current as
possible, in case you are still using a 9-volt battery as your power supply.

Figure 4-78. Pin functions of the LM7805 voltage regulator, shown with the metal back
facing away from you.

Figure 4-79. How to use the LM7805 voltage regulator. The capacitors are mandatory.

Figure 4-80. Placing a voltage regulator at the top of a breadboard, to occupy minimal
room while also allowing for an on-off slide switch and a low-current LED to show that
power is switched on.

Caution: Inappropriate Inputs
DC, not AC. Remember that the LM7805 is a DC-to-DC converter. Do not
confuse it with an AC adapter, which uses alternating current from an outlet in
your home, and converts it to DC. Do not apply AC to the input of your voltage
regulator.
Maximum Current. The LM7805 does a wonderful job of maintaining its
output at an almost constant voltage, regardless of how much current you draw
through it—so long as you stay within its rated range. Don’t try to pull more
than one amp through the voltage regulator.
Maximum Voltage. Although the voltage regulator is a solid-state device, it
behaves a little like a resistor in that it radiates heat in the process of reducing a
voltage. The higher the voltage you put into the regulator, and the more current
that passes through it, the more heat it must get rid of. Theoretically you could
use an input of 24VDC and still get a regulated output of 5VDC, but this would
not be a good idea. A good input range would be 7VDC to 12VDC.
Minimum Voltage. Like all semiconductor devices, the regulator delivers a
voltage that is lower than its input voltage. This is why I suggest a minimum
input of 7VDC.
Heat Sinking. The purpose of the metal back with a hole in the top is to radiate
heat, which it will do more effectively if you bolt it to a piece of aluminum,
since aluminum conducts heat very effectively. The aluminum functions as a
heat sink, and you can buy fancy ones that have multiple cooling fins. If you’re
not planning to draw more than 200mA through the regulator, a heat sink is
unnecessary. The circuits in this book will require less than that.

Usage
When building circuits using 5-volt logic chips, you want 5VDC to be available
down the positive bus of your breadboard. Note very carefully that the 9-volt
input to the circuit in Figure 4-80 is not on the positive bus, but is applied only to
the upper pin on the voltage regulator. The 5VDC output from the lower pin of
the voltage regulator is connected with the positive bus.
The negative bus on the breadboard is shared by the voltage regulator and your
external voltage supply. This is known as a “common ground.”

After you install your voltage regulator, set your meter to measure DC volts and
measure the voltage between the two buses on the breadboard, just to make sure.
Logic chips will be easily damaged by incorrect or reversed voltage.

Your First Logic Gate
Now that you have your 5VDC breadboard ready, take a couple of tactile
switches, two 10K resistors, a low-current LED, and a 680-ohm resistor, and set
them around a 74HC00 logic chip as shown in Figure 4-81. (Because you are
using a low-current LED, a 680-ohm resistor is appropriate.)
You may notice that many of the pins of the chip are shorted together and
connected to the negative side of the power supply. I’ll explain that in a moment.
When you connect power, the LED should light up. Press one of the tactile
switches, and the LED remains illuminated. Press the other tactile switch, and
again the LED stays on. Now press both switches, and the light should go out.
Pins 1 and 2 are logic inputs for the 74HC00 chip. By default, the circuit holds
them at a low voltage, being connected to the negative side of the power supply
through 10K pulldown resistors. But each pushbutton overrides its resistor and
forces the input pin to rise near to the value of the 5V positive bus.
When an input or output associated with a 5V logic chip is near 0VDC, we
say it is logic-low.
When an input or output associated with a 5V logic chip is near 5VDC, we
say it is logic-high.

Figure 4-81. Figuring out the logical function of the NAND gate.

The logic output from the chip, as you saw, is normally high—but not if the first
input and the second input are high. Because the chip does a “Not AND”
operation, we say that it contains a NAND logic gate.
Logic gates can be represented with special symbols that are used in a kind of
schematic known as a logic diagram. The logic diagram that corresponds with
the circuit in Figure 4-81 is shown in Figure 4-82, where the U-shaped thing
with a circle at the bottom is the logic symbol for a NAND gate. No power
supply is shown for it in a logic diagram, but if you refer back to the schematic
in Figure 4-81, the chip does in fact require power, at pins 7 (negative ground)
and 14 (positive). This enables the chip to put out more current than its inputs
take in.
Any time you see a symbol for a logic chip, remember that it needs power to
function.
The 74HC00 chip actually contains four separate NAND gates, each of which

has two logical inputs and one output. They are arrayed as shown in Figure 4-83,
in the diagram on the right. Because only one gate was needed for the simple
test, the input pins of the unused gates were shorted to the negative side of the
power supply, to stop them from floating.

Figure 4-82. A logic diagram can be easier to understand than a schematic showing a logic
chip.

Figure 4-83. The arrangement of gates inside two logic chips.

Many logic chips are interchangable. In fact, let’s try that right now. First,
disconnect the power. Carefully pull out the 74HC00 and put it away with its
legs embedded in conductive foam (or aluminum foil, if you don’t have any
foam). Substitute a 74HC08 chip, which is an AND chip. Make sure you have it
the right way up, with its notch at the top. Reconnect the power and use the
pushbuttons as you did before. This time, you should find that the LED comes
on if the first input AND the second input are both positive, but it remains dark
otherwise. Thus, the AND chip functions exactly opposite to the NAND chip. Its
pinouts are shown in Figure 4-83, on the left.
You may be wondering why these things are useful. Soon you’ll see that we can
put logic gates together to do things such as create an electronic combination
lock, or a pair of electronic dice, or a computerized version of a TV quiz show
where users compete to answer a question. If you were insanely ambitious, you
could build an entire computer out of logic gates. A hobbyist named Bill Buzbee
actually built a web server from vintage logic chips—see Figure 4-84.

Figure 4-84. This computer motherboard hand-made by Bill Buzbee is built from 74xx series
logic chips, and functions as the hearts of a web server.

Background: Logical Origins
George Boole was a British mathematician, born in 1815, who did something
that few people are ever lucky enough or smart enough to do: he invented an
entirely new branch of mathematics.
Interestingly, it was not based on numbers. Boole had a relentlessly logical mind,
and he wanted to reduce the world to a series of true-or-false statements that
could overlap in interesting ways.
Venn diagrams, conceived around 1880 by a man named John Venn, can be used
to illustrate some logical relationships of this type. Figure 4-85 shows the
simplest possible Venn diagram, where I have established one very large group
(all the creatures in the world) and have defined a subgroup (consisting only of
those creatures that live in the water). The Venn diagram illustrates that all
creatures that live in water also live in the world, but only a subset of creatures
in the world live in the water.

Figure 4-85. The simplest possible relationship between a group and the larger world that
contains it.

Now I’ll introduce another group: creatures that live on land. But wait—some
creatures are able to live on both land and water. Frogs, for instance. These
amphibians are members of both groups, and I can show this with another Venn
diagram in Figure 4-86, where the groups overlap.

Figure 4-86. This Venn diagram is a way of showing that some creatures in the world live on
land, some live in water, and some inhabit both land and water.

However, not all groups overlap. In Figure 4-87 I have created one group of
creatures with hooves, and another group of creatures with claws. Are there any
creatures that have hooves and claws? I don’t think so. I could express this by
creating a truth table, as in Figure 4-88.

Figure 4-87. Some subgroups do not overlap. I don’t think any creatures have claws as well
as hooves.

Figure 4-88. The simplest form of a truth table tabulates the validity of pairs of inputs, each
of which can have one of two states.

A NAND gate could be used to represent this table, because its pattern of inputs
and outputs is exactly the same, as shown in Figure 4-89.

Figure 4-89. This truth table for a NAND gate has exactly the same pattern as the previous
table.

Beginning with these very simple concepts, Boole developed his logic language
to a very high level. He published a treatise on it in 1854, long before it could be
applied to electrical or electronic devices. In fact, during his lifetime, his work
seemed to have no practical applications at all. But a man named Claude
Shannon encountered Boolean logic while studying at MIT in the 1930s, and in
1938 he published a paper describing how Boolean analysis could be applied to
circuits using relays. This had immediate practical applications, as telephone
networks were growing rapidly, creating complicated switching problems.
A very simple telephone problem could be expressed like this. Long ago, it was
common for two customers living in separate homes in a rural area to share one
telephone line. If one of them wanted to use the line, or the other wanted to use
it, or neither of them wanted to use it, there was no problem. But they could not
both use it simultaneously. Once again, this is the same logical pattern as
described in Figure 4-89, if we interpret “high” to mean that one person wants to
use the line, and “low” meaning that the person doesn’t want to use it.
But now there’s an important difference. The NAND gate doesn’t just illustrate
the network. Because the telephone network uses electrical states, a NAND gate
can control the network. (Actually, in the early days of networks, everything was

done by relays; but an assembly of relays can still function as a logic gate.)
After Shannon’s application of Boolean logic to the telephone system, the next
step was to see that if you used an “on” condition to represent numeral 1 and an
“off” condition to represent numeral 0, you could build a system of logic gates
that could count. And if it could count, it could do arithmetic.
When vacuum tubes were substituted for relays, the first practical digital
computers were built. Then transistors took the place of vacuum tubes, and
integrated circuit chips replaced transistors, leading to the desktop computers
that we now take for granted. But deep down, at the lowest levels of these
incredibly complex devices, they still use the laws of logic discovered by George
Boole.
Incidentally, when you use a search engine online, if you use the words AND
and OR to refine your search, you’re actually using Boolean operators.

Fundamentals: Logic Gate Basics
The NAND gate is the most fundamental building block of digital computers,
because you can do addition sums using nothing but NANDs. If you want to
learn more about this, search online for topics such as “binary arithmetic” and
“half-adder.” You can also find circuits that do addition sums using logical
operators in my book Make: More Electronics.
Generally, there are seven types of logic gates:
AND, NAND, OR, NOR, XOR, XNOR, NOT
Their names are usually printed entirely in capital letters. Of the first six, XNOR
is hardly ever used.
All of the gates have two inputs and one output, except for the NOT gate, which
has only one input and one output, and is more often referred to as an inverter. If
it has a high input, it gives a low output, and if it has a low input, it gives a high
output.
Symbols that represent the seven types of gates are shown in Figure 4-90. Notice
that the little circles at the bottom of some of the gates invert the output. (These
circles are called bubbles.) Thus, the output of a NAND gate is the inverse of an
AND gate.

Figure 4-90. Symbols for the six two-input logic gates, plus the NOT gate.

What do I mean by “inverse”? This should become clear if you look at the truth
tables for logic gates that I have drawn in Figure 4-91, Figure 4-92, and
Figure 4-93. In each of the tables, two inputs are shown on the left followed by
an output on the right, with red meaning a high-logic state and blue meaning a
low-logic state. Compare the outputs of each pair of gates, and you’ll see how
the patterns are inverted.

Figure 4-91. The inputs shown on the left produce the outputs shown on the right.

Figure 4-92. The inputs shown on the left produce the outputs shown on the right.

Figure 4-93. The inputs shown on the left produce the outputs shown on the right.

Background: The Confusing World of TTL and CMOS
Back in the 1960s, the first logic gates were built with transistor–transistor logic,
abbreviated TTL, meaning that tiny bipolar transistors were etched into a single
wafer of silicon. Soon, these were followed by complementary metal oxide
semiconductors, abbreviated CMOS. The 4026B chip that you used in
Experiment 19 is an old CMOS chip.
You may remember that bipolar transistors amplify current. Thus, TTL circuits
require a significant flow of electricity to function. But CMOS chips are voltagesensitive, enabling them to draw hardly any current while they are waiting for a
signal, or while they are pausing after emitting a signal.
The table in Figure 4-94 summarizes the original advantages and disadvantages
of the two types of chips. The CMOS series, with part numbers from 4000
upward, were slower and more easily damaged by static electricity, but were
valuable because of their meager power consumption. The TTL series, with part
numbers from 7400 upward, used much more power but were less sensitive and
very fast. So, if you wanted to build a computer, you used the TTL family, but if
you wanted to build a little gizmo that would run for weeks on a small battery,
you used the CMOS family.

Figure 4-94. In this table comparing early CMOS and TTL chips, the CMOS attributes with
a question mark were eventually reconciled with the TTL attributes.

From this point on everything became confusing, because CMOS manufacturers
wanted to grab market share by emulating the advantages of TTL chips. Newer
generations of CMOS chips even changed their part numbers to begin with “74”
to emphasize their compatibility, and the functions of pins on CMOS chips were
swapped around to match the functions of pins on TTL chips. The voltage
requirements of CMOS were also changed to match TTL.
Today, you can still find some of the old TTL chips around, especially in the LS
series (with part numbers such as 74LS00 and 74LS08). However, they have
become uncommon.
It’s more common to find the 4000 series CMOS chips—such as the 4026B that
you used in the previous experiment. They are still being made because their
wide range of acceptable power-supply voltages is useful.

Over the years, CMOS chips became faster and less vulnerable to static
electricity, which explains why I added a question mark in these categories in
Figure 4-94. Modern CMOS chips also mostly reduced their maximum power
supply voltages to 5VDC—which is why I added a question mark in this
category, too.
The situation can be summed up like this:
Any logic chips still available in the old 4000 series will have the features I
have listed in Figure 4-94. You are quite likely to find a use for the 4000
series of chips.
You are unlikely to use old TTL chips in the 7400 series, because they have
no significant advantages.
You may still find schematics that specify 74LSxx chips. You can substitute the
74HCTxx chips, which are designed to function identically.
The 74HCxx generation is by far the most popular in through-hole format. They
have the high input impedance of CMOS, which is useful, and they are cheaper
than some of the more modern, exotic versions. All of the logic chips in this
book are of the HC type.
Now for the part numbering. Where you see a letter “x” in the list that follows, it
means that various letters and numbers may appear in that location. Thus “74xx”
includes the 7400 NAND gate, the 7402 NOR gate, the 74150 16-bit data
selector, and so on. A combination of letters preceding the “74” identifies the
chip manufacturer, while letters following the part number may identify the style
of package, may indicate whether it contains heavy metals that are
environmentally toxic, and other details. This is explained visually in Figure 4-3.
Here’s the history of the TTL family:
74xx: The old original generation, now obsolete.
74Sxx: Higher speed “Schottky” series, now obsolete.
74LSxx: Lower power Schottky series, still used occasionally.
The CMOS family:
40xx: The old original generation, now obsolete.
40xxB: The 4000B series was improved but still susceptible to damage from

static electricity. These chips are still commonly used, especially in hobbyelectronics applications.
74HCxx: Higher-speed CMOS, with part numbers matching the TTL family,
and pinouts matching the TTL family. I’ve used this generation extensively in
this book, because it’s widely available, and the circuits here have no need for
greater speed or power.
74HCTxx: Like the HC series but matching the old TTL standard for
maximum and minimum logic-low and logic-high voltages, respectively.
74xx series with other letters in the middle of the part number: More modern,
faster, usually surface-mount, often designed for lower operating voltages.

What You Don’t Need
Speed differences are irrelevant from our point of view, as we’re not going to be
building circuits running at millions of cycles per second.
Price differences between chip families are usually minor when purchased in low
quantities.
Lower-voltage chips are not appropriate for our purposes, as they are almost all
surface-mount format, and we would have to create a lower-voltage power
supply. Because surface-mount chips are so much more difficult to deal with,
and their only major advantage is miniaturization, I won’t be using them.
Through-hole equivalents have the same logic functions.

Fundamentals: Part Numbers and Functions
The interior connections of currently available through-hole 14-pin logic chips in
the HC series are shown in Figure 4-83, Figure 4-95, Figure 4-96, Figure 4-97,
Figure 4-98, Figure 4-99, Figure 4-100, and Figure 4-101.

Figure 4-95. Standardized configuration of gates in the 74xx family of logic chips.

Figure 4-96. Standardized configuration of gates in the 74xx family of logic chips.

Figure 4-97. Standardized configuration of gates in the 74xx family of logic chips.

Figure 4-98. Standardized configuration of gates in the 74xx family of logic chips.

Figure 4-99. Standardized configuration of gates in the 74xx family of logic chips.

Figure 4-100. Standardized configuration of gates in the 74xx family of logic chips.

Figure 4-101. Standardized configuration of gates in the 74xx family of logic chips.

All the part numbers in these chips are shown in their minimal form. Thus the
7400 chip may have actual part numbers such as 74HC00, 74HCT00, and so on,
and will be preceded and followed by other letter codes; but it is generically
referred to as a 7400 chip, so that’s how I present it here.
It’s very important to check the pin functions of logic chips against the diagrams
here or a manufacturer’s datasheet before using them. Interior connections may
seem to follow similar patterns, but there are exceptions.

Fundamentals: Rules for Connecting Logic Gates
Permitted:
You can connect the input of a gate directly to your regulated power supply,
either positive side or negative side.
You can connect the output from one gate directly to the input of another
gate.
The output from one gate can power the inputs of many other gates (this is
known as “fanout”). The exact ratio depends on the chip, but in the 74HCxx
series, you can always power at least ten inputs with one logic output.
The output from a logic chip can drive the trigger (pin 2) of a 555 timer, so

long as the timer shares the same 5VDC power supply.
Low input doesn’t have to be zero. A 74HCxx logic gate will recognize any
voltage up to 1 volt as “low.”
High input doesn’t have to be 5 volts. A 74HCxx logic gate will recognize
any voltage above 3.5 volts as “high.”
The acceptable ranges for inputs, and the minimum guarantees for outputs, are
shown in Figure 4-102.

Figure 4-102. To avoid errors, stay within the recommended input ranges for logic chips.

Not permitted:
No floating inputs! On CMOS chips, such as the HC family, you must always
connect all input pins with a known voltage. This includes the input pins of
gates that are unused on a chip.
Any single-throw switch or pushbutton should be used with a pullup or
pulldown resistor, so that when the contacts are open, the input to the chip is
not floating.
Don’t use an unregulated power supply, or more than 5 volts, or less than 5
volts, to power 74HCxx logic gates.
Be careful when using the output from a 74HCxx logic chip to power an
LED. You can draw as much as 20mA from the chip, but this will pull down
the output voltage. If you are also connecting that voltage to the input of a
second chip, the voltage may be pulled down so much by the LED that the
second chip doesn’t recognize it as “high” anymore. Generally, try not to use
a logic output to power an LED at the same time as another logic chip.
Always check currents and voltages when modifying a circuit or designing a
new one.
Throughout this book, I am using low-current LEDs in conjunction with
logic-chip outputs, because I think this is a good habit to acquire, in case an
output powering an LED is also used as a logic input for another chip at some
point in the future.
Never apply a significant voltage or current to the output pin of a logic gate.
In other words, don’t force an output into another output.
For this reason, don’t tie the outputs together from two or more logic gates.
So much for the dos and don’ts. Now it’s time for your first real logic-chip
project.

Experiment 21: A Powerful Combination
Suppose you want to prevent other people from using your computer. I can think
of two ways to do this: using software, or using hardware. The software would
be some kind of startup program that intercepts the normal boot sequence and
requests a password. It would be a little more secure than the password

protection that is a standard feature of Windows and Mac operating systems.
You could certainly do it that way, but I think it would be more fun (and more
relevant to this book) to do it with hardware. What I’m imagining is a numeric
keypad requiring the user to enter a secret combination before the computer can
be switched on. I’ll call it a “combination lock,” even though it won’t actually
lock anything. It will disable the power-on button that you normally use to
switch on your computer.

Caution: The Warranty Issue
If you follow this project all the way to its conclusion, you’ll open your desktop
computer, cut a wire, and insert your own little circuit. You won’t be going near
any of the boards inside the computer, and you will only access the wire to the
computer’s “power on” button, but still, if you bought your computer new, you
will void your warranty. I don’t take this too seriously, myself, but if that makes
you uneasy, here are three options:
Breadboard the circuit for fun, and leave it at that.
Use the circuit on some other device.
Use it on an old computer.

What You Will Need
Breadboard, hookup wire, wire cutters, wire strippers, multimeter
9-volt power supply (battery or AC adapter)
Low-current LED (1)
Generic LED (1)
LM7805 voltage regulator (1)
74HC08 logic chip (1)
555 timer chip (1)
2N2222 transistor (1)
DPDT 9VDC relay (1)
Diodes: 1N4001 (1), 1N4148 (3)

Resistors: 330 ohms (1), 470 ohms (1), 1K (1), 2.2K (1), 10K (6), 1M (1)
Capacitors: 0.01µF (1), 0.1µF (1), 0.33µF (1), 10µF (2)
Tactile switches (8)
Optional: Tools to open your computer, drill four holes, and make saw cuts
between the holes, to create a rectangular opening for the keypad (if you want
to take this project to its conclusion). Also, four small bolts to attach the
keypad to the computer cabinet after you create the opening for it

A Three-Part Circuit
The entire breadboarded circuit is shown in Figure 4-107, but before you start to
build it, let’s take a look at the schematics.
The circuit is divided into three sections:
1. Power supply and three dummy pushbuttons.
2. Active pushbuttons and logic.
3. Output.
The schematic in Figure 4-103 shows part 1. This is simple enough. When you
press button A, this supplies 9VDC to the voltage regulator, which delivers
5VDC down the lefthand bus. The button also supplies 9VDC down a magentacolored wire on the right, for reasons which I’ll get to in a moment.
In addition you will notice buttons B, C, and D, any one of which makes a
connection with negative ground.

Figure 4-103. The top section of the circuit.

Now take a look at Figure 4-104, which shows the center section of the circuit
using logic symbols. Imagine this attached to the top part of the circuit in
Figure 4-103. Each of the buttons E through H can supply positive voltage to an
AND gate, whose lefthand input is normally held low through a 10K pulldown
resistor. The output from each gate feeds an input of the next gate.

Figure 4-104. The middle section of the circuit, using logic symbols.

Lastly, Figure 4-105 shows the bottom section of the circuit, where the output
from the last of the AND gates activates a transistor, which triggers a 555 timer.
The timer controls a relay, and the relay will be used to lock and unlock your
computer (or any other device that uses a simple on-off button).

Figure 4-105. The bottom section of the circuit.

How It Works
I have set this up so that you have to hold down button A to activate the circuit,
and you have to continue pressing it while you enter a secret sequence on the
pushbuttons. This satisfies two purposes: the circuit draws no power while
you’re not using it, and you can’t leave it switched on by mistake.
The secret sequence consists of pressing buttons E, F, G, and H in that order,
while you are holding down button A. Of course if you actually install the
circuit, you can scramble the positions of the buttons. I laid them out like this on

the breadboard for the sake of simplicity.
Suppose you are holding down button A, and you press button E as the first in
the sequence to unlock the circuit. In Figure 4-104 you can see that button E
conducts 5 volts directly to the left input of the first AND gate. This overcomes
the pulldown resistor, so the left input is now logic-high.
The righthand input of the AND gate is being held high through a 10K resistor.
So, now both inputs of the AND gate are high, and consequently its output
changes from low to high.
Current from the output circulates around through a diode, to the lefthand input.
Consequently, you can let go of button E, and the output from the AND gate will
maintain the lefthand input in a high state. The gate has latched itself, like the
relay in Experiment 15. It is able to do this because it has its own power supply
(not shown in the logic schematic) which sustains the output voltage regardless
of small reductions in the input voltage.
The high output from the first AND gate also connects with the righthand input
of the second AND gate. Now that the second AND gate has a high righthand
input, if you press the button to pull up the lefthand input, the output from the
second AND gate goes high. Note that the button wouldn’t have worked before,
because you needed a high output from the first AND gate to feed the second
AND gate.
After you press each button, the AND gate beside it latches itself, and you
can release the button.
You have to press the buttons in sequence. If you press four buttons out of
sequence, nothing happens.
You have to hold down button A throughout the whole procedure.
Now take a look at buttons C, D, and E. What happens if you press any of these
buttons while you are entering the code to unlock the circuit? Any of the buttons
will pull down the voltage on the righthand input of the first AND gate.
Consequently, the output from the AND gate will go low. If the gate had latched
itself, it comes unlatched. Moreover, the low output from the first AND gate will
unlatch the second AND gate, and the low output from the second AND gate
will unlatch the third AND gate.
Any of buttons C, D, and E will reset the whole circuit. I included them just to

make entering the correct combination more difficult. Naturally I am assuming
that if you install this system, all the buttons will look the same.

More than One Button?
What if someone presses more than one button simultaneously (while holding
down button A)? The results will be unpredictable. If all the buttons E, F, G, and
H are pressed together, the relay will be activated—except that if any of the
buttons B, C, or D is also pressed, this will stop anything from happening. The
possibility of simultaneous button presses can be seen as a flaw in this circuit,
but the chance of someone pressing A, E, F, G, and H while not pressing B, C, or
D is small. To reduce this risk further, you could add more “reset” buttons in
parallel with B, C, and D.

Triggering the Relay
Suppose you enter the correct combination. The last AND gate applies about 5
volts to the base of transistor in Figure 4-105. The transistor turns on and starts
conducting. This reduces the resistance between pin 2 of the 555 timer and
negative ground, so the voltage on pin 2 is pulled down, and the timer is
triggered.
The timer is being powered by 9 volts, which reaches it down the magentacolored wire on the right. The timer output should be sufficient to activate the
relay. Now see what the relay does: its righthand set of contacts provides an
alternate source of power to the 9-volt bus.
So long as the pulse from the 555 timer continues, it holds the relay contacts
closed. So long as the relay is closed, it powers the circuit—including the timer.
Yes, the timer is energizing the relay, and the relay is powering the timer.
You can let go of button A now, and the relay will remain latched, so long as the
pulse from the timer lasts. The pulse will end after about 30 seconds, cutting off
power to the relay, so its contacts open. This turns off the timer, and also the rest
of the circuit. The circuit now consumes no power at all.
The set of contacts on the left side of the relay are intended to provide power for
the “on” button on your computer. So, during the brief time while the timer
energizes the relay, you’ll be able to switch on your computer. The rest of the

time, the “on” button won’t work.

The Logic Chip
Now take a look at Figure 4-106. This is the center section of the circuit,
redrawn with an actual 74HC08 logic chip containing four two-input AND gates.
It performs exactly the same function as the logic schematic in Figure 4-104.
You can compare the two schematics to see how their functions are identical.
The big difference is that the circuit showing the chip tells you how the
component actually has to be installed—but, you are likely to find this diagram
much harder to understand. Logic diagrams have their uses.

Figure 4-106. The middle section of the circuit, showing actual components.

Time to Build!

The fully breadboarded circuit is shown in Figure 4-107. For this project, you
cannot really test it in stages; you have to build the whole thing. Component
values are shown in Figure 4-108.

Figure 4-107. The complete breadboarded circuit for the electronic combination lock.

Figure 4-108. The component values for the breadboard layout.

Setup
Be careful to keep the two voltages in this circuit separate from each other. The
5VDC supply is insufficient to operate the relay, but 9VDC will burn out your
logic chip. The lefthand bus on the breadboard is for the 5VDC supply.
Unswitched 9VDC is taken down to the relay by the brown wire on the left of
the breadboard in Figure 4-107. The purple or magenta wires on the right carry
9VDC, which is switched on either by button A or by the righthand relay
contacts.
Brown indicates the unswitched 9VDC supply from a battery or AC adapter.
Magenta or purple is the 9VDC supply, which is switched, either by the relay
or the button labelled A.
Red is 5VDC, delivered by the voltage regulator.
After you build the circuit, attach your 9VDC power supply and hold down
button A. The red LED comes on, but nothing else happens.
While you continue to hold down button A, press and release each of the buttons
labeled E, F, G, and H in succession, from top to bottom. When you complete
the sequence, the green LED comes on, showing that the relay has closed and
you successfully unlocked the circuit.
Let go of button A, and the LED should stay on for about 30 seconds before the
circuit automatically switches itself off. During this 30-second period, if this
circuit is installed in your computer, you will have the opportunity to start the
computer.
After the circuit switches itself off, it consumes no power at all. You can run it
with a 9-volt battery, and the battery should literally last for years.
Try holding the power button again, and press the same buttons in a different
sequence. Also, try including some of the buttons labeled B, C, and D. The green
LED will not light up, and the relay will not be activated.
Suppose you install a finished version of this circuit. To crack the code, someone
will have to know:

You have to hold down button A while entering the correct sequence.
If you press an incorrect button, the code must be re-entered from the start.
Only buttons E, F, G, and H are active, and they must be pressed in that order.
That seems a very secure arrangement, to me. But if you want even more
security, you can always add more buttons!

Testing
Set your meter to measure continuity, and attach its probes (using alligator test
leads) to the lefthand output from the relay that is labeled “To Computer” in
Figure 4-105. These two wires do not carry any voltage, so you need your meter
in continuity-test mode to verify that the contacts inside the relay have closed.
Enter the correct combination of buttons, and the meter should beep. Let go of
button A, and the meter should continue to beep while the 555 timer energizes
the relay. At the end of the timer cycle, the relay opens and the meter stops
beeping.
You can reconfigure your meter to measure current and insert it between the
positive side of your battery and the 9VDC supply entry point on the breadboard.
The meter should show no power consumption until button A is pressed.

Dealing with Diodes
This circuit contains two types of latching. The system for latching the relay is
unusual but satisfies the requirement that the circuit should consume zero current
when it is not being used. The system by which the AND gates latch themselves
is another matter.
The fourth AND gate doesn’t need to latch, because only a brief pulse (from
button H) is needed to start the timer. But the first three AND gates have to latch,
to keep their outputs positive after you release each of the buttons E, F, and G.
The diodes take care of this by feeding current from gate outputs back to their
inputs.
Can you see any problem with this? Remember that a diode takes about 0.7
volts. Remember that a logic gate has to distinguish clearly between a high state
and a low state on its inputs. If you start to sprinkle diodes through a logic circuit

without keeping careful track of voltages, you may end up with a logic gate that
doesn’t recognize an input that is supposed to be high. This is the same issue that
I was concerned about in Experiment 15, where a voltage reduced by a transistor
followed by a diode might have failed to trigger a relay.
When in doubt, verify voltages with your meter and check back to the input
specifications illustrated in Figure 4-102.
In the combination-lock circuit that I’ve shown here, the output from each of the
first three AND gates only circulates back through one diode to the input of the
gate, so there’s no reason why this should not work reliably. Just bear in mind
that you have to exercise care and discretion when mixing diodes with logic
chips.
Perhaps this makes you wonder—if a diode isn’t the formally correct method to
make a logic gate latch itself, what is the ideal way to do things?
One option might seem to be, replace each diode with a piece of wire, to feed the
signal back to the gate input. What are the diodes really for, anyway?
They serve an important purpose. If a diode was replaced with a piece of wire,
the positive voltage being applied through a pushbutton could also flow through
that wire, down and around to the output of the logic gate.
It is absolutely not a good idea to push voltage into any output of a gate.
The correct option for latching a logic state in a circuit is with a flip-flop.
Previously I have used a 555 timer wired in bistable mode as a flip-flop, because
we were already working with timers, and I wanted to demonstrate this
application. But in this circuit, it wouldn’t make sense to add four 555 timers just
to serve that function. You can buy chips containing several flip-flops, and you
can also make a flip-flop by combining two NAND gates or two NOR gates, as I
will show you in Experiment 22.
For this little circuit creating a combination lock, I wanted to minimize the chip
count and the complexity. Diodes were the simplest, easiest way to achieve this.

Questions
The output from the fourth AND gate was a single positive pulse. Why didn’t I
use that to activate the relay directly, instead of introducing a timer?

One reason is that the relay draws an initial surge of current exceeding the
maximum 20mA that an AND gate can supply. Also of course I wanted a fixedlength pulse from the timer.
All right, but why did I add a transistor to the circuit? Because the AND gate
gives a positive pulse, and the timer needs a negative transition on its trigger pin.
The transistor provided a way to convert a positive to a negative. Adding a NOT
gate (that is, an inverter) could have achieved the same goal, but would have
increased the chip count.
In that case, why didn’t I use NAND gates instead of AND gates? A NAND has
a normally positive output that goes low when both of its inputs are high. That
seems to be exactly what the 555 timer wants. With a NAND gate, I could have
omitted the transistor.
This is true, but the preceding AND gates require positive outputs to feed back
and sustain their positive inputs. So, I must retain those AND gates for the first
three pushbuttons. I could only substitute a NAND gate for the last one, to create
the right output for the timer. This means you would have still needed the
74HC08 chip, and you would have had to add a 74HC00 chip, just to use one of
its gates. A transistor is easier and takes less room.
Here’s another question. Why did I include two LEDs in the circuit? Because
when you’re punching buttons to unlock your computer, you need to know
what’s going on. The Power On LED reassures you that your battery isn’t dead.
The Relay Active LED tells you that the system is now unlocked, in case you are
unable to hear the relay click.
Lastly, the big question: how can you actually install this circuit in a computer,
assuming you are willing to give that a try? It’s a lot easier than it sounds, as I
will explain.

The Computer Interface
First, make sure you have wired the combination lock circuit correctly. A single
wiring error can cause your circuit to deliver 9VDC through the lefthand relay
contacts instead of merely closing a switch. This is important!
To make absolutely sure, change your meter to measure volts DC, and enter the
correct combination on the tactile switches. If the green LED lights up but your

meter measures no voltage, this is good. Anything else, and you have a wiring
error.
Now let’s consider how your computer normally functions when you want to
switch it on.
Old computers used to have a big switch at the back, attached to the heavy metal
box inside the computer that transformed house current to regulated DC voltages
that a computer needs. Most modern computers are not designed this way; you
leave the computer plugged in, and you touch a little button on the front of the
computer (if it’s not a Mac) or the keyboard (if it is a Mac). The button is
connected by an internal wire to the motherboard.
This is ideal from our point of view, because we don’t have to mess with high
voltages. Inside your computer, don’t even think of opening that metal box with
the fan mounted in it, containing the computer power supply. Just look for the
wire that runs from the “power up” button to the motherboard. Most often this
wire will contain just two conductors, but on some computers it will be part of a
ribbon cable. The key is to look at the contacts for the pushbutton, which will be
attached to the conductors that you want.
First make sure that your computer is unplugged, ground yourself (because
computers contain CMOS chips that are sensitive to static electricity), and very
carefully snip just one of the two conductors from the pushbutton. Now plug in
your computer and try to use the “power up” button. If nothing happens, you’ve
probably cut the right wire. Even if you cut the wrong wire, it still prevented
your computer from booting, which is what you want, so you can use it anyway.
Remember, we are not going to introduce any voltage to this wire. We’re just
going to use the relay as a switch to reconnect the conductor that you cut. You
should have no problem if you maintain a cool and calm demeanor, and look for
that single wire that starts everything. Check online for the maintenance manual
for your computer if you’re really concerned about making an error.
After you find the wire and cut just one of its conductors, keep your computer
unplugged during the next steps.
Find where the wire attaches to the motherboard. Usually there’s a small
unpluggable connector. First, mark it so that you know how to plug it back in the
right way around. Better still, photograph it. Then disconnect it while you follow

the next couple of steps.
Strip insulation from the two ends of the wire that you cut, and solder an
additional piece of two-conductor wire, as shown in Figure 4-109, with heatshrink tubing to protect the solder joints. (This is very important!)

Figure 4-109. The combination lock project can be interfaced with a typical desktop
computer by cutting one conductor in the wire from the “power up” pushbutton, soldering
an extension, and covering the joints with heat-shrink tubing.

Run your new piece of wire to the relay, making sure you attach it to the pair of

contacts that close, inside the relay, when it is energized by the unlocking
operation. You don’t want to make the mistake of unlocking your computer
when you think you’re locking it, and vice versa.
Reconnect the connector that you disconnected from your motherboard, plug in
your computer, and press the computer’s “start” button. If nothing happens, this
is good! Now enter the secret combination on your keypad (while holding down
the power button to provide battery power) and watch for the green LED to light
up. Now try the “start” button again, and everything should work—so long as
you press the button within the 30 seconds allowed by your circuit.
Having tested your circuit, the only remaining task is installation. Just remember
to remove the case completely from the rest of the computer, if you are
contemplating something along the lines shown in Figure 4-110.

Figure 4-110. An option for installing your keypad (not necessarily recommended).

Enhancements

At the end of any project, there’s always more you can do.
Using a Keypad. In the previous edition of this book, I suggested using a
numeric keypad in this project. Some people felt that the keypad cost too much,
and others had difficulty finding the right kind of keypad. After some thought, I
decided just to use tactile switches this time around. They’re easy to install on
your breadboard, and if you decide to make a more permanent version of the
circuit, you can simply mount eight pushbuttons on a square of metal or plastic.
But a keypad is still an option, so long as it is not matrix encoded. That kind of
keypad is really designed for use with a microcontroller. The kind you want will
have as many pins as there are buttons, plus one.
Powering the Relay. You may be wondering if the voltage from the output of a
555 timer is sufficient to work the relay reliably. This is the same question that I
discussed in Experiment 15, where I decided not to power a relay through a
transistor-diode combination. The problem is, the voltage from a 555 timer
varies depending on how heavily you load the output. This is why I
recommended a high-sensitivity relay for this experiment. Typically it will draw
less than one-third of the current of a standard type, which I felt was satisfactory
for demonstration purposes. Bear in mind, I wanted to specify just one type of
relay for all the experiments in this book. However, if you plan to install the
circuit, and it absolutely positively has to work every time, even when your 9V
battery is running low—you could consider substituting a 6VDC relay. Really?
Won’t the timer output overload it? Not necessarily. Some relays are designed to
tolerate overvoltage. For instance, the datasheet for the Omron G5V-2-H1-DC6
6-volt relay allows a maximum voltage of 180% of the rated voltage. As always,
the best recommendation is to test a circuit thoroughly, consider options, and
read datasheets.
Safeguarding the Computer. To make this project more secure, you could
remove the usual screws that secure the case of the computer, and replace them
with tamper-proof screws. Naturally, you will also need the special tool that fits
the screws, so that you can install them (or remove them, if your security system
malfunctions for any reason).
Code Update. Another enhancement would be a way to facilitate changing your
secret code if you feel the need. This will be difficult if you make a soldered
version of the circuit, but you can install miniature plugs and sockets known as

“headers” to allow you to swap the wires around.
Destructive Security. For those who are absolutely, positively, totally paranoid,
you could fix things so that entering a wrong code flips a second high-amperage
relay which supplies a massive power overload, melting your CPU and sending a
big pulse through the hard drive. For a solid-state drive, you could consider
installing a “suicide relay” that will apply a higher voltage to the 5VDC input.
But I wouldn’t recommend this myself.
There’s no doubt about it. Messing up the hardware has major advantages
compared with trying to erase data using software. It’s faster, difficult to stop,
and tends to be permanent. So, when the Recording Industry Association of
America comes to your home and asks to switch on your computer so that they
can search for illegal file sharing, just accidentally give them an incorrect
unlocking code, sit back, and wait for the pungent smell of melting insulation—
or a burst of gamma rays, if you go for the nuclear option (see Figure 4-111).

Figure 4-111. For those who are absolutely, positively, totally paranoid: a meltdown/selfdestruct system controlled by a secret key combination provides enhanced protection against
data theft or intrusions by RIAA investigators asking annoying questions about file sharing.

On a more realistic level, no system is totally secure. The value of a hardware
locking device is that if someone does defeat it (for instance, by figuring out
how to unscrew your tamper-proof screws, or simply ripping your keypad out of
the computer case with metal shears), at least you’ll know that something
happened—especially if you put little dabs of paint over the screws to reveal

whether they’ve been messed with. By comparison, if you use passwordprotection software and someone defeats it, you may never know that your
system has been compromised.

Experiment 22: Race to Place
The next project using digital logic is going to get us into the concept of
feedback, where the output is piped back to affect the input—in this case,
blocking it. It’s a small project, but quite subtle, and the concepts will be useful
to you in the future.

What You Will Need
Breadboard, hookup wire, wire cutters, wire strippers, multimeter
9-volt power supply (battery or AC adapter)
74HC32 logic chip (1)
555 timers (2)
SPDT slide switches (2)
Tactile switches (2)
Resistors: 220 ohms (1), 2.2K (1), 10K (3)
Capacitors: 0.01µF (2), 0.1µF (1), 0.33µF (1)
LM7805 voltage regulator (1)
Generic LEDs (2)
Low-current LED (1)

The Goal
On quiz shows such as Jeopardy!, contestants race to answer each question. The
first person who hits an answer button automatically locks out the other
contestants, so that their buttons become inactive. How can we make a circuit
that will do the same thing?
If you search online, you’ll find several hobby sites where other people have
suggested circuits to work this way, but they lack features that I think are

necessary. The approach I’m going to use here is both simpler and more
elaborate. It’s simpler because it has a very low chip count, but it’s more
elaborate in that it incorporates “quizmaster control” to make a more realistic
game.
I’ll suggest some initial ideas for a two-player version. After I develop that idea,
I’ll show how it could be expanded to four or even more players.

A Conceptual Experiment
I want to show how this kind of project grows from an initial idea. By going
through the steps of developing a circuit, I’m hoping I may inspire you to
develop ideas of your own in the future, which is much more valuable than just
replicating someone else’s work.
First consider the basic concept: there are two people, each with a button to
press, and whoever goes first locks out the other person.
Sometimes it helps me to visualize this kind of thing if I draw a sketch, so that’s
where I’ll begin. In Figure 4-112, the signal from each button passes through an
imaginary component that I’ll call a “button blocker,” activated by the other
person’s button. I’m not exactly sure what the button blocker will be or how it
will work, yet, but it will be activated by one player going first, and it will block
the other player.

Figure 4-112. The basic concept: whoever goes first blocks the other player.

Now that I’m looking at it, I see a problem here. If I want to expand this to three
players, it will get complicated, because each player must activate the “button
blockers” of two opponents, and if there are four players, each much activate the
“button blockers” of three opponents. The number of connections will become
unmanageable. Figure 4-113 shows this.

Figure 4-113. Increasing the number of participants from two to three more than doubles the
number of connections.

Any time I see this kind of complexity, I think there has to be a better way.
Also, there’s another problem. After a player lets his finger off the button, the
other players’ buttons will be unblocked again. This suggests to me that as in
Experiments 15, 19, and 21, I need . . . a flip-flop, also known as a latch. Its
purpose will be to hold the signal from the first player’s button and continue to
block the other players, even after the first player has released his button.
This now sounds even more complicated. But wait a minute. If the winning
player’s button triggers a latch, the latch now keeps the winning circuit
energized, and the winner’s button becomes irrelevant. So, the latch can block
all the buttons. This makes things much simpler. I can summarize it as a
sequence of events:
First player presses his button.
His signal is latched.
The latched signal feeds back and blocks all the buttons.

The new sketch in Figure 4-114 shows this. Now the configuration is modular,
and can be expanded to almost any number of players, just by adding more
modules, without increasing in complexity.

Figure 4-114. Any latch now blocks all the buttons.

There’s something important missing, though: a reset switch, to put the system
back to its starting mode after the players have had time to press their buttons
and see who won. Also, I need a way to prevent players from pressing their
buttons too soon, before the quizmaster has finished asking the question. Maybe
I can combine this function in just one switch, which will be under the
quizmaster’s control.
See Figure 4-115. In its Reset position, the quizmaster switch can reset the
system and remove power to the buttons. In its Set position, the switch stops
holding the system in reset mode, and provides power to the buttons. I’ve gone
back to showing just two players, to make everything as simple as possible, but
the concept is still easily expandable.
Now I have to deal with a logic problem in the diagram. The way I’ve drawn it,

everything is joined together. I’ve used arrows to show the direction of signals,
but I don’t know how I could actually stop signals from going the wrong way. If
I don’t deal with this, the signal from either player will light up both LEDs. How
can I stop this from happening?
I could put diodes in the “up” wires to block current from running down them.
But I have a more elegant idea: I’ll add an OR gate, because the inputs to an OR
gate are separated from each other electrically. Figure 4-116 shows this.

Figure 4-115. Quizmaster control has now been added.

Figure 4-116. Adding an OR gate isolates one player’s circuit from the other.

The basic OR gate has only two logical inputs. Will this prevent me from adding
more players? No, because you can buy an OR that has three, four, or even eight
inputs. If any one of them is high, the output is high. For fewer players than a
gate can handle, you tie the unused inputs to ground and ignore them.
Now I’m getting a clearer idea of what the thing I’ve called a “button blocker”
should actually be. I think it should be another logic gate. It should say, “If
there’s only one input, from a button, I’ll let it through. But if there are any
additional inputs, I won’t let them through.”
Before I start choosing gates, though, I have to decide what the latch will be. I
can buy an off-the-shelf flip-flop, which flips “on” if it gets one signal and “off”

if it gets another, but chips containing flip-flops tend to have more features than I
need for a s a ss Mf
×

Figure 4-118. Step 1 in the circuit visualization. Reset mode.

In Step 1, the quizmaster’s switch is in reset mode. The low voltage on the reset
pins of the timers has forced them both to create negative outputs. These outputs
keep the LEDs dark and also go to the OR1 gate. Because it has negative inputs,
it creates a negative output, although OR2 and OR3 ignore that because one
input on each of these gates is high, provided by pullup resistors beside the
buttons. Remember, if either of the inputs to an OR gate is high, the output is
high. And so long as the trigger pin on a timer in bistable mode is high, the timer
will not be triggered. So, the circuit is stable.
In Step 2, the quizmaster has asked a question and flipped his switch to the right,

to supply (negative) power to the players’ buttons. However, neither of the
players has responded yet, so the pullup resistors maintain the circuit in a stable
state with negative outputs from the timers.

Figure 4-119. Step 2 in the circuit visualization. Players’ buttons are active, but no one has
pressed a button yet.

In Step 3, Player 1 has pressed the lefthand button. This sends a low pulse to
OR2. Now that OR2 has two low inputs, its output goes low. The low pulse goes
to the trigger pin of the lefthand timer. But components do not respond
instantaneously, and the timer has not processed the signal yet.

In Step 4, a few microseconds later, the timer has processed the negative input
signal and created a positive output pulse that lights the LED and also circulates
back to OR1. Now that OR1 has a positive input, it also has a positive output.
This goes to the inputs of OR2 and OR3, and so their outputs become positive.
As a result, both of the timers now have positive inputs on their trigger pins. Any
button press by either player will now be ignored, because OR1 continues to
supply positive current in the circuit.

Figure 4-120. Step 3 in the circuit visualization. The left player has pressed a button, but the
555 timer has not responded yet.

Remember, when a 555 is running in flip-flop mode, a low input on its trigger

pin will flip it into having a high output, and the output will persist even if the
trigger pin goes high again.
The only thing that will end the 555’s high output is a low state on its reset
pin. That will only happen when the game master turns his switch back to
reset mode.
There’s only one situation that can upset this happy scenario. What if both
players press their buttons absolutely simultaneously? In the world of digital
electronics, this is highly unlikely. But if it somehow happens, both of the timers
should react, and both of the LEDs will light up, showing that there has been a
tie.

Figure 4-121. Step 4 in the circuit visualization. The left player’s action has flowed through
the circuit and now blocks the right player.

On the Jeopardy! TV show, you never see a tie. Absolutely never! I’m
wondering, if the electronic system on the show registers a simultaneous
response from two players, maybe it has a randomizing feature to select one of
them. Just speculating, of course.
To demonstrate how a two-player circuit can be upgraded to handle extra
players, I’ve included a simplified three-player schematic in Figure 4-122. The
circuit could be extended outward indefinitely, the only limit being the number
of inputs available on OR1.

Figure 4-122. The circuit can be expanded easily for more players.

Breadboarding It
In Figure 4-123 I have revised the schematic using an actual OR chip, in a layout
as close to a breadboard configuration as possible, so that you can build this
thing easily. A breadboarded version is shown in Figure 4-124, and the
component values are shown in Figure 4-125.

Figure 4-123. The two-player schematic has been redrawn here, using a quad two-input OR
chip.

Figure 4-124. Breadboard layout, equivalent to the schematic.

Figure 4-125. Component values for the breadboard layout.

Because the only logic gates that I’ve used are OR gates, and only three are
needed, I just need one logic chip: the 74HC32, which contains four two-input
OR gates. (I’ve grounded the inputs to the fourth). The two OR gates on the left
side of the chip have the same functions as OR2 and OR3 in my simplified
schematic, and the OR gate at the bottom-right side of the chip works as OR1,
receiving input from pin 3 of each 555 timer. If you have all the components,
you should be able to put this together and test it quite quickly.
You may notice that I’ve added a 0.01µF capacitor between pin 2 of each 555
timer (the input) and negative ground. Why? Because when I tested the circuit
without the capacitors, sometimes I found that one or both of the 555 timers
would be triggered simply by flipping the quizmaster switch, without anyone
pressing a button.
At first this puzzled me. How were the timers getting triggered, without anyone
doing anything? Maybe they were responding to “bounce” in the quizmaster
switch—meaning tiny and very rapid vibrations in the contacts when the switch
is moved. Sure enough, this was happening, and small capacitors solved the
problem. They may also slow the response of the 555 timers fractionally, but not
enough to interfere with slow human reflexes.
As for the buttons, it doesn’t matter if they “bounce,” because each timer locks
itself on at the very first impulse and ignores any hesitations that follow.
You can experiment building the circuit, disconnecting the 0.01µF capacitors,
and flipping the quizmaster switch to and fro a dozen times. Because I am
recommending a small, cheap slide switch, I think you will see a number of
“false positives.” I’m going to explain more about switch bounce, and how to get
rid of it, in the next experiment.

Enhancements
After you breadboard the circuit, if you proceed to build a permanent version, I
suggest that you expand it so that at least four players can participate. This will
require an OR gate capable of receiving four inputs. The 74HC4078 is the
obvious choice, as it allows up to eight. Just connect any unused inputs to

negative ground.
Alternatively, if you already have a couple of 74HC32 chips and you don’t want
to bother ordering a 74HC4078, you can gang together three of the gates inside a
single 74HC32 so that they function like a four-input OR. Look at the simple
logic diagram in Figure 4-126 showing three ORs, and remember that the output
from each OR will go high if at least one input is high.

Figure 4-126. Three two-input ORs can emulate a single four-input OR.

And while you’re thinking about this, can you figure out how to combine three
two-input ANDs that will substitute for a four-input AND gate?
For a four-player game, you’ll need two additional 555 timers, of course, and
two more LEDs, and two more pushbuttons.
As for creating a schematic for the four-player game—I’m going to leave that to
you. Begin by sketching a simplified version, just showing the logic symbols.
Then convert that to a breadboard layout (which is the hard part). And here’s a
suggestion: pencil, paper, and an eraser can still be quicker, initially, than circuitdesign software or graphic-design software, in my opinion.

Experiment 23: Flipping and Bouncing
In three experiments, now, I’ve used 555 timers in bistable mode. The time has
come to deal with “real” flip-flops, including an explanation of how they work. I
will also show how they can deal with the phenomenon that I mentioned briefly

in the previous experiment: switch bounce.
When a switch is flipped from one position to another, its contacts vibrate very
briefly. This is the “bounce” of which I speak, and it can be a problem in circuits
where digital components respond so quickly, they interpret every tiny vibration
as a separate input. If you connect a pushbutton to the input of a counter chip, for
instance, the counter may register 10 or more input pulses from a single press of
the button. A sample of actual switch bounce is shown in Figure 4-127.

Figure 4-127. Fluctuations created by vibrating contacts when a switch is closed. (Derived
from a datasheet at Maxim Integrated corporation.)

There are many techniques for debouncing a switch, but using a flip-flop is
probably the most fundamental.

What You Will Need
Breadboard, hookup wire, wire cutters, wire strippers, multimeter
9-volt power supply (battery or AC adapter)
74HC02 logic chip (1), 74HC00 logic chip (1)
SPDT slide switches (2)
Low-current LEDs (3)
Resistors: 680 ohms (2), 10K (2), 2.2K (1)
Capacitors: 0.1µF (1), 0.33µF (1)
LM7805 voltage regulator (1)

Assemble the components on your breadboard, as shown in Figure 4-128. The
same circuit is shown as a schematic in Figure 4-129, and the component values
are shown in Figure 4-130. When you apply power, one of the LEDs at the
bottom should be lit.
Now I want you to do something odd. Please disconnect the wire labeled A in
Figure 4-128. Just pull it out of the board. If you refer to the schematic in
Figure 4-129, you’ll see that you have disconnected power to the pole of the
switch, leaving the two NOR gates connected only with their pulldown resistors.

Figure 4-128. Breadboarded flip-flop circuit using NOR gates.

You may be surprised to find that the LED remains lit.
Push the wire back into the board, slide the switch to its opposite position, and
the first LED should go out, while the other LED should come on. Once again,
pull out the wire, and once again, the LED should remain lit.
Here’s the take-home message:
A flip-flop requires only an initial input pulse—for example, from a switch.
After that, it ignores that input.

Figure 4-129. Flip-flop schematic using NOR gates.

How It Works
Two NOR gates or two NAND gates can function as a flip-flop.
Use NOR gates when a double-throw switch delivers a positive input.
Use NAND gates when a double-throw switch delivers a negative input.
Either way, you have to use a double-throw switch.
I’ve mentioned the double-throw switch three times (actually, four times if you
count this sentence) because for some strange reason, most introductory books
fail to emphasize this point. When I first started learning electronics, I went
crazy trying to understand how two NORs or two NANDs could debounce a
simple SPST pushbutton—until finally I realized that they can’t. The reason is
that when you power up the circuit, the NOR gates (or NAND gates) need to be
told in which state they should begin. Their initial orientation comes from the
switch being in one state or the other. A SPST pushbutton cannot do that, when it
is not being pushed. So you have to use a double-throw switch. (Now I’ve
mentioned it five times.)

Figure 4-130. Component values for the breadboarded NOR-based flip-flop.

Debouncing with NORs
I’ve created a multiple-step schematic in Figure 4-131 and Figure 4-132 to show
the changes that occur as a switch flips to and fro with two NOR gates. To
refresh your memory, I’ve also included a truth table in Figure 4-133 showing
the logical outputs from NOR gates for each combination of inputs.
Referring initially to Figure 4-131, in Step 1, the switch is supplying positive
current to the lefthand side of the circuit, overwhelming the negative supply

from the pulldown resistor, so we can be sure that the NOR gate on the left has
one positive logical input. Because any positive logical input will make the NOR
give a negative output (as shown in the truth table in Figure 4-133), the negative
output crosses over to the righthand NOR, so that it now has two negative inputs,
which make it give a positive output. This crosses back to the lefthand NOR
gate. So, in this configuration everything is stable.

Figure 4-131. When the switch moves to a neutral center position, the status of the NOR
gates remains unchanged.

Figure 4-132. After the states of the NOR gates are reversed, they remain that way when the
switch moves back to its neutral center position.

Figure 4-133. A reminder of the truth table for a NOR gate.

Now comes the clever part. In Step 2, suppose that you move the switch so that
it doesn’t touch either of its contacts. (Or suppose that the switch contacts are
bouncing, and failing to make a good contact. Or suppose you disconnect the
switch entirely.) Without a positive supply from the switch, the lefthand input of
the left NOR gate goes from positive to negative, as a result of the pulldown
resistor. But the righthand input of this gate is still positive, and one positive is
all it takes to make the NOR maintain its negative output, so nothing changes. In
other words, the circuit has “flopped” in this state, regardless of whether the
switch is disconnected.
Referring to Figure 4-133, if the switch turns fully to the right and supplies
positive power to the righthand pin of the right NOR gate, that NOR recognizes
that it now has a positive logical input, so it changes its logical output to
negative. That goes across to the other NOR gate, which now has two negative
inputs, so its output goes positive, and runs back to the right NOR.
In this way, the output states of the two NOR gates change places. They flip, and
then flop there, even if the switch breaks contact or is disconnected again, as in
Step 4.
If a switch bounces so severely that the pole connection fluctuates all the way
between one contact and the other, this circuit won’t work. It only works if the
output alternates between one connection, and no connection at all. But this is
generally the case with a SPDT switch.

Debouncing with NANDs
The drawings in Figure 4-134 and Figure 4-135 show a similar sequence of
events if you use a negatively powered switch with two NAND gates. To refresh
your memory of NAND behavior, I am including Figure 4-136.

Figure 4-134. Two NAND gates can be used as a flip-flop with pullup resistors and a switch
providing negative power.

Figure 4-135. Once again, the gate states remain unchanged when the switch is unconnected
with either of them.

Figure 4-136. A reminder of the truth table for a NAND gate.

If you want to verify the function of the NAND circuit, you can use your
74HC00 chip, specified in the parts list for this experiment, to test it yourself. Be
careful, though: the gates inside the NOR chip are upside-down compared with
the gates inside the NAND chip. You will have to move some wires around on
your breadboard, because the two chips are not swappable. Refer back to
Figure 4-83 and Figure 4-95 for the specifications.

Jamming Versus Clocking
The NOR and the NAND circuits are examples of a jam-type flip-flop, so called
because the switch forces it to respond immediately, and jams it into that state.
You can use this circuit anytime you need to debounce a switch (as long as it’s a
double-throw switch).
A more sophisticated version is a clocked flip-flop, which requires you to set the
state of each input first and then supply a clock pulse to make the flip-flop
respond. The pulse has to be clean and precise, which means that if you supply it
from a switch, the switch must be debounced—probably by using another jam-

type flip-flop! Considerations of this type have made me reluctant to use clocked
flip-flops in this book. They add a layer of complexity that I prefer to avoid in an
introductory text. If you want to know more about flip-flops, I explore them in
greater detail in Make: More Electronics. It’s not a simple topic.
What if you want to debounce a single-throw button or switch? Well, you have a
problem! One solution is to buy a special-purpose chip such as the 4490 “bounce
eliminator,” which contains digital delay circuitry. A specific part number is the
MC14490 from On Semiconductor. This contains six circuits for six separate
inputs, each with an internal pullup resistor. It’s relatively expensive, however—
more than 10 times the price of a 74HC02 containing NOR gates. Really, you
will have an easier time if you avoid single-throw switches and use double-throw
switches (or pushbuttons) that are more easily debounced.
Or, you could use a 555 timer wired in flip-flop mode. My preference for that
option now seems to make more sense.

Experiment 24: Nice Dice
Electronic circuits to simulate the throw of one or two dice have been around for
decades. However, new configurations still exist, and this project provides an
opportunity to learn more about logic while ending up with something useful. I
especially want to introduce you to binary code, the universal language among
digital chips.

What You Will Need
Breadboard, hookup wire, wire cutters, wire strippers, multimeter
9-volt power supply (battery or AC adapter)
555 timer (1)
74HC08 logic chip (1), 74HC27 logic chip (1), 74HC32 logic chip (1)
74HC393 binary counter (1)
Tactile switch (1)
SPDT slide switches (2)
Resistors: 100 ohms (6), 150 ohms (6), 220 ohms (7), 330 ohms (2), 680

ohms (4), 2.2K (1), 10K (2), 1M (1)
Capacitors: 0.01µF (2), 0.1µF (2), 0.33µF (1), 1µF (1), 22µF (1)
LM7805 voltage regulator (1)
Low-current LEDs (15)
Generic LED (1)

A Binary Counter
At the heart of every electronic dice circuit that I have ever seen is a counter chip
of some kind. Often it’s a decade counter with 10 “decoded” output pins that are
energized one at a time, in sequence. A die only has six faces, but if you tie the
seventh pin of the counter back to its reset pin, the counter will restart after it
reaches six. (Note that “dice” is really a plural word that should only be used for
two dice or more, while “die” is the singular word, although many people don’t
realize this.)
I always like to do things differently, so I decided not to use a decade counter,
partly because I wanted a binary counter to satisfy my desire to demonstrate
binary code. This added a little complexity to the circuit, but will enrich the
learning process—and when all is said and done, you’ll have a circuit that runs
two dice (not just one) with a modest chip count, while still fitting on a
breadboard.
The counter chip that I’ve chosen is widely used: the 74HC393. It actually
contains two counters, but the second one can be ignored for the time being. The
pinouts are shown in Figure 4-137.

Figure 4-137. Pin functions of the 74HC393 binary counter.

Manufacturers have an odd habit of identifying the pin functions of digital chips
using as few letters as possible. These cryptic abbreviations can be difficult to
understand. To give you an example, in Figure 4-137 the pin labels inside the
outline of the chip are the ones I found in a datasheet from Texas Instruments.
(To make things even more confusing, other manufacturers use different
abbreviations of their own. There is no standardization.)
Outside the outline of the counter I have restated the pin functions in relatively
plain English, in green lettering. The number preceding each pin function refers
to counter #1 or counter #2, packaged separately in the chip.

Counter Testing
The best way to understand this chip is to bench-test it. Figure 4-138 shows the
schematic, and Figure 4-139 shows it on a breadboard. Figure 4-140 shows the
breadboarded component values.
Remember:
This is a 5V logic chip. Don’t leave out the voltage regulator.
Note there is a 0.1µF capacitor between the power-supply pin of the timer,

and ground. This is to suppress little voltage spikes that the timer tends to
generate. They can confuse the counter if they are uncontrolled.
The capacitor and resistors that I have specified with the timer will run at about
0.75Hz. In other words, the beginning of one pulse, and the beginning of the
next pulse, will be slightly more than one second apart. You can see this by
watching the yellow LED on the timer output. (If the yellow LED does not
behave this way, you made a wiring error somewhere.)

Figure 4-138. Schematic for observing the output and the reset function of the 74HC393
decade counter.

Figure 4-139. The breadboarded test circuit.

Figure 4-140. Component values in the breadboarded circuit.

The four red LEDs labeled A, B, C, and D will display the output states of the
counter. If your connections are correct, they will run through the sequence
shown in Figure 4-141, where a black circle indicates that an LED is not lit, and
a red circle indicates that it is lit.

Figure 4-141. The full sequence of outputs from a binary counter.

I’m going to tell you some more, now, about binary and decimal arithmetic. Do
you really need to know this? Yes, it’s useful. A variety of chips such as
decoders, encoders, multiplexers, and shift registers use binary arithmetic, and of
course it is absolutely fundamental in almost every digital computer that has ever

been made.

Fundamentals: Binary Code
As you can see in Figure 4-141, every time the LED in column A goes out, the
LED in column B reverses its state—from on to off, or off to on. Every time the
LED in column B goes out, it reverses the LED in column C, and so on. One
consequence of this rule is that each LED flashes twice as fast as the one to its
left.
The row of LEDs represents a binary number, meaning a number written in only
two digits: 0 and 1, as shown in the white font in Figure 4-141. The equivalent
decimal number is shown in the black font on the left.
The LEDs can be considered binary digits, commonly known as bits.
The rule for counting in binary is very simple. In the rightmost column, start
with 0, then add 1—and then, because you can only count in ones and zeroes, the
next time you want to add 1, you have to revert to 0 and carry 1 to the next
column to the left.
What if the numeral in the next column to the left is already a 1? Change it back
to 0 and carry 1 to the next column after that. And so on.
The rightmost LED represents the least significant bit of a four-bit binary
number. The leftmost LED is showing us the most significant bit.

Rising Edge, Falling Edge
When you run the test, notice that each transition of the rightmost red LED
(either from on to off, or off to on) always occurs when the yellow LED goes
out. Why is this?
Most counters are edge triggered, meaning that the rising edge or the falling
edge of a high pulse nudges the counter along to the next value in its series,
when the pulse is applied to the clock input pin. The behavior of the LEDs
clearly shows you that the 74HC393 is falling-edge triggered. In Experiment 19,
we used a counter that was rising-edge triggered. The type that you use depends
on your application.
The 74HC393 counter also has a reset pin, just like the 4026B chip from

Experiment 19.
Some datasheets describe a reset pin as a “master reset” pin, which may be
abbreviated MR.
Some manufacturers call a “reset” pin a “clear” pin, which may be
abbreviated CLR on a datasheet.
Whatever it’s called, the reset pin will always have the same end result. It forces
all the outputs of the counter to go low—which in this case means 0000 binary.
A reset pin requires a separate pulse. But does the reset occur when the pulse
begins, or when it ends?
Let’s find out. If you built the circuit carefully, the reset pin is held in a low state
through a 10K resistor. But there is also a tactile switch that can connect the reset
pin directly to the positive bus. This overwhelms the 10K resistor, and forces the
reset pin to go high.
As soon as you press the tactile switch, all the outputs go dark, and they stay
dark until you let go of the tactile switch. Evidently, the reset function of the
74HC393 is triggered and held by a high state.

The Modulus
Switch off the power, disconnect the pullup resistor and the tactile switch from
the reset pin (pin 2), and substitute a wire as shown in Figure 4-142. All the
previous connections have been grayed out. The new wire, in solid black,
connects the fourth digit, from output D, to the reset pin. Figure 4-143 shows the
revision on the breadboard; the new connection is colored green.
What do you think will happen?

Figure 4-142. Adding an automatic reset to the timer.

Figure 4-143. Close-up of the revision on the breadboard. The pulldown resistor, the tactile
switch, and associated connections have been removed. The green wire has been inserted.

Run the counter again. It counts from 0000 up to 0111. The very next binary
output should be 1000, but as soon as the fourth digit transitions from 0 to 1, the
high state is sensed by the reset pin, forcing the counter back to 0000.
Can you see the leftmost LED flicker, before the counter resets? I doubt it,
because the counter responds in less than a millionth of a second.
The counter now runs from 0000 through 0111 before automatically repeating
itself. Because counting from 0000 through 0111 binary is equivalent to counting
from 0 to 7 in decimal, we now have a divide-by-8 counter. (Previously, it was a
divide-by-16 counter.)
Suppose you move your reset wire from the fourth digit to the third digit. Now
you have a divide-by-4 counter.
You can easily wire almost any 4-bit binary counter so that it resets after 2, 4,
or 8 input pulses.
The number of states in the output of a counter, before it repeats, is known as the
modulus, often abbreviated as “mod.” A mod-8 counter repeats after eight pulses
(which are numbered from 0 through 7).

Converting to Modulus 6
What about the project that we are supposed to be working on here, to generate
electronic dice patterns? I’m getting to it. Because a die has six sides, I have a
feeling that we may need to rewire the counter so that it repeats after six states.
In binary code, the output sequence will look like this: 000, 001, 010, 011, 100,
101. (We can ignore the most significant bit, in column D, because we don’t
need it for just six states.) I need to make the counter reset after its output of 5
decimal, which is 101 binary.
(Why 5 decimal, and not 6 decimal? Because we are counting upward from 0. It
would be more convenient in this project if the counter would start from 1, but it
doesn’t do that.)
What’s the next output after 101 binary? The answer is 110 binary.
Is there something distinctive about 110? If you study the sequence, you’ll see
that 110 is the first in the series that begins with two high bits.
How can we tell the counter, “When you have a 1 in column B, and a 1 in

column C, reset to 0000?” The word “and” in the last sentence should give you a
clue. An AND gate has a high output when, and only when, its two inputs are
high. Just what we need.
Can we drop it right in? Absolutely, because all the members of the 74HCxx
chip family are designed to talk to each other. In Figure 4-144 you will see that I
have added an AND gate. Of course, to use it on your breadboard, you’ll have to
add an appropriate chip, which is a 74HC08. It contains four AND gates, of
which we only need one. Therefore, in addition to power connections, its unused
inputs must be grounded. This is a bit of a hassle, but I’ll show you how to do it,
as soon as I make a few more additions and modifications. (The unused outputs
must be left unconnected.)

Figure 4-144. An AND gate has been added, to adjust the counter so that it only cycles
through six output states instead of its usual 16.

Meanwhile, please remember this take-home message:
You can use logic chip(s) with a counter to change the modulus of the counter
by looking for a distinctive pattern in the output states, and feeding back a
signal to the reset pin.

Not Using a Seven-Segment Display
For the dice display, I could just use a seven-segment numeral that counts from 1
to 6. But this is a problem, because the counter runs from 0 through 5. I don’t see
an easy way to convert 000 binary to a seven-segment numeral 1, 001 binary to a
seven-segment numeral 2, and so on.
Could we make the counter skip 000 binary somehow? Er, maybe, but I’m not
sure how. Perhaps by using a three-input OR gate that would feed back to the
clock input to advance the counter to the next state—but then this would conflict
with the usual clock signals, and it all sounds like a lot of trouble to me.
In any case, I’m not very excited by using a seven-segment numeral in this
project, because it’s not visually appealing. Why not use LEDs that emulate the
pattern of spots on an actual die? The sequence is shown in Figure 4-145.

Figure 4-145. The series of spot patterns to be reproduced by LEDs.

Can you figure out a way to convert the binary output from the counter to
illuminate the LEDs in those patterns?

Choosing the Gates
I’ll start with the easiest option. If I connect output A from the counter (see
Figure 4-138) to the LED that represents the center spot of the die, that will work
out well, because the center spot is only illuminated for patterns 1, 3, and 5, and
goes out for patterns 2, 4, and 6. This is exactly the way that output A behaves.
Then things get a little tricky. I need to illuminate a diagonal pair of spots for
patterns 4, 5, and 6, and the other diagonal pair for 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6. But how?
Figure 4-146 shows my answer to the problem. You’ll see I have added a couple
more logic gates: a three-input NOR, and a two-input OR. Alongside I have
shown the sequence of binary numbers, and the spot patterns that each number

creates on the die.
To make things work, I had to begin with the die showing a 6 pattern when the
counter starts at 000 binary. The sequence of patterns really doesn’t matter, so
long as they are all represented. They’re going to be selected at random anyway.
Figure 4-147 shows how the counter outputs light up the different patterns of
spots. And just in case this still isn’t entirely clear, I have created a snapshot
sequence showing high and low states in the circuit as the counter increments
from 000 through 101. The snapshots are shown in Figure 4-148, Figure 4-149,
and Figure 4-150.

Figure 4-146. A logic network to create the sequence of spots on a die.

I squeezed the snapshots so that I could fit two into the width of a column, and I
omitted the AND gate, because it doesn’t do anything during the counting range
of 000 through 101. It responds only when the counter tries to advance to 110—
at which point, the AND sets it back to 000.

Figure 4-147. How the outputs from the binary counter are used to light the patterns of
spots.

Figure 4-148. The logic for generating patterns 6 and 1.

Figure 4-149. The logic for generating patterns 2 and 3.

Figure 4-150. The logic for generating patterns 4 and 5.

If you’re wondering how I came up with this selection of logic gates to translate
the counter output into the dice patterns, I’m not sure I know how to tell you.
There’s a certain amount of trial and error, and some intuitive guesses involved
in creating this kind of logic diagram. At least, that’s the way it is for me. There
are more rigorous and formal ways of doing it, but personally I don’t find them
so easy.

The Finished Circuit
The schematic in Figure 4-151 was derived from the logic diagram in Figure 4146. The breadboarded version is shown in Figure 4-152.

The component values are shown in Figure 4-153. Note that I changed the
timing resistor and timing capacitor for the 555 timer, so that it now runs around
5kHz. The idea of this circuit is that you will stop the timer at an arbitrary
moment, after it has gone through hundreds of cycles. This way, you should end
up with a random number.
I have added a switchable 22µF capacitor that can make the timer run slowly
(about 2Hz) if you want to demonstrate how the counting works, to anyone who
is skeptical.
I haven’t bothered to show the values for the lower half of the breadboard,
because the only components there are the chips. That’s a nice aspect of building
circuits based on logic: you don’t have to worry about squeezing in resistors and
capacitors. Chips and wires do most of the work.
The numbered outputs at the bottom of the circuit in Figure 4-151 and Figure 4152 correspond with the inputs to the pattern of LEDs shown in Figure 4-154.
There isn’t room on the breadboard to add the LEDs, so you will either need a
second breadboard, or you can drill some holes to mount the LEDs in a piece of
plywood or plastic.

Figure 4-151. A complete circuit for emulating the roll of a single die.

Figure 4-152. Breadboarded version of the single-die circuit.

Figure 4-153. Values for the components in the control section of the dice simulation.

Three pairs of the LEDs are wired in series, because a logic chip isn’t powerful
enough to drive a pair of LEDs in parallel. Putting them in series will require
you to use a lower-value resistor than usual. The way to do this is to apply
5VDC to one of the pairs of LEDs through your meter, set to measure milliamps.
Try a 220-ohm series resistor, and see how much current you measure. If you
aim for a maximum of 15mA, that will be within the specifications of HC chip
outputs. You may need a resistor with a value of 150 ohms or 100 ohms,
depending on the characteristics of the LEDs that you are using.
Finally apply 5VDC through a 330-ohm resistor to the center LED, and compare
its brightness to the LEDs wired in pairs. You may have to increase the resistor
value to make the center LED visually equivalent to the others.

Hook up the LEDs to the logic circuit, hold down the button, release it, and you
have your dice value (or, to be semantically correct, your die value).

Figure 4-154. Wiring seven LEDs (six of them in pairs, in series) to display the spot patterns
of a single die.

How do you know that it gives you a really random result? Really, the only way
to be sure is to use it repeatedly and note how many times each number comes
up. You might need to run it maybe 1,000 times to get decent verification.
Because the circuit relies on the behavior of a human being pressing a button,
there is no way to automate the testing process. All I can say is, the result really
should be random.

Good News
There are more chips in this circuit than you’ve used in previous circuits in the
book, but in the immortal words of Professor Farnsworth, in one of my favorite
TV shows, Futurama: “Good news, everyone!”

The good news is that you can modify this circuit to simulate two dice instead of
one, simply by adding some more wires and LEDs. You don’t need any more
chips at all.
We have a lot of unused logic gates in the AND, NOR, and OR chips. Three
ANDs are left over, two NORs, and two ORs. In addition, there is also an
entirely separate counter in the 74HC393 chip. This is exactly what you need.
The question is, how to create a second series of random numbers, different from
the first. Maybe add another 555 timer, running at a different speed?
I don’t like this idea, because the two timers will go in and out of phase with
each other, and some pairs of values may come up more than others. I think it
would be a better idea if the first counter runs from 000 through 101 binary, and
then triggers the second counter to advance from 000 to 001. The first counter
goes from 000 through 101 again, and triggers the second counter to move on to
010. And so on.
The second counter will run at one-sixth the speed of the first, but if you drive
them fast enough, the patterns will still be too fast to see. The great advantage of
this arrangement is that every possible combination of values will be displayed
an equal number of times, so they should all have an almost-equal chance of
coming up, just as if you were using two real dice.
Why do I say “almost equal”? Because, bear in mind there is a tiny delay when a
counter resets itself from 101 binary to 000 binary. But if the lefthand counter is
running at around 5kHz, a delay of less than one-millionth of a second seems
trivial.

Chained Counters
The last remaining question is how the first counter can advance the second
counter when it reaches 101 and flips back to 000.
This is easy. Consider what happens when the output from the first counter
changes from 011 to 101 to 110, the last value lasting only for an instant before it
resets to 000. After the C output reaches a high state, it drops low.
What does the clock input of the second counter need, to make it advance by one
count? You already know that. It needs a high state that drops low. All you have
to do is to connect the C output, from the first timer, to the clock input of the

second timer. Indeed, the chip is designed to work this way, so that the falling
state from one timer acts as a “carry” signal to advance the next timer.
The schematic in Figure 4-155 shows the circuit for two dice. I’m not including
another breadboard picture, because you should be able to add the new wiring
yourself. It is almost exactly a mirror image of the wiring that you already
installed, but don’t forget to move it down by one row of holes on the
breadboard, to allow room for the positive power supply to each chip.

Figure 4-155. Complete circuit to run two LED dice.

Going Further
Could the circuit be simplified? As I mentioned at the beginning, a decade
counter would require simpler logic than a binary counter. You wouldn’t need an
AND gate to make it count with a modulus of six, because just the seventh
output pin on the decade counter could be connected back to the reset.
However, if you want to run two dice, you would need two decade counters, and
that would mean two separate chips. Also, you would still need two chips to
handle the logic for the two displays. To see why, search online for digital dice.
At this point, you should be able to understand the schematics that will be
displayed in Google Images.
The only simplification I can see, in the circuit that I have described, would be to
substitute two diodes for each OR gate. The circuits that you’ll find online often
do this, but you will end up with a signal passing through two diodes in
succession, which will drop the voltage below a level that I feel is acceptable.

The Slowdown Problem
The version of this project that I included in the first edition of Make:
Electronics included a nice extra feature. When you took your finger off the
“run” button, the die pattern display gradually slowed before it stopped. This
increased the suspense of waiting to see what the final number would be.
The feature was enabled by splitting the power supply to the 555 timer. The
timer was “always on” but voltage to its RC network was shut off when the
player stopped pressing the “run” button. At that point, a large capacitor slowly
discharged into the network, and the timer slowed as the voltage diminished.
A reader named Jasmin Patry sent email telling me that when he used the circuit,
the value 1 came up disproportionately often, and he suspected that this had
something to do with the slowdown feature.
Jasmin turned out to be a video game designer who understands much more
about randomicity than I do. He had the polite, patient style of a man who really
knew what he was talking about, and he seemed interested in helping to fix the

problem that he had identified.
After he sent me graphs showing the relative frequency of each number in the
simulation, I had to agree that the problem existed. I suggested many possible
explanations, all of which turned out to be wrong. In the end Jasmin successfully
proved that the lower power consumption of a single LED, relative to the higher
power consumption of six LEDs, allowed the timer to keep running for a little
longer when the voltage was marginal. This increased the odds that it would stop
during that period.
Eventually Jasmin suggested a substitute circuit, in which a second 555 timer
was added, and the outputs from the two timers were merged through an XOR
gate. He successfully proved that this eliminated the bias toward one number. I
was delighted that one of my readers had learned so much from reading my
book, he was able to identify and fix a mistake that he found in it.
In this new edition, I have omitted the slowdown capacitor that caused the
trouble in the first edition. But I haven’t adopted Jasmin’s circuit, because it was
quite complicated. A single die would have needed its own pair of 555 timers,
plus the XOR gate that he wanted. He also used diodes that I would have
replaced with OR gates, and there wasn’t nearly enough room on the breadboard.
With his permission, I will send his circuit as a freebie to anyone who registers
with me (using the procedure described in the Preface—see “Me Informing
You”). I cannot easily reprint it here, because I would have to redraw it
completely to fit the two-column format.

Slowdown Alternatives
You’d think there must be a simpler way to make the display slow down, without
affecting the randomicity. When I looked online, I found that someone had used
an NPN transistor with its emitter connected to pin 7 of the timer, and a capacitor
between its base and its collector, so that when power was disconnected, the
transistor output would gradually diminish. Several other people had done the
same thing in their dice circuits. However, I suspect that this configuration may
be subject to the same problems that Jasmin found.
I have also seen circuits using exactly the same slowdown capacitor
configuration that I used (for example, on the Doctronics website). I think they

are almost certainly susceptible to the problem that I have described.
My final answer on this topic may be dissatisfying: I don’t know how to achieve
a slowing effect without adding more components that will greatly complicate
the circuit.
However—just before the text of this book was finalized, my friend and factchecker Fredrik Jansson suggested powering the 555 timer from a separate
voltage regulator, to isolate it from power fluctuations in the rest of the circuit. I
like this idea, but there wasn’t time to try it before the book went into
production.
I built a completely different dice circuit using a PICAXE microcontroller, but
discovered that this had its own randomicity issues because of the imperfect
random-number generator built into the chip.
In Experiment 34 (the last one in this book), you’ll find that I have created yet
another dice simulation, using an Arduino. But here again, I had to depend on
the built-in random-number generator, and I am skeptical that it creates an
evenly distributed range of numbers.

Figure 4-156. This electronic dice display uses 10mm LEDs embedded in a box of sanded
polycarbonate plastic.

The issue of randomness is really not simple at all. I became so interested in it
after my emails with Jasmin Patry, I explored it at length in Make: More
Electronics, and also wrote a column about it in Make: magazine (volume 45) in
collaboration with Aaron Logue, who runs his own little website describing
projects that he builds. He introduced me to the concept of using a reversebiased transistor to generate random noise, which is then processed with a clever
algorithm attributed to the great computer scientist, John von Neumann. This, I
think, is as close to a perfect random-number generator as you can get—but the
chip count is not trivial.
All of these enhancements go beyond the range of an introductory-level book. If
any readers have a really simple enhancement to the dice circuit presented here,
to add the slowdown effect, my email inbox is always open, and yes, I do read
the messages.
Meanwhile, I’m including a couple of photographs of finished electronic-dice
projects. The one in Figure 4-156 was included in the first edition of this book,
in 2009. Figure 4-157 shows one that I built around 1975, after Don Lancaster’s
amazing TTL Cookbook told me how I could use 74xx logic chips. Forty years
later, the LEDs still light up randomly. (At least, I think they’re random.)

Figure 4-157. Electronic dice designed and built around 1975, in a box of Lucite and blackpainted plywood.

Chapter 5. What Next?
At this point, we can branch out in numerous directions. Here are some
possibilities:
Audio: This is a large field including hobby projects such as amplifiers and
“stomp boxes,” to modify guitar sound.
Electromagnetism: This is a topic that I haven’t even mentioned yet, but it has
some fascinating applications.
Radio-frequency devices: Anything that receives or transmits radio waves,
from an ultra-simple AM radio onward.
Programmable microcontrollers: These are tiny computers on a single chip.
You write a little program on your desktop computer, and load it into the chip.
The program tells the chip to follow a sequence of procedures, such as receiving
input from a sensor, waiting for a fixed period, and sending output to a motor.
Popular controllers include the Arduino, PICAXE, BASIC Stamp, and many
more.
I don’t have space to develop all of these topics fully, so what I’m going to do is
introduce you to them by describing just a few projects in each category. You
can decide which interests you the most, and then proceed beyond this book by
reading other guides that specialize in that interest.
I’m also going to make some suggestions about setting up a productive work
area, reading relevant books, catalogs, and other printed sources, and generally
proceeding further into hobby electronics.

Tools, Equipment, Components, and Supplies
No additional tools or equipment are needed for this final chapter of the book.
For a summary of all the components, see Figure 6-8. See “Supplies” for a list of
additional supplies (primarily wire, for the coils in Experiments 25, 26, 28, 29,
and 31).

Customizing Your Work Area
At this point, if you’re getting hooked on the fun of creating hardware but
haven’t allocated a permanent corner to your new hobby, I have some
suggestions. Having tried many different options over the years, my main piece
of advice is this: don’t build a workbench!
Many hobby electronics books want you to go shopping for 2 × 4s and plywood,
as if a workbench has to be custom-fabricated to satisfy strict criteria about size
and shape. I find this puzzling. To me, the size and shape is not very important. I
think the most important issue is storage.
I want tools and parts to be easily accessible, whether they’re tiny transistors or
big spools of wire. I certainly don’t want to go digging around on shelves that
require me to get up and walk across the room.
This leads me to two conclusions:
You need storage around the workbench.
You need storage below the workbench.
Many DIY workbench projects allow little or no storage underneath. Or, they
suggest open shelves, which will be vulnerable to dust. My minimum
configuration would be a pair of two-drawer file cabinets with a slab of 3/4-inch
plywood or a Formica-clad kitchen countertop placed across them. File cabinets
are ideal for storing all kinds of objects, not just files, and you can often find
cheap ones at yard sales and thrift stores.
Of all the workbenches I’ve used, the one I liked best was an old-fashioned steel
office desk—the kind of monster that dates back to the 1950s. They’re difficult
to move (because of their weight) and don’t look beautiful, but you can buy them
cheaply from used office furniture dealers, they’re generous in size, they
withstand abuse, and they last forever. The drawers are deep and usually slide in
and out smoothly, like good file-cabinet drawers. Best of all, the desk has so
much steel in it that you can use it to ground yourself before touching
components that are sensitive to static electricity. If you use an antistatic wrist
strap, you can simply attach it to a sheet-metal screw that you drive into one
corner of the desk.

What will you put in the deep drawers of your desk or file cabinets? Some
paperwork may be useful, perhaps including the following documents:
Product datasheets
Parts catalogs
Sketches and plans that you draw yourself
The remaining capacity of each drawer can be filled with plastic storage boxes.
The boxes can contain tools that you don’t use so often (such as a heat gun or a
high-capacity soldering iron), and larger-sized components (such as
loudspeakers, AC adapters, project boxes, and circuit boards). You should look
for storage boxes that measure around 11 inches long, 8 inches wide, and 5
inches deep, with straight sides. Boxes that you can buy at Walmart will be
cheaper, but they often have tapering sides, which are not space-efficient.
The boxes that I like best are Akro-Grids, made by Akro-Mils (see Figure 5-1
and Figure 5-2). These are very rugged, with optional transparent snap-on lids.
Perspective in the photographs make the boxes look as if they taper downward,
but they don’t. You can download the full Akro-Mills catalog online and then
search online for retail suppliers. You’ll find that Akro-Mils also sells an
incredible variety of parts bins, but I don’t like open bins because their contents
are vulnerable to dust and dirt.

Figure 5-1. Akro-Grid boxes contain grooves allowing them to be partitioned into numerous

compartments for convenient parts storage. The height of the box in this photograph allows
three to be stacked in a typical file-cabinet drawer.

Figure 5-2. Lids are sold separately for Akro-Grid boxes to keep the contents dust-free. The
taller box shown here allows two to be stacked in a file-cabinet drawer.

For medium-size components, such as potentiometers, power connectors, control
knobs, and toggle switches, I like storage containers measuring about 11 inches
long, 8 inches wide, and 2 inches deep, divided into four to six sections. You can
buy these from Michaels (the craft store), but I prefer to shop online for the
Plano brand, as they seem more durably constructed. The Plano products that are
most suitable for medium-size electronic parts are classified as fishing-tackle
boxes.
For undivided, flat-format storage boxes, the Prolatch 23600-00 is ideally sized
to fit a file-cabinet drawer, and the latches are sufficiently secure that you could
stack a series of them on their long edges. See Figure 5-3.

Figure 5-3. This Plano brand box is undivided, making it useful for storing spools of wire or
medium-size tools. When stacked upright on its long edge, three will fit precisely in a filecabinet drawer.

Plano also sells some really nicely designed toolboxes, one of which you can
place on your desktop. It will have small drawers for easy access to
screwdrivers, pliers, and other basics. Because you need a work area that’s only
about three feet square for most electronics projects, surrendering some desk
space to a toolbox is not a big sacrifice.
If you have a steel desk with relatively shallow drawers, one of them can be
allocated for printed catalogs. Don’t underrate the usefulness of hardcopy, just
because you can buy everything online. The Mouser catalog, for instance, has an
index, which is more useful in some respects than their online search feature,
and the catalog is divided into helpful categories. Many times I’ve found useful
parts that I never knew existed, just by browsing, which is much quicker than
flipping through PDF pages online, even with a broadband connection.
Currently, Mouser is still quite generous about sending out their catalogs, which
contain over 2,000 pages. McMaster-Carr will also send you a catalog, but only
after you’ve ordered from them, and only once a year. It is probably the most
comprehensive, most wonderful catalog of tools and hardware in the world.

Now, the big question: how to store all the dinky little parts, such as resistors,
capacitors, and chips? I’ve tried various solutions to this problem. The most
obvious is to buy a case of small drawers, each of which is removable, so you
can place it on your desk while you access its contents. But I don’t like this
system, for two reasons. First, for very small components, you need to subdivide
the drawers, and the dividers are never secure. And second, the removability of
the drawers creates the risk of accidentally emptying the contents on the floor.
Maybe you’re too careful to allow this to happen, but I’m not. In fact, on one
occasion I tipped the entire case of drawers onto the floor.
My personal preference is to use Darice Mini-Storage boxes, shown in Figure 54. You can find these at Michaels in small quantities, or buy them more
economically in bulk online—just search for:
darice mini storage box
The blue boxes are subdivided into five compartments that are exactly the right
size and shape for resistors. The yellow boxes are subdivided into 10
compartments, which are ideal for semiconductors. The purple boxes aren’t
divided at all, and the red boxes have a mix of divisions. All the boxes share the
same stock number: 2505-12.
The dividers are molded into the boxes, so you don’t have the annoyance
associated with removable dividers that slip out of position, allowing
components to mix together. The box lids fit tightly, so that even if you drop one
of the boxes, it probably won’t open. The lids have metal hinges, and a ridge
around the edge that makes the boxes securely stackable.

Figure 5-4. Darice Mini-Storage boxes are ideal for components such as resistors,
capacitors, and semiconductors. The boxes can be stacked stably, stored on shelves, or
grouped in larger boxes. The brand sticker is easily removed after being warmed with a heat
gun.

After considerable searching, I found cheap plastic bins, with lids, measuring
about 8 inches by 13 inches by 5 inches deep. Each bin will hold nine Darice
parts boxes. The bins can then be categorized and stored on shelves.

Labeling
No matter which way you choose to store your parts, labeling them is essential.
Any ink-jet printer will produce neat-looking labels, and if you use peelable
(nonpermanent) labels, you’ll be able to reorganize your parts in the future, as
always seems to become necessary. I use color-coded labels for my collection of
resistors, so that I can compare the stripes on a resistor with the code on the
label, and see immediately if the resistor has been put in the wrong place. See
Figure 5-5.
Even more important: you need to place a second (non-adhesive) label inside
each compartment with the components. This label tells you the manufacturer’s
part number and the source, so that reordering is easy. I buy a lot of items from
Mouser, and whenever I open their little plastic bags of parts, I snip out the

section of the bag that has the identifying label on it, and slide it into the
compartment of my parts box before I put the parts on top of it. This saves
frustration later.

Figure 5-5. To check that resistors are not placed in the wrong compartments, print the color
code on each label.

If I were really well organized, I would also keep a database on my computer
listing everything that I buy, including the date, the source, the type of
component, and the quantity. But I’m not that well organized.

On the Bench
Some items are so essential that they should sit on the bench or desktop on a
permanent basis. These include your soldering iron(s), Helping Hand with
magnifier, desk lamp, breadboard, power strip, and power supply. For a desk
lamp, I prefer to use one that contains an LED bulb, for reasons explained in
Experiment 14.
A power supply for your projects is a matter of personal preference. If you’re
serious about electronics, you can buy a unit that delivers properly smoothed

current at a variety of properly regulated and calibrated voltages. Your little
wall-plug AC adapter cannot do this, and its output may vary depending on how
heavily you load it. Still, as you’ve seen, it is sufficient for basic experiments,
and when you’re working with logic chips, you need to mount a 5-volt regulator
on your breadboard anyway. Overall, I consider a good power supply optional.
Another optional item is an oscilloscope. This will show you, graphically, the
electrical fluctuations inside your wires and components, and by applying probes
at different points, you can track down errors in your circuit. It’s a neat gadget to
own, but it will cost a few hundred dollars, and for our tasks so far, it has not
been necessary. If you plan to get seriously into audio circuits, an oscilloscope
becomes far more important, because you’ll want to see the shapes of the
waveforms that you generate.
You can try to economize on an oscilloscope by buying a unit that plugs into the
USB port of your computer and uses your computer monitor to display the
signal. I have tried one of these, and was not entirely happy with the results. It
worked, but did not seem accurate or reliable for low-frequency signals. Maybe I
was unlucky, but I decided not to try any other brands.
The surface of your desk or workbench will undoubtedly become scarred by
random scuffs, cut marks, and drops of molten solder. I use a piece of half-inch
plywood, two feet square, to protect my primary work area, and I clamp a
miniature vise to its edge. In the past I used to cover the plywood with a square
of conductive foam, to reduce the risk of static discharge from me to sensitive
components. Over the years, though, I realized that my particular combination of
carpet, chair, and shoes does not cause me to suffer from static. This is a matter
for you to determine by experience. If you see a tiny little spark sometimes when
you touch a metal object, and you feel a little zap of electricity, you need to
consider grounding yourself and perhaps using antistatic foam (or a piece of
metal) on your working surface.
Inevitably, during your work you’ll create a mess. Little pieces of bent wire,
stray screws, fasteners, and fragments of stripped insulation tend to accumulate,
and can be a liability. If metal parts or fragments get into a project that you’re
building, they can cause short circuits. So you need a trash container. But it has
to be easy to use. I use a full-size garbage pail, because it’s so big that I can’t
miss it when I throw something toward it, and I can never forget that it’s there.

Last, but most essential: a computer. Now that all datasheets are available online,
and all components can be ordered online, and many sample circuits are placed
online by hobbyists and educators, I don’t think anyone can work efficiently
without quick Internet access. To avoid wasting space, you can place a tower
computer on the floor and mount its monitor on the wall—or use a tablet, or a
small, cheap laptop that has a minimal footprint.
A possible workbench configuration, using a steel desk, is shown in Figure 5-6.
A more space-efficient configuration is suggested in Figure 5-7.

Figure 5-6. An old steel office desk can be as good as, if not better than, a conventional
workbench when building small electronics projects. It provides a large work area and
ample storage, and has sufficient mass for you to ground yourself when dealing with
components that are sensitive to static electricity.

Figure 5-7. For maximum utilization of available space, consider walling yourself in.

Reference Sources Online
When people ask me to recommend a website offering basic information at entry
level, I recommend Doctronics.
I like the way they draw their schematics, and I like the way they include many
illustrations of circuits on breadboards, as I do myself. They also sell kits, if
you’re willing to pay and wait for shipping from the UK.
My next favorite hobby site is also British-based: the Electronics Club. It’s not
as comprehensive as Doctronics, but very friendly and easy to understand.
For a more theory-based approach, try ElectronicsTutorials.
This will go a little farther than the theory sections I’ve included here.

For an idiosyncratic selection of electronics topics, try Don Lancaster’s Guru’s
Lair.
Lancaster wrote The TTL Cookbook more than 30 years ago, which opened up
electronics to at least two generations of hobbyists and experimenters. He knows
what he’s talking about, and isn’t afraid of getting into some fairly ambitious
areas such as writing his own PostScript printer drivers and creating his own
serial-port connections. You’ll find a lot of ideas there.

Books
Yes, you do need books. A few of the ones I use are stacked up in Figure 5-8.
As you’re already reading this one, I won’t recommend other beginners’ guides.
Instead, I’ll suggest some titles that will take you farther in various directions,
and can be used for reference.
Make: More Electronics is the sequel that I wrote to this book, which includes all
the topics (such as op-amps) for which I did not have space here. Some of the
circuits are more ambitious. If you read that book, and this book, you will cover
most aspects of electronics that are accessible to an individual on a moderate
budget.

Figure 5-8. A sun-damaged copy of Don Lancaster’s classic guide to TTL chips remains at
the top of my stack of reference books. It opened up a whole new era of hobby electronics
more than 40 years ago. Much of its information is still useful, and copies are available from
secondhand sources, including Amazon.

The Encyclopedia of Electronic Components is a project that I began before I
realized quite how demanding it would be. Consequently, its three volumes were
repeatedly delayed. Volumes 1 and 2 are in print as I write this. By the time you
read this, maybe Volume 3 will be in print too. The idea of these books is that
they are ideal for quick reference. They can remind you of what you forgot, and
they go into a lot of detail. By comparison, Make: Electronics is a teaching guide
full of hands-on tutorials, in which I try not to get bogged down in detail.
Now let me list the books that I consider most important, written by other
people:
Practical Electronics for Inventors, by Paul Scherz with Simon Monk (McGrawHill, Second Edition, 2013): This is a massive, comprehensive book, well worth
the $40 cover price. Despite its title, you won’t need to invent anything to find it
useful. It’s my primary reference source, covering a wide range of concepts,
from the basic properties of resistors and capacitors all the way to some fairly
highend math.

Getting Started with Arduino, by Massimo Banzi and Michael Shiloh (Make,
2014): This is the simplest introduction around, and will help to familiarize you
with the processing language used in Arduino (similar to the C language, if you
know anything about that).
Making Things Talk, by Tom Igoe (Make: Books, 2011): This ambitious and
comprehensive volume shows how to make the most of the Arduino’s ability to
communicate with its environment, even getting it to access sites on the Internet.
TTL Cookbook, by Don Lancaster (Howard W. Sams & Co, 1974): The 1974
copyright date is not a misprint! You may be able to find some later editions, but
whichever one you buy, it will be secondhand. Lancaster wrote his guide before
the 74xx series of chips was emulated on a pin-for-pin basis by CMOS versions
such as the 74HCxx series, but it’s still a good reference, because the concepts
and part numbers haven’t changed, and his writing is so accurate and concise.
Just bear in mind that his information about high and low logic voltages is no
longer accurate.
CMOS Sourcebook, by Newton C. Braga (Sams Technical Publishing, 2001):
This book is entirely devoted to the 4000 series of CMOS chips, not the 74HCxx
series that I’ve dealt with primarily here. The 4000 series is older and must be
handled more carefully, because it’s more vulnerable to static electricity than the
generations that came later. Still, the chips remain widely available, and their
great advantage is their willingness to tolerate a wide voltage range, typically
from 5 to 15 volts. This means you can set up a 12-volt circuit that drives a 555
timer, and use output from the timer to go straight into CMOS chips (for
example). The book is well organized in three sections: CMOS basics, functional
diagrams (showing pinouts for all the main chips), and simple circuits showing
how to make the chips perform basic functions.
The Encyclopedia of Electronic Circuits, by Rudolf F. Graf (Tab Books, 1985):
A totally miscellaneous collection of schematics, with minimal explanations.
This is a useful book to have around if you have an idea and want to see how
someone else approached the problem. Examples are often more valuable than
general explanations, and this book is a massive compendium of examples.
Many additional volumes in the series have been published, but start with this
one, and you may find it has everything you need.
The Circuit Designer’s Companion, by Tim Williams (Newnes, Second Edition,

2005): Much useful information about making things work in practical
applications, but the style is dry and fairly technical. May be useful if you’re
interested in moving your electronics projects into the real world.
The Art of Electronics, by Paul Horowitz and Winfield Hill (Cambridge
University Press, Second Edition, 1989): The fact that this book has been
through 20 printings tells you two things: (1) many people regard it as a
fundamental resource; (2) secondhand copies should be widely available, which
is an important consideration, as the list price is over $100. It’s written by two
academics, and has a more technical approach than Practical Electronics for
Inventors, but I find it useful when I’m looking for backup information.
Getting Started in Electronics, by Forrest M. Mims III (Master Publishing,
Fourth Edition, 2007): Although the original dates back to 1983, this is still a fun
book to have. I think I have covered many of its topics here, but you may benefit
by reading explanations and advice from a completely different source, and it
goes a little farther than I have into some electrical theory, on an easy-tounderstand basis, with cute drawings. Be warned that it’s a brief book with
eclectic coverage. Don’t expect it to have all the answers.

Experiment 25: Magnetism
Now that I have surveyed your future options, let me deal with a very important
topic that has been waiting in the background: the relationship between
electricity and magnetism. Quickly this will lead us into audio reproduction and
radio, and I’ll describe the fundamentals of self-inductance, which is the third
and final basic property of passive components (resistance and capacitance being
the other two). I left self-inductance until last because it has limited application
to DC circuits. But as soon as we start dealing with analog signals that fluctuate,
it becomes fundamental.

Fundamentals: A Two-Way Relationship
Electricity can create magnetism:
When electricity flows through a wire, the electricity creates a magnetic force
around the wire.

This principle is used in almost every electric motor in the world.
Magnetism can create electricity:
When a wire moves through a magnetic field, the field creates a flow of
electricity in the wire.
This principle is used in power generation. A diesel engine, or a water-powered
turbine, or a windmill, or some other source of energy can turn coils of wire
through a powerful magnetic field. Electricity is induced in the coils. With the
exception of solar panels, all practical sources of electric power use magnets and
coils of wire.
In the next experiment, you’ll see a dramatic mini-demo of this effect. It should
be a part of any school science class, but even if you’ve done it in the past, I
suggest that you do it again, because setting it up takes only a matter of
moments.

What You Will Need
Large screwdriver (1)
22-gauge wire, or thinner (no more than 6 feet)
9-volt battery (1)
Paper clip (1)

Procedure
This couldn’t be simpler. Wind the wire around the shaft of the screwdriver, near
its tip. The turns should be neat and tight and closely spaced, and you’ll need to
make 100 of them, within a distance of no more than 2 inches. To fit them into
this space, you’ll have to make turns on top of previous turns. If the final turn
tends to unwind itself, secure it with a piece of tape.
Now apply the 9-volt battery. At first sight, this looks like a very bad idea,
because you’re going to short out your battery just as you did in Experiment 2.
But when you pass current through a wire that’s coiled instead of straight, the
flow of current is inhibited (in a way that I will explain shortly), and the current
does some work (such as, it can move a paper clip).

Put a small paper clip near the screwdriver blade, as shown in Figure 5-9.

Figure 5-9. This most basic electromagnet is just strong enough to attract a paper clip.

The surface should be smooth, so that the paper clip can slide across it easily.
Because many screwdrivers are already magnetic, you may find that the paper
clip is naturally attracted to the tip of the blade. If this happens, move the clip
just outside the range of attraction. Now apply the 9 volts to the circuit, and the
clip should jump to the tip of the screwdriver.
Congratulations: you just made an electromagnet. The schematic is shown in
Figure 5-10.

Figure 5-10. A schematic can’t get much simpler than this.

Theory: Inductance
When electricity flows through a wire, it creates a magnetic field around the
wire. Because the electricity “induces” this effect, it is known as inductance.
This is illustrated in Figure 5-11.

Figure 5-11. When the flow of electricity is from left to right along this conductor, it induces
a magnetic force shown by the green arrows.

The field around a straight wire is very weak, but if we bend the wire into a
circle, the magnetic force starts to accumulate, pointing through the center of the

circle, as shown in Figure 5-12. If we add more circles, to form a coil, the force
accumulates even more. And if we put a steel or iron object (such as a
screwdriver) in the center of the coil, the effectiveness increases further.

Figure 5-12. When the conductor is bent to form a circle, the cumulative magnetic force acts
through the center of the circle, as shown by the large arrow.

Figure 5-13 shows this graphically, along with a formula known as “Wheeler’s
approximation,” which allows you to calculate the inductance of a coil
approximately, assuming you know the inner radius, the outer radius, the width,
and the number of turns. (The dimensions must be in inches, not metric.) The
basic unit of inductance is the henry, named after American electrical pioneer
Joseph Henry. Because this is a large unit (like the farad), the formula expresses
inductance in microhenries.

Figure 5-13. A graphical representation showing how the dimensions and number of turns in
a coil affect its inductance, calculated approximately with a simple formula.

You’ll see from the graphs that if you keep the basic size of a coil the same, and
double the number of turns (by using thinner wire or wire with thinner
insulation), the reactance of the coil increases by a factor of four. This is because
the formula includes the factor N x N at the top. Here are some take-home
messages:

Inductance increases with the diameter of the coil.
Inductance increases approximately with the square of the number of turns.
(In other words, three times as many turns create nine times the inductance.)
If the number of turns remains the same, inductance is lower if you wind the
coil so that it’s slender and long, but is higher if you wind it so that it’s fat and
short.

Fundamentals: Coil Schematics and Basics
Check the schematic symbols for coils in Figure 5-14. Moving from left to right,
either of the first two symbols represents a coil with an air core (the first symbol
is older than the second). The third and fourth symbols indicate that the coil is
wound around a solid iron core, or a core composed of iron particles or ferrite,
respectively.

Figure 5-14. Schematic symbols to represent coils. See text for details.

An iron core will add to the inductance of a coil, because it increases the
magnetic effect.
If you measure the magnetic field created by a coil with a positive power source
at one end and negative ground at the other end, the field will reverse if you
reverse the polarity of the power supply.
Perhaps the most widespread application of coils is in transformers, where
alternating current in one coil induces alternating current in another, often
sharing the same iron core. If the primary (input) coil has half as many turns as
the secondary (output) coil, the voltage will be doubled, at half the current—

assuming hypothetically that the transformer is 100% efficient.

Background: Joseph Henry
Born in 1797, Joseph Henry was the first to develop and demonstrate powerful
electromagnets. He also originated the concept of “self-inductance,” meaning the
“electrical inertia” that is a property of a coil of wire.
Henry started out as the son of a day laborer in Albany, New York. He worked in
a general store before being apprenticed to a watchmaker, and was interested in
becoming an actor. Friends persuaded him to enroll at the Albany Academy,
where he turned out to have an aptitude for science. In 1826, he was appointed
Professor of Mathematics and Natural Philosophy at the Academy, even though
he was not a college graduate and described himself as being “principally selfeducated.” Michael Faraday was doing similar work in England, but Henry was
unaware of it.
Henry was appointed to Princeton in 1832, where he received $1,000 per year
and a free house. When Morse attempted to patent the telegraph, Henry testified
that he was already aware of its concept, and indeed had rigged a system on
similar principles to signal his wife, at home, when he was working in his
laboratory at the Philosophical Hall.
Henry taught chemistry, astronomy, and architecture, in addition to physical
science, and because science was not divided into strict specialties as it is now,
he investigated phenomena such as phosphorescence, sound, capillary action,
and ballistics. In 1846, he headed the newly founded Smithsonian Institution as
its secretary. His photograph appears in Figure 5-15.

Figure 5-15. Joseph Henry was an American experimenter who pioneered the investigation
of electromagnetism. This photograph is archived in Wikimedia Commons.

Experiment 26: Tabletop Power Generation
In Experiment 5, you saw that chemical reactions can generate electricity. Now
it’s time to see electricity generated by a magnet.

What You Will Need
Wire cutters, wire strippers, test leads, multimeter
Cylindrical neodymium magnet, 3/16” diameter by 1.5” long, axially
magnetized (1)
Hookup wire, 26-gauge, 24-gauge, or 22-gauge, total 200 feet
Low-current LED (1)

Capacitor, 1,000µF (1)
Switching diode, 1N4001 or similar (1)
Optional extras:
Cylindrical neodymium magnet, 3/4” diameter by 1” long, axially magnetized
(1)
Half-inch diameter wooden dowel, 6” long (minimum)
Steel screw, #6 size with flat head
PVC water pipe, 3/4” internal diameter, 6” long (minimum)
Two pieces of 1/4” plywood, each about 4” x 4” (you will need a 1” hole saw
or Forstner bit to drill a hole through the plywood)
Spool of magnet wire, quarter-pound, 26-gauge, about 350 feet (1)

Procedure
First, you need a magnet. Neodymium magnets are the strongest available, and
are fairly cheap if you choose the small cylindrical type. A magnet of just 3/16”
diameter and 1.5” long will be sufficient. Wrap about 10 turns of 22-gauge wire
tightly around it, as shown in Figure 5-16. Now allow the wire to loosen slightly,
so that the magnet can slide through the coils.

Figure 5-16. Just ten turns of wire can be sufficient to create a small electrical potential
when a magnet moves through them.

Set your meter to measure millivolts AC (not DC, because we’re going to be
dealing with alternating pulses of electricity). Strip a little insulation from each
end of the coil, and use alligator test leads to attach the meter. Grasp the magnet
between finger and thumb, and shuttle it quickly to and fro inside the coil. I’m
guessing you’ll see a value of 3mV to 5mV on your meter. Yes, this small
magnet, and 10 turns of wire, can generate a few millivolts.
Try winding a bigger coil, with the layers overlapping, as shown in Figure 5-17.
Move the magnet quickly again. You should find that you are generating more
voltage.

Figure 5-17. Adding more turns of wire will increase the measured voltage when the magnet
moves through them.

Remember the formula from the previous experiment, in which I showed how
passing electricity through more coils of wire would induce a stronger magnetic
field. It works both ways:
More coils of wire will generally induce a higher voltage, when a magnet

moves through the coils.
This leads me to wonder—if we had a bigger, stronger magnet and a lot of turns
of wire, could we generate enough electricity to power something, such as,
maybe, an LED?

Lighting an LED
I’m going to use 22-gauge wire, because you already have it for the other
experiments. The trouble is, it is relatively thick and has thick insulation. Two
hundred turns of this wire really begin to bulk up. This is why we should be
using magnet wire, which is pure copper wire with an ultra-thin coating of
insulation made from shellac or plastic film. Magnet wire is designed to pack as
densely as possible.
However, you may not feel like spending the money for a spool of magnet wire,
bearing in mind that you are unlikely to find any other use for it. So, I decided to
see if 22-gauge hookup wire would be workable in this experiment. The answer
is yes, but only just.
You do need 200 feet. That will cost a bit of money, but you can always reuse
the wire for normal purposes, such as creating jumpers for breadboards.
You can join two or more pieces of wire together when you are winding a spool,
and so long as you twist the stripped ends tightly, you don’t need to solder them.
You also need a more powerful magnet. The smallest that worked for me is
cylindrical, measures 1” long and 3/4” in diameter, and is axially magnetized,
meaning that the north and south poles are at opposite ends of its axis. (The axis
is an imaginary line that runs through the center of the cylinder, parallel with its
curved sides. You can imagine the cylinder like a shaft rotating around its axis.)
The equipment that I ended up with is shown in Figure 5-18. The magnet is at
the right-hand side. The spool I made from 1/4” plywood, and it is just over four
inches in diameter. A piece of 3/4” PVC water pipe runs through the center, and
its inside diameter is just a fraction wider than the diameter of the magnet, so
that the magnet can slide through it freely.

Figure 5-18. Two hundred turns of 22-gauge wire on a home-made spool, with a magnet that
attaches itself to a screw in a wooden dowel.

Push-fit the plywood circles onto the pipe, to create a spool. Now you need to
wind 200 feet of wire onto the spool—taking care to leave access to the inside
end of the wire. I drilled a small hole in one of the plywood circles, near the
center, and poked the wire out through the hole.
The width of the coil that you are going to wind should be about the same as the
length of the magnet, and the magnet inside the tube should be able to emerge
completely on either side of the coil. The cross-section of the spool in Figure 519 shows what I mean.
To hold the magnet conveniently, I drilled a hole in one end of a piece of 1/2”
wooden dowel, and inserted a #6 1” flat-headed screw. I was then able to hold
the dowel like a handle, while the magnet attracted itself firmly to the screw.
Now for the big moment. Use a couple of alligator test leads to attach the ends of
your coil to the inputs of your meter, and set the meter to AC volts, as you did
before. This time, though, set it to measure up to 2 volts.
With the magnet attached to the dowel, you can push it as quickly as possible in
and out of the PVC pipe. Alternatively, remove the magnet from the dowel, drop
it into the pipe, and rattle it up and down with your finger and thumb over the
ends of the pipe. If you really work hard, your meter should show a voltage of

around 0.8V.

Figure 5-19. Setup for generating just enough power to light an LED.

You took all that trouble, and you got less than a volt?
Ah, but your meter is averaging the current. Each pulse is probably peaking at a
higher voltage.
Disconnect your test leads from the meter, and attach them to a low-current
LED. Clamp the LED so that it doesn’t jostle around. Now when you move the
magnet vigorously, I think you will see the LED flicker. If it doesn’t, reverse the
orientation of the magnet in the tube and try again. You really need a low-current
LED to make this work.

Optional Extensions
If you are willing to spend a little more money, you can get much more
impressive results.
First, use a bigger magnet. I get excellent results from one that is 2” long and
5/8” in diameter. Of course, you’ll need a larger diameter of PVC pipe to
accommodate the magnet.
Second, buy a spool of proper magnet wire. I used about 500 feet of 26-gauge
wire. It’s easy to buy online; there are dozens of suppliers.
If you’re fortunate, your magnet wire will be supplied on a plastic spool with a
hole in the middle just a little bit bigger than the diameter of your magnet. And,
better still, the spool of magnet wire will allow you access to the “tail” of the
wire sticking out in the center of the spool, as shown circled in red in Figure 520.

Figure 5-20. A spool of magnet wire with the inside end accessible, circled in red.

To remove the thin film of insulation from the ends of the magnet wire, you can
scrape them very gently with a knife blade, or rub them with fine sandpaper.
Check with a magnifying glass to make sure that some insulation has been
removed. You can also apply your meter to check the resistance, which should
be less than 100 ohms.
Now you can attach an LED to each end of the magnet wire on the spool, and
generate voltage by pushing your magnet in and out of the center of the spool, as
shown in Figure 5-21.
If the spool is the wrong size, or if the tail of the wire isn’t accessible, you’ll just
have to rewind the wire from one spool to another. Suppose you have 500 feet;
that will entail rewinding about 2,000 turns. If you can make four turns per
second, you’ll require 500 seconds—a little less than 10 minutes, which I think
is tolerable.

Figure 5-21. Ready for power generation, on a rather small scale.

Figure 5-22. Demonstration device capable of dazzling results.

Figure 5-22 shows a larger-scale device that I built for demonstration purposes.
The coil of magnet wire is coated with epoxy glue, so that it won’t unravel, and I
mounted the pipe in a block of plastic that holds it securely. My neodymium
magnet attaches itself to a steel screw in to the end of an aluminum rod, also

visible in the photograph.
I added two high-intensity LEDs to the coil, with their polarity in opposite
directions. When the magnet shuttles up and down, the LEDs light up the whole
room. Also, their opposite polarity shows that voltage travels through the coil in
one direction on the upstroke, and in the other direction on the downstroke. See
Figure 5-23.

Figure 5-23. The LED generator in action.

Caution: Blood Blisters and Dead Media

Beware of the spooky capabilities of neodymium.
Neodymium magnets are breakable. They’re brittle and can shatter if they slam
against a piece of magnetic metal (or another magnet). For this reason, many
manufacturers advise you to wear eye protection.
You can easily pinch your skin and get blood blisters (or worse). Because a
magnet pulls with increasing force as the distance between it and another object
gets smaller, it closes the final gap very suddenly and powerfully. Ouch!
Magnets never sleep. In the world of electronics, we tend to assume that if
something is switched off, we don’t have to worry about it. Magnets don’t work
that way. They are always sensing the world around them, and if they notice a
magnetic object, they want it, now. Results may be unpleasant, especially if the
object has sharp edges and your hands are in the way. When using a magnet,
create a clear area on a nonmagnetic surface, and watch out for magnetic objects
underneath the surface. For example, my magnet sensed a steel screw embedded
in the underside of a kitchen countertop, and slammed itself into contact with the
countertop unexpectedly.
It’s hard to take this seriously until it happens to you. But, seriously, neodymium
magnets don’t fool around. Proceed with caution.
Also, remember that magnets create magnets. When a magnetic field passes
across an iron or steel object, the object picks up some magnetism of its own. If
you wear a watch, be careful not to magnetize it. If you use a smartphone, keep
it away from magnets. Likewise, any computer or disk drive is vulnerable. The
magnetic stripe on a credit card is easily erased. Also keep magnets well away
from TV screens and video monitors (especially cathode-ray tubes). Last but not
least, powerful magnets can interfere with the normal operation of cardiac
pacemakers.

Charging a Capacitor
Here’s another thing to try. Disconnect the LED from whatever coil of wire you
created, and connect a 1,000µF electrolytic capacitor in series with a 1N4001
signal diode, as shown in Figure 5-24. Attach your meter, measuring DC volts
(not AC, this time), across the capacitor.

Figure 5-24. A diode enables you to accumulate voltage from your coil in a capacitor.

If your meter has a manual setting for its range, set it to at least 2VDC. Make
sure the positive (unmarked) side of the diode is attached to the negative
(marked) side of the capacitor, so that positive voltage will pass through the
capacitor and then through the diode.
Now move the magnet vigorously up and down in the coil. The meter should
show that the capacitor is accumulating charge. When you stop moving the
magnet, the voltage reading may decline very slowly, mostly because the
capacitor discharges itself through the internal resistance of your meter.
This experiment is more important than it looks. Bear in mind that when you
push the magnet into the coil, it induces current in one direction, and when you

pull it back out again, it induces current in the opposite direction. You are
actually generating alternating current.
The diode only allows current to flow one way through the circuit. It blocks the
opposite flow, which is how the capacitor accumulates its charge. If you jump to
the conclusion that diodes can be used to convert alternating current to direct
current, you’re absolutely correct. We say that the diode is “rectifying” the AC
power.

Next: Audio
Experiment 25 showed that voltage can create a magnet. Experiment 26 has
shown that a magnet can create voltage. We’re now ready to apply these
concepts to the detection and reproduction of sound.

Experiment 27: Loudspeaker Destruction
You saw that electricity running through a coil can create enough magnetic force
to pull a small metallic object toward it. What if the coil is very light, and the
object is heavier? In that case, the coil can be pulled toward the object. This
principle is at the heart of a loudspeaker.
To understand how a loudspeaker works, there’s really no better way than to
disassemble it. Maybe you’d prefer not to spend a few dollars on this destructive
but educational process—in which case, you might consider picking up a piece
of nonfunctional audio equipment at a yard sale, and pulling a loudspeaker out of
that. Or simply take a look at my photographs illustrating the process step by
step.

What You Will Need
Cheapest possible loudspeaker, 2” minimum (1)
Utility knife (1)

Procedure
Figure 5-25 shows a small loudspeaker seen from the rear. A magnet is hidden in
the sealed cylindrical section.

Figure 5-25. The back of a small loudspeaker.

Turn the loudspeaker face-up, as shown in Figure 5-26. Cut around the perimeter
of its cone with a sharp utility knife or X-Acto blade. Then cut around the
circular center and remove the O-shaped circle of black paper that you’ve
created.

Figure 5-26. A two-inch loudspeaker ready for its fate.

The unconed speaker is shown in Figure 5-27. The yellow weave at the center is
the flexible section that normally allows the cone to move in and out, while
preventing it from deviating from side to side.

Figure 5-27. The loudspeaker with its cone removed.

Cut around the outside edge of the yellow weave, and you should be able to pull
up a hidden paper cylinder, which has a copper coil wound around it, as shown
in Figure 5-28. In the photograph, I’ve turned it over so that it is easily visible.

Figure 5-28. The copper coil is normally hidden inside the groove of the magnet, below.

The two ends of this copper coil normally receive power through flexible wires
from two terminals at the back of the speaker. When the coil sits in the groove
visible in the magnet, the coil reacts to voltage fluctuations by exerting an upand-down force in reaction to the magnetic field. This vibrates the cone of the
loudspeaker and creates sound waves.
Large loudspeakers in your stereo system work exactly the same way. They just
have bigger magnets and coils that can handle more power (typically, as much as
100 watts).
Whenever I open up a small component like this, I’m impressed by the precision
and delicacy of its parts, and the way it can be mass-produced for such a low
cost. I imagine how astonished Faraday, Henry and the other pioneers of
electrical research would be, if they could see the components that we take for
granted today. Henry spent days winding coils by hand to create electromagnets
that were far less efficient than this cheap little loudspeaker.

Background: Origins of Loudspeakers
As I mentioned at the beginning of this experiment, a coil will move if its
magnetic field interacts with a heavy or fixed object. If the object is a permanent
magnet, the coil will interact with it more strongly, creating more vigorous
motion. This is how a loudspeaker works.
The idea was introduced in 1874 by Ernst Siemens, a prolific German inventor.
(He also built the world’s first electrically powered elevator in 1880.) Today,
Siemens AG is one of the largest electronics companies in the world.
When Alexander Graham Bell patented the telephone in 1876, he used Siemens’
concept to create audible frequencies in the earpiece. From that point on, soundreproduction devices gradually increased in quality and power, until Chester
Rice and Edward Kellogg at General Electric published a paper in 1925
establishing basic principles that are still used in loudspeaker design today.
At sites such as Radiola Guy, you’ll find photographs of very beautiful early
loudspeakers, which used a horn design to maximize efficiency, as shown in
Figure 5-29. As sound amplifiers became more powerful, speaker efficiency
became less important compared with quality reproduction and low
manufacturing costs. Today’s loudspeakers convert only about 1% of electrical
energy into acoustical energy.

Figure 5-29. This beautiful Amplion AR-114x illustrates the efforts of early designers to
maximize efficiency in an era when the power of audio amplifiers was very limited. Photos
by “Sonny, the RadiolaGuy.” Many early speakers are illustrated at
http://www.radiolaguy.com. Some are for sale.

Theory: Sound, Slectricity, and Sound
Time now to establish a more specific idea of how sound is transformed into
electricity and back into sound again.
Suppose someone bangs a gong with a stick, as shown in Figure 5-30. The flat
metal face of the gong vibrates in and out, creating pressure waves that the
human ear perceives as sound. Each wave of high air pressure is followed by a

trough of lower air pressure, and the wavelength of the sound is the distance
(usually ranging from meters to millimeters) between one peak of pressure and
the next.

Figure 5-30. Striking a going makes its flat surface vibrate. The vibrations create waves of
pressure in the air.

The frequency of the sound is the number of waves per second, usually
expressed as hertz.
Suppose we put a very sensitive little membrane of thin plastic in the path of the
pressure waves. The plastic will flutter in response to the waves, like a leaf
fluttering in the wind. Suppose we attach a tiny coil of very thin wire to the back
of the membrane so that it moves with the membrane. And let’s position a
stationary magnet inside the coil of wire. This configuration is like a tiny, ultra-

sensitive loudspeaker, except that instead of electricity producing sound, the
sound will produce electricity. Pressure waves make the membrane oscillate
along the axis of the magnet, and the magnetic field creates a fluctuating voltage
in the wire. The principle is illustrated in Figure 5-31.
This is known as a moving-coil microphone. There are other ways to build a
microphone, but this is the configuration that is easiest to understand. Of course,
the voltage that it generates is very small, but we can amplify it using a
transistor, or a series of transistors, as suggested in Figure 5-32.

Figure 5-31. Sound waves entering a moving-coil microphone make a membrane vibrate.
The membrane is attached to a coil on a sleeve around a magnet. Motion of the coil induces
small currents.

Figure 5-32. Tiny signals from the microphone pass through an amplifier, which enlarges
their amplitude while retaining their frequency and the shape of their waveform.

Then we can feed the output through the coil around the neck of a loudspeaker,
and the loudspeaker will recreate the pressure waves in the air, as shown in
Figure 5-33.

Figure 5-33. The amplified electrical signal is passed through a coil around the neck of a
loudspeaker cone. The magnetic field induced by the current causes the cone to vibrate,
reproducing the original sound.

Somewhere along the way, we may want to record the sound and then replay it.
But the principle remains the same. The hard part is designing the microphone,
the amplifier, and the loudspeaker so that they reproduce the waveforms
accurately at each step. It’s a significant challenge, which is why accurate sound
reproduction can be elusive.

Experiment 28: Making a Coil React
You’ve seen that when you pass current through a coil, the current creates a
magnetic field. When you disconnect the current, what happens to the field that
it created?
The energy in the field is converted back into a brief pulse of electricity. We say
that this happens when the field collapses.
This experiment will enable you to see it for yourself.

What You Will Need
Breadboard, hookup wire, wire cutters, wire strippers, multimeter
Low-current LEDs (2)
Hookup wire, 22 gauge (26 gauge preferred), 100 feet (1 spool)
Resistor, 47 ohms (1)
Capacitor, 1,000 µF or larger (1)
Tactile switch (1)

Procedure
Take a look at the schematic in Figure 5-34. The breadboarded version is shown
in Figure 5-35. For the coil, you can use a spool of 100 feet of 22-gauge hookup
wire. Alternatively, if you created your own coil of 200 feet of wire in
Experiment 26, you can use that; and if you splurged on a spool of magnet wire,
that will be even better.

Figure 5-34. A simple circuit to demonstrate the self-inductance of a coil.

Figure 5-35. Breadboarded version of the self-inductance experiment.

When you look at the schematic, it doesn’t seem to make much sense. The 47-

ohm resistor seems too small to protect the LED—but why should the LED light
up at all, when the electricity can go around it through the coil?
Now test the circuit, and I think you’ll be surprised. Each time you press the
button, the LED blinks briefly. Can you imagine why that should be?
Try adding a second LED, the other way up, as in Figure 5-36 and Figure 5-37.
Press the button again, and the first LED flashes, as before. But now when you
release the button, the second LED flashes.

Figure 5-36. One LED flashes when a magnetic field is created; the other flashes when the
field collapses.

Figure 5-37. Breadboarded version of the two-LED demonstration circuit.

A Collapsing Field
Here’s what happened during this experiment. At first, the coil required a brief
amount of time to build up a magnetic field. This took a moment, and during that
moment the coil blocked some of the flow of current. As a result, some of the
current detoured through the first LED. Once the magnetic field was established,
current flowed through the coil more normally.
This response of the coil is known as self-inductance. Sometimes people use the
term inductive reactance, or just reactance, but since self-inductance is the
correct term, I’ll be using it here.
When you disconnected the power, the magnetic field collapsed, and the energy
from the field was converted back into electricity in a short, brief pulse. This
caused the second LED to flash when you let go of the button.
Naturally, different sizes of coil store and release different amounts of energy.
Perhaps you remember in Experiment 15, I advised you to tie a diode across the
coil of a relay to absorb the surge that occurs when a relay coil is switched on
and off. You have now seen this effect for yourself.

Resistors, Capacitors, and Coils
The three primary types of passive components in electronics are resistors,
capacitors, and coils. We can now list and compare their properties.
A resistor constrains current flow, and drops voltage.
A capacitor allows a pulse of current to flow initially, but blocks direct current.
A coil (often referred to as an inductor) blocks DC current initially, but allows a
continuing flow of direct current.
In the circuit that I just showed you, I didn’t use a higher-value resistor because I
knew the coil would allow only a very brief pulse. The blinking LEDs would
have been less easily visible if I had used a more usual 330-ohm or 470-ohm
resistor.
Don’t try to run the circuit without the coil of wire included. You will quickly
burn out one or both of the LEDs. The coil may look as if it isn’t doing anything,
but it is.
Here’s one last variation on this experiment, to test your memory and
understanding of electrical fundamentals. Build a new circuit shown in Figure 538 and Figure 5-39 using a 1,000µF capacitor instead of a coil (be careful to get
its polarity the right way around, with the positive lead at the top.) Also, use a
470-ohm resistor, because the coil isn’t there to block and divert current
anymore.
First hold down button B for a second or two to make sure that the capacitor is
discharged. Now, what will you see when you press button A? Maybe you can
guess. Remember, a capacitor will pass an initial pulse of electricity.
Consequently, the bottom LED lights up—and then gradually fades out, because
the capacitor accumulates a positive charge on its upper plate and a negative
charge on its lower plate. As this occurs, the potential across the lower LED
diminishes to zero.

Figure 5-38. In many ways, the behavior of a capacitor is opposite to the behavior of a coil.

Figure 5-39. Breadboarded version of the capacitor demo.

The capacitor is now charged. Press the right-hand button, and the capacitor
discharges through the upper LED. You can see this as the equivalent of the

experiment in Figure 5-37, but using a capacitor instead of a coil.
Capacitors and inductors both store power. You were able to see this more
obviously with the capacitor, because a high-value capacitor is much smaller
than a high-value coil.

Theory: Alternating Current Concepts
Here’s a simple thought experiment. Suppose you set up a 555 timer to send a
stream of pulses through a coil. This will be a primitive form of alternating
current.
Will the self-inductance of the coil interfere with the stream of pulses? That will
depend on how long each pulse is, and how much inductance the coil has. If the
frequency of pulses is just right, the self-inductance of the coil will last just long
enough to block each pulse. Then the coil will recover in time to block the next
one. In conjunction with a resistor (or just the resistance of the loudspeaker) a
coil can suppress some frequencies while allowing others to pass through.
If you have a stereo system that uses a small speaker to reproduce high
frequencies and a large speaker to reproduce low frequencies, almost certainly
there is a coil somewhere in the speaker cabinet, stopping the higher frequencies
from reaching the large speaker.
What happens if you substitute a capacitor for a coil? If the AC pulses are long
relative to the value of the capacitor, it will tend to block them. But if the pulses
are shorter, the capacitor can charge and discharge in rhythm with the pulses, and
will allow them through.
I don’t have space in this book to get deeply into alternating current. It’s a vast
and complicated field where electricity behaves in strange and wonderful ways,
and the mathematics that describe it can become quite challenging, involving
differential equations and imaginary numbers. (What is an imaginary number?
The most obvious example is the square root of minus-one. How can that exist?
Well—it can’t, which is why we say that it’s imaginary. Yet it crops up in
electrical theory. If that sounds interesting, you may want to check it out.)
But I haven’t finished with coils yet. The next experiment will demonstrate the
audio effects that I just described above.

Experiment 29: Filtering Frequencies
In this experiment, you’ll change the sound of sound. Using coils and capacitors,
you can filter sections of the audible spectrum to create a rich variety of effects.

What You Will Need
Breadboard, hookup wire, wire cutters, wire strippers, test leads, multimeter
9-volt power supply (battery or AC adapter)
Loudspeaker, 8 ohms impedance, minimum 4 inches diameter (1)
Audio amplifier chip, LM386 (1)
22-gauge hookup wire, 100 feet
Small plastic storage bin as a loudspeaker enclosure (1)
555 timer (1)
Resistors, 10K (2)
Capacitors: 0.01µF (3), 2.2µF (1), 100µF (1), 220µF (3)
Trimmer potentiometers: 10K (1), 1M (1)
SPDT slide switches (4)
Tactile switch (1)

A Home for Your Speaker
The little speaker that I recommended for previous projects was adequate when
all you needed was a few beeps, but small speakers have a limited capability to
reproduce bass notes. Since I want you to be able to hear how electronic
components can affect those notes, it’s time to consider a larger speaker, such as
the one in Figure 5-40, which has a cone four inches in diameter.

Figure 5-40. A loudspeaker that would be suitable for this project.

Bearing in mind my previous comments on the need to suppress out-of-phase
sound waves from the back of the speaker, you’ll need a box to contain it. The
box will also boost the sound by resonating, in the same way that the body of an
acoustic guitar resonates with the vibrations of its strings.
If you have time to make a plywood box, that would be ideal, but the simplest
and cheapest enclosure is probably a plastic storage bin with a snap-on lid.
Figure 5-41 shows the speaker bolted into the bottom of a bin. Drilling holes
neatly in thin plastic is quite a challenge, and—well, I didn’t try too hard.

Figure 5-41. A resonant enclosure is necessary if you want to hear some bass (lower
frequencies) from your speaker. A cheap plastic storage bin is sufficient for demo purposes.

To improve the attributes of the plastic bin, you can put some soft, heavy fabric
inside it before you snap the lid on. A hand towel or some socks should be
sufficient to absorb some of the vibration.

A Single Chip
Back in the 1950s, you needed vacuum tubes, transformers, and other powerhungry, heavyweight components to build an audio amplifier. Today, you can
buy a chip for about $1 that will do the job, if you add a few capacitors around it,
and a volume control.
One of the simplest, cheapest, and easiest to use is the LM386, which is
available from multiple manufacturers, each of which prefaces or appends some
extra identifying letters and numbers to it. The LM386N-1, LM386N, and
LM386M-1 are all basically the same for our purposes. Just make sure you buy
the through-hole version, not the surface-mount version. Pinouts for this
amplifier are shown in Figure 5-42.

Figure 5-42. Pinouts for the LM386 single-chip amplifier.

This little chip works with a power supply ranging from 4VDC to 12VDC, and
although it is rated for just 1.25 watts, you’ll be surprised how loud it can sound.
It has a nominal amplification ratio of 20:1.

Test, 1-2-3
For testing purposes, I want a source of frequencies covering a large range of the
audible spectrum. A simple way to achieve this is with a 555 timer. The
schematic in Figure 5-43 shows the timer at the top, with component values that
can deliver a range from around 70Hz to 5KHz when you twiddle the 1M
trimmer potentiometer. Unfortunately you won’t hear this as a linear response,
by which I mean that a small rotation of the trimmer will have a much greater
audible effect on high frequencies than on low frequences. But, it will be good
enough for demo purposes, and the lower frequencies provide a more dramatic

demo of audio filtering anyway.

Figure 5-43. A basic audio experimentation circuit.

The breadboarded version of the circuit is shown in Figure 5-44 and the

component values are shown in Figure 5-45.

Figure 5-44. Breadboarded version of the audio experimentation circuit.

Figure 5-45. Component values in the audio experimentation circuit.

When you build this circuit, I have to warn you that amplifiers are sensitive to all
electrical fluctuations, not just the ones you want to hear. Any electrical
interference will be reproduced as a mess of scratchy, buzzing sounds, and this
problem will be much worse if you use unnecessarily long pieces of wire to
connect components.
The kind of jumper wires with little plugs on the end are especially undesirable
in an amplifier circuit, as they behave like radio antennas. I have tried to limit
the lengths of all the wires in the breadboard layout shown in Figure 5-44, and I
encourage you to do the same. The only locations where wire length doesn’t
matter too much are on the power-output side of the chip, where you need to
attach wires to your loudspeaker and to a coil.
For the coil, magnet wire of 22 gauge or thinner is ideal, but you will get some
audible results from a 100-foot spool of 22-gauge hookup wire, and the 200 feet
of hookup wire that I suggested in the previous experiment would be better.
Now, before powering up your breadboard, please pay attention to the three slide
switches near the bottom of the circuit, and make sure that all of them are in the
“down” position. In other words, slide them toward the bottom of the
breadboard. Also turn the two trimmer potentiometers about halfway through
their range.
You can power this project with an AC adapter or a 9-volt battery, with no
regulation necessary. However, if you use an adapter, it may introduce some hum
into the circuit. You can reduce this by placing a capacitor of 1,000µF or more
between the two buses of the breadboard. If you use a battery, the power
consumption of the amplifier will limit battery life to two or three hours, and
some of the sound filters will pull down the voltage slightly, affecting the audio
frequency created by the 555 timer.
As soon as you switch on the power, you should hear a tone. If you don’t, your
first troubleshooting strategy should be to disconnect the upper lead of the
220µF capacitor from the output pin of the 555 timer, and touch your speaker
wires very briefly between that pin and the negative bus. If you don’t hear
anything, you made a wiring error around the timer. If you do hear something,
then your error is related to the LM386 amplifier chip.
Make sure you connected power to the correct pins of the LM386. The positive
and negative supply pins are not in the same positions as on logic chips.

Still no sound? Detach the top end of the short vertical piece of blue wire above
the 10K trimmer. Touch the end of this piece of wire with your finger, and you
should hear some whistling and buzzing sounds, because this is attached to the
input pin of the amplifier (pin 4). Still nothing? Try attaching your speaker
between the negative side of capacitor C6, and the negative power supply bus.
C6 is a coupling capacitor connecting you directly with the output pin of the
LM386.
If none of these attempts is successful, you’ll have to go around the circuit with
your meter, checking voltages.

Adventures in Audio
Assuming that your circuit is now up and running, I’ll explain the functions of
the components before I suggest some things to try. I’m going to refer to the
labels that I applied to components in the breadboard layout shown in Figure 544.
Capacitor C1 sets the frequency of the timer, in conjunction with the 1M
trimmer. Just in case you want to hear a sound higher in pitch than 5KHz, you
can substitute a 0.0068µF (6.8nF) capacitor.
C5 is a coupling capacitor. It has a large value so that it will be transparent to a
wide range of frequencies. Its purpose is to block DC from the 555 timer,
because you only want to amplify the fluctuations, not the basic voltage.
Capacitor C6 is another coupling capacitor, protecting your loudspeaker from the
DC coming out of the amplifier.
Capacitor C7 couples the amplifier output to negative ground when you press the
button beside it. The value of C7 is chosen so that it takes away the higher
frequencies, shunting them to ground. Without those frequencies, the sound that
goes to the loudspeaker sounds more mellow.
Capacitor C4 is switched in and out of the circuit by slide switch S3. When the
slide is up, sound from the 555 passes through C4 on its way to the amplifier.
Because C4 has a small value, it blocks low frequencies, leaving you with a thin,
tinny sound.
The complicated part of the circuit relates to the coil. I wanted you to hear the
difference when a coil is connected in parallel with the loudspeaker, and when it

is in series with the loudspeaker. Switches S1 and S2 give you those options, as
shown in Figure 5-46 and Figure 5-47. When the coil is in parallel with the
speaker, this is sometimes described as bypassing the speaker.

Figure 5-46. Switches S1 and S2 (identified in the breadboard diagram for the circuit) allow
you to feed audio to the speaker in parallel with an external coil, or in series with it.

Figure 5-47. Two other configurations of S1 and S2 allow you either to bypass the coil, or
mute the output from the amplifier.

You have quite a lot to play with here, especially bearing in mind that you can
adjust the frequency and volume of the sound while you test the various filters.
You can also test the effect of using two filters simultaneously. For instance,
press the button to activate the bypass capacitor C7, which cuts the high
frequencies, and switch C4 into the circuit at the same time, to cut the low
frequencies. Now you have a bandpass filter, so called because you are passing
just a narrow band of frequencies in the midrange.
The trimmer at bottom-left functions as a volume control, but you’ll find that it
only works properly in the middle part of its range. If you push it too high or too
low, the circuit starts oscillating. This is a problem with amplifier circuits. The
solution tends to involve adding small and large capacitors in various locations. I
decided not to bother, because the midrange of the trimmer is usable.
The capacitors and coils in this circuit are all operating on a passive basis. They
block some frequencies, but they don’t boost any frequencies. A more
sophisticated audio filtering system uses transistors to provide active filtering,

but requires a lot more electronics.

Theory: Waveforms
If you blow across the top of a bottle, the mellow sound that you hear is caused
by the air vibrating inside the bottle. If you could make a graph of the pressure
waves, they would have a rounded profile.
If you could slow down time and draw a graph of the alternating voltage in any
power outlet in your house, it would have the same profile.
If you could measure the speed of a pendulum swinging slowly to and fro in a
vacuum, and draw a graph of the speed relative to time, once again it would have
the same profile.
That profile is a sine wave, so called because you can derive it from basic
trigonometry. In a right-angled triangle, suppose one of the sides adjacent to the
right angle is called “a.” If you divide the length of “a” by the length of the
sloping side of the triangle (the hypoteneuse), the result is the sine of the angle
opposite side “a.”
To make this simpler, imagine a ball on a string rotating around a center point, as
shown in Figure 5-48. Ignore the force of gravity, the resistance of air, and other
annoying variables. Just measure the vertical height of the ball and divide it by
the length of the string, at regular instants of time, as the ball moves around the
circular path at a constant speed. Plot the result as a graph, and there’s your sine
wave, shown in Figure 5-49. Note that when the ball circles below its horizontal
starting line, we consider its distance negative, so the sine wave becomes
negative, too.

Figure 5-48. You can draw a sine wave by beginning with simple geometry.

Figure 5-49. An audio sine wave is generated by any instrument that uses a vibrating
column of air—such as a flute. It is a gentle, harmonious sound.

Why should this particular curve turn up in so many places and so many ways in
nature? There are reasons for this rooted in physics, but I’ll leave you to dig into
that topic if it interests you. Getting back to the subject of audio reproduction,
what matters is this:
The static pressure in the air around you is called ambient pressure. It results
from air being pulled down by the force of gravity. (Yes, air does have
weight.)
Almost any sound consists of a wave that is higher than ambient pressure,
followed by a wave that is lower than ambient pressure—just like waves in
the ocean.
We can represent the higher and lower waves of pressure by voltages that are
relatively high and relatively low, which is why I used the red and blue
background in Figure 5-49.
Any sound can be broken down into a mixture of sine waves of varying

frequency and amplitude.
Or, conversely:
If you put together the right mix of audio sine waves, you can create any
sound at all.
Suppose that there are two sounds playing simultaneously. Figure 5-50 shows
one sound as a purple curve and the other as a green curve. When the two sounds
travel either as pressure waves through air or as alternating electric currents
through a wire, their amplitudes are added together to make the more complex
curve, which is shown in black. Now try to imagine dozens or even hundreds of
different frequencies being added together, and you have an idea of the complex
waveform of a piece of music.

Figure 5-50. When two sine waves are generated at the same time (for instance, by two
musicians, each playing a flute), the combined sound creates a compound curve. The purple
sine wave is twice the frequency of the green sine wave. The compound curve (black line) is
the sum of the distances of the sine waves from the baseline of the graph.

An astable 555 timer circuit creates a square wave. This is because the output
from the timer switches abruptly from low to high and back again. The result is
shown in Figure 5-51. A sine wave sounds gentle and melodious, as it varies
smoothly. A square wave tends to sound harsh, and has a “buzz” to it. That buzz

is really composed of harmonics, meaning frequencies that are two or more
times the basic frequency.

Figure 5-51. The square wave that you might obtain from a source such as a 555 timer,
which switches its output abruptly on and off.

Because a square wave contains high-frequency harmonics, it’s a good choice
for testing audio filters. A low-pass filter, which only allows lower frequencies,
will remove the buzz by rounding off the corners of the square wave.

Mangling Some Music
You may be wondering, if the LM386 is an audio amplifier, can it amplify
music? Yes, and in fact, that’s what it is designed to do. You can test this for
yourself using any audio device with a headphone output.
Bear in mind that the LM386 is only a mono amplifier, so you won’t be able to
hear both audio channels from your music player. To obtain just one of them, use
a cable with a miniature audio jack at each end. Cut off one of them, strip the
insulation from the wire, and you will find a mesh of fine wires that are the
shielding in the cable, to be connected with negative ground. Inside the shielding
will be two conductors, carrying the signals for the left channel and the right

channel. Snip off one of them (it doesn’t matter which one), and throw it away—
but don’t allow the conductor in the residual stub of wire to short-circuit with the
shielding.
Strip insulation from the remaining conductor. The wires inside are very thin,
and you will be able to deal with them more easily in this experiment if you add
a little solder. The desired result is shown in Figure 5-52.

Figure 5-52. An audio cable stripped to expose its shielding and one conductor. The
shielding connects with negative ground.

Make sure the power to your amplifier circuit is off, and push all the slide
switches to the down positions. Remove the orange piece of wire that connects
pin 3 of the 555 timer with the 220µF capacitor below it. You are taking the 555
timer out of the circuit, and using the positive end of capacitor C6 as your input
point.
Use one of your alligator test leads to grab the positive capacitor lead, and attach
the other end of the test lead to the audio conductor in your cable. Use another
test lead to connect the shielding from the cable to negative ground in your
circuit. It’s essential that your music player must share negative ground with
your amplifier circuit.

Switch on your circuit, then switch on your music player, and you should hear
music. If it’s too loud and distorted, you may need to insert a 1K or 10K resistor
between the audio wire from the music player and the positive end of the
capacitor.
Once you have the volume right, you can play with your high-pass and low-pass
filters to see how they affect the music. They won’t make it sound good, but they
will make it sound different.

Background: Crossover Networks
In a traditional audio system, each speaker cabinet contains two drivers—one of
them a small speaker called a tweeter, which reproduces high frequencies, the
other a large speaker known as a woofer, which reproduces low frequencies.
(Modern systems often remove the woofer and place it in a separate box of its
own that can be positioned almost anywhere, because the human ear has
difficulty sensing the direction of low-frequency sounds. In this system, the
woofer may be referred to as a subwoofer, because it is capable of reproducing
very low frequencies.)
Audio frequencies are divided between a tweeter and a woofer by filtering them,
so that the tweeter doesn’t try to deal with any low frequencies, and the woofer
is protected from high frequencies. The circuit that takes care of this is called a
“crossover network,” and truly hardcore audiophiles have been known to make
their own (especially for use in car systems) to go with speakers of their choice
in cabinets that they design and build themselves.
If you want to make a crossover network, you should use high-quality polyester
capacitors (which have no polarity, last longer than electrolytics, and are better
made) and a coil that has the right number of turns of wire and is the right size,
to cut high frequencies at the appropriate point. Figure 5-53 shows a polyester
capacitor, while Figure 5-54 shows an audio crossover coil that I bought on eBay
for $6. I was curious to find out what was inside it, so I took it apart.

Figure 5-53. Some nonelectrolytic capacitors have no polarity, such as this high-quality
polyester film capacitor.

Figure 5-54. What exotic components may we find inside this highend audio component?

First I peeled away the black vinyl tape that enclosed the coil. Inside was some
typical magnet wire—copper wire thinly coated with shellac or semitransparent
plastic, as shown in Figure 5-55. I unwound the wire, and as I did so, I counted
the number of turns.

Figure 5-55. The black tape is removed, revealing a coil of magnet wire.

Figure 5-56 shows the wire and the spool that it was wound around.

Figure 5-56. The audio crossover coil consists of a plastic spool and some wire. Nothing

more.

So here’s the specification for this particular coil in an audio crossover network.
Forty feet of 20-gauge copper magnet wire, wrapped in 200 turns around a small
plastic spool.
Conclusion: there’s a lot of mystique attached to audio components. They are
frequently overpriced, and you can make your own coil if you start with these
parameters and adjust them to suit yourself.
Suppose you want to put some thumping bass speakers into your car. Could you
build your own filter so that they only reproduce the low frequencies?
Absolutely—you just need to wind a coil, adding more turns until it cuts as
much of the high frequencies as you choose. Just make sure the wire is heavy
enough so that it won’t overheat when you push 100 or more audio watts
through it.
Here’s another project to think about: a color organ. You can tap into the output
from your stereo and use filters to divide audio frequencies into three sections,
each of which drives a separate set of colored LEDs. The red LEDs will flash in
response to bass tones, yellow LEDs in response to the midrange, and green
LEDs in response to high frequencies (or whatever colors you prefer). You can
put signal diodes in series with the LEDs to rectify the alternating current, and
series resistors to limit the voltage across the LEDs to, say, 2.5 volts (when the
music volume is turned all the way up). You’ll use your meter to check the
current passing through each resistor, and multiply that number by the voltage
drop across the resistor, to find the wattage that it’s handling, to make sure the
resistor is capable of dissipating that much power without burning out.
Audio is a field offering all kinds of possibilities if you enjoy designing and
building your own electronics.

Experiment 30: Make It Fuzzy
Let’s try one more variation on the circuit in Experiment 29. This will
demonstrate another fundamental audio attribute: distortion.

What You Will Need

The breadboarded circuit from Experiment 29, plus:
2N2222 transistor (1)
Resistors: 330 ohms (1), 10K (1)
Capacitors: 1µF (2) and 10µF (1)

Making the Mods
The modifications to the circuit are very minor. You need to add a transistor, two
resistors, and three capacitors. Figure 5-57 shows the new components at the top
end of the breadboard, with the preexisting components grayed out.
Figure 5-58 shows the same components, and their values, in the relevant section
of the schematic, with other components omitted.
The 2N2222 transistor overloads the input of the LM386, while the 1µF
capacitors, C8 and C9, limit low frequencies to emphasize the fuzzy effect.
The purpose of C10 is to boost the LM386. This is a feature of the chip: if you
add a capacitor between pin 1 and pin 8, the power of the amplifier can increase
from 20:1 to 200:1.
Thus, in two separate ways this unfortunate little amplifier chip is being forced
to do more than its designers intended. Naturally enough, it will complain about
this cruel treatment.
Make the modifications, and switch on the power. The output previously had
some buzz in it, because it was basically a square wave. But now if you
experiment with the 10K trimmer and the 1M trimmer, you can make the output
scream, Hendrix-style.
If the result is too extreme, you can remove the 330-ohm resistor and substitute
one with a slightly higher value. And what exactly is going on here?

Figure 5-57. Modifications to the circuit from Experiment 29, to add more distortion.

Figure 5-58. The additional components, with values.

Background: Clipping
In the early days of “hi-fi” (high-fidelity) sound, engineers labored mightily to
perfect the process of audio reproduction. They wanted the waveform at the
output end of the amplifier to look identical with the waveform at the input end,
the only difference being that it should be bigger, so that it would be powerful
enough to drive loudspeakers. The slightest distortion of the waveform was
unacceptable.
Little did they realize that their beautifully designed tube amplifiers would be
abused by a new generation of rock guitarists whose intention was to create as

much distortion as possible.
If you push a vacuum tube—or a transistor—to amplify a sine wave beyond the
component’s capabilities, it runs out of power and “clips” the top and bottom of
the curve. This makes it look more like a square wave, and as I explained
Experiment 29, a square wave has a harsh, buzzing quality. For rock guitarists
trying to add an edge to their music, the harshness is a desirable feature.
The sequence in Figure 5-59 shows what happens. So long as the output stays
within the voltage limits of the amplifier, the signal can be faithfully reproduced.
But in the second frame of the sequence, the input to the amplifier has increased
to the point where the output would exceed the limits (suggested by the gray
sections of the curve). Because the amplifier only has so much power available,
it clips the signal, as shown in the third frame in the sequence.

Figure 5-59. When a sine wave (top) is passed through an amplifier that is turned up beyond
the limit of its components, the amplifier chops the wave (bottom).

For rock guitarists, clipping sounded good, and “stomp boxes” were introduced
to create the effect. A very early example is shown in Figure 5-60

Figure 5-60. This Vox Wow-Fuzz pedal was one of the early stomp boxes, which deliberately
induced the kind of distortion that audio engineers had been trying to get rid of for decades.

Background: Stomp-Box Origins
The Ventures recorded the first single to use a fuzz box, titled “The 2,000 Pound
Bee,” in 1962. Truly one of the most awful instrumentals ever made, it used
distortion as a gimmick and must have made other musicians conclude that this
was a sound destined for oblivion.
Then Ray Davies of the Kinks started experimenting with distortion, initially by
plugging the output from one amp into the input of another, supposedly during
the recording of his hit “You Really Got Me.” This overloaded the input and
created clipping that sounded more musically acceptable. From there it was a
short step to Keith Richards using a Gibson Maestro Fuzz-Tone when the
Rolling Stones recorded “(I Can’t Get No) Satisfaction” in 1965.
Today, you can find thousands of advocates promoting as many different
mythologies about “ideal” distortion. In Figure 5-61, I’ve included a schematic
from Flavio Dellepiane, a circuit designer in Italy who gives away his work
(with a little help from Google AdSense).
Flavio is a self-taught Maker, having gained much of his knowledge from
electronics magazines such as the old British publication, Wireless World. In the

fuzz circuit that I’m including here, he uses a very high-gain amplifier consisting
of three field-effect transistors (FETs), which closely imitate the rounded square
wave typical of an overdriven tube amp.

Figure 5-61. This circuit designed by Flavio Dellepiane uses three transistors to simulate the
kind of distortion that used to be created by overloading the input of a tube amplifier.

Flavio offers dozens more schematics on his site, developed and tested with a
dual-trace oscilloscope, low-distortion sinewave oscillator (so that he can give
audio devices a “clean” input before he abuses it), distortion meter, and precision
audio voltmeter. This last item, and the oscillator, were built from his own
designs, and he gives away their schematics, too. Thus his site provides one-stop
shopping for home-audio electronics hobbyists in search of a self-administered
education.

Before fuzz, there was tremolo. A lot of people confuse this with vibrato, so let’s
clarify that distinction right now:
Vibrato applied to a note makes the frequency waver up and down, as if a
guitarist is bending the strings.
Tremolo applied to a note makes its volume fluctuate, as if someone is
turning the volume control of an electric guitar up and down very quickly.
Harry DeArmond sold the first tremolo box, which he named the Trem-Trol. It
looked like an antique portable radio, with two dials on the front and a carrying
handle on top. Perhaps in an effort to cut costs, DeArmond didn’t use any
electronic components. His steam-punkish Trem-Trol contained a motor fitted
with a tapered shaft, with a rubber wheel pressing against it. The speed of the
wheel varied when you turned a knob to reposition the wheel up and down the
shaft. The wheel, in turn, cranked a little capsule of “hydro-fluid,” in which two
wires were immersed, carrying the audio signal. As the capsule rocked to and
fro, the fluid sloshed from side to side, and the resistance between the electrodes
fluctuated. This modulated the audio output.
Today, Trem-Trols are an antique collectible. Johann Burkard has posted an MP3
of his DeArmond Trem-Trol online so you can actually hear it.
The idea of using a mechanical source for electronic sound mods didn’t end
there. The original Hammond organs derived their unique, rich sound from a set
of toothed wheels turned by a motor. Each wheel created a fluctuating
inductance in a sensor like the record head from a cassette player.
It’s fun to think of other possibilities for motor-driven stomp boxes. Going back
to tremolo: imagine a transparent disc masked with black paint, except for a
circular stripe that tapers at each end. While the disc rotates, if you shine a bright
LED through the transparent stripe toward a phototransistor, you have the basis
for a tremolo device. You could even create never-before-heard tremolo effects
by keeping a library of discs with different stripe patterns. Figure 5-62 shows
what I have in mind, while Figure 5-63 suggests some disc patterns. For a real
fabrication challenge, how about an automatic disc changer?
In the world of solid-state electronics, today’s guitarists can choose from a
smorgasbord of effects, all of which can be home-built using plans available
online. For reference, try these special-interest books:

Analog Man’s Guide to Vintage Effects by Tom Hughes (For Musicians Only
Publishing, 2004). This is a guide to every vintage stomp box and pedal you can
imagine.

Figure 5-62. A hypothetical neo-electromechanical tremolo generator.

Figure 5-63. Different stripe patterns could be used to create various tremolo effects.

How to Modify Effect Pedals for Guitar and Bass by Brian Wampler (Custom
Books Publishing, 2007). This is an extremely detailed guide for beginners with
little or no prior knowledge. Currently it is available only by download, from
sites such as Open Library.
but you may be able to find the previously printed edition from secondhand
sellers, if you search for the title and the author.
Of course, you can always take a shortcut by laying down a couple hundred
dollars for off-the-shelf stomp boxes that use digital processing to emulate
distortion, metal, fuzz, chorus, phaser, flanger, tremolo, delay, reverb, and
several more, all in one convenient package. Purists, of course, will claim that it
“doesn’t quite sound the same,” but maybe that’s not the point. Some of us
simply can’t get no satisfaction until we build our own stomp box and then
tweak it, in search of a sound that doesn’t come off-the-shelf and is wholly our
own.

Experiment 31: One Radio, No Solder, No Power
Getting back to the principle of inductance, I want to show you how it can
enable a simple circuit that receives AM radio signals without a power supply.
This is often known as a crystal radio, because the earliest examples used a
natural mineral crystal that functioned as a semiconductor. The idea originated at
the dawn of telecommunications, but if you’ve never tried it, you’ve missed an
experience that is truly magical.

What You Will Need
Rigid cylindrical object, about three inches in diameter, such as a vitamin
bottle or water bottle (1)
Hookup wire, 22 gauge, 60 feet minimum
Heavier wire, 16 gauge preferred, 50 to 100 feet (this wire may be stranded,
and you can try a thinner gauge to reduce the cost, although your radio may
not pull in so many stations)
Polypropylene rope (“poly rope”) or nylon rope, 10 feet
Germanium diode (1)
High-impedance earphone (1)
Test lead (1)
Alligator clips (3) or use extra test leads
Optional:
9-volt power supply (battery or AC adapter)
LM386 single-chip amplifier
Small loudspeaker (2” acceptable)
The diode and headphone can be ordered from the Scitoys Catalog. A highimpedance earphone is also available from amazon.com.

Step 1: The Coil
You need to create a coil that will resonate with radio transmissions in the AM
waveband. The coil will consist of 65 turns of 22-gauge hookup wire, measuring

approximately 60 feet.
You can wind the coil around any empty glass or plastic container, so long as it
has parallel sides providing a constant diameter close to 3”. A water bottle will
do, if it isn’t the type made of extremely thin plastic that will be easily squashed
or deformed under pressure.
I just happened to have a vitamin bottle that was exactly the right size. In the
photographs, you’ll notice that it has no label. I softened its adhesive with a heat
gun (lightly, to avoid melting the bottle) and then peeled it off. Some remaining
adhesive residue was removed with a little xylene.
After you prepare a clean, rigid bottle, use a sharp object such as an awl or a nail
to punch two pairs of holes in it, as shown in Figure 5-64. The holes will be used
to anchor the ends of the coil.
Strip some insulation from the end of your hookup wire, and anchor it in one
pair of holes, as shown in Figure 5-65. Now wrap five turns of wire around the
bottle, and keep it from unwinding itself by applying a small, temporary piece of
tape. Duct tape is ideal, or regular Scotch tape will do. “Magic” tape isn’t strong
enough and will be difficult to remove.

Figure 5-64. The holes will anchor wire wrapped around the bottle.

Figure 5-65. Anchor one end of your wire in a pair of holes.

Now you need to strip away about half an inch of insulation from the wire. The
idea is that you should be able to tap into the coil at this point. Using your wire
strippers, make an incision in the insulation and then pull the plastic coating
away from your incision. See Figure 5-66.

Figure 5-66. Use your wire strippers and your thumbnails to pull back about half an inch of
insulation.

The next step is to twist the exposed wire into a loop, to make it easily accessible
and prevent the insulation from closing up. See Figure 5-67.

Figure 5-67. Create a loop in the section of wire that you exposed.

You just created a tap on your coil. Remove the piece of tape that you used to
hold your first five turns temporarily, and wind another five turns around the
bottle. Apply the tape again, and create another tap. You’ll need a total of 12 of
them, altogether. It doesn’t matter if they don’t line up with each other precisely.
When you have made the last tap, wind five more turns around the bottle and
then cut the wire. Bend the end into a U shape about a half-inch in diameter, so
that you can hook it through the pair of holes that you drilled at the far end of the
bottle. Pull the wire through, then loop it around again to make a secure anchor
point.
My coil wrapped around a vitamin bottle is shown in Figure 5-68.

Figure 5-68. The completed coil, wrapped tightly around the bottle.

Your next step is to set up an antenna, which will be a section of wire that is as
thick as possible and as long as possible. If you live in a house with a yard
outside, this is easy: just open a window, toss out a reel of 16-gauge wire while
holding the free end, then go outside and string up your antenna by using
polypropylene rope (“poly rope”) or nylon rope, available from any hardware
store, to hang the wire from any available trees, gutters, or poles. The total
length of the wire should be 50 to 100 feet. Where it comes in through the
window, suspend it on another length of poly rope. The idea is to keep your
antenna wire as far away from the ground or from any grounded objects as
possible.
If you don’t have an accessible yard, you can string up your antenna indoors,
hanging it with poly rope or nylon rope from window treatments, door knobs, or
anything else that will keep it off the floor. The antenna doesn’t have to be in a
straight line; in fact you can run it all around the room.

Caution: High Voltage!
The world around us is full of electricity. Normally we’re unaware of it, but a

thunderstorm is a sudden reminder that there’s a huge electrical potential
between the ground below and the clouds above.
If you put up an outdoor antenna, never use it if there is any chance of a
lightning strike. This can be extremely dangerous. Disconnect the indoor end of
your antenna, drag it outside, and push the end of the wire into the ground to
make it safe.

Antenna and Ground
Use an alligator test lead to connect the end of your antenna wire with the top
end of the coil that you made.
Next you need to establish a ground wire. This literally has to connect with the
ground outside. Ideally, you should bury a couple of feet of bare wire in soft,
moist earth—although this may be problematic if you live in a desert area, as I
do. If you use a grounding stake of the type sold by wholesale electrical supply
houses to ground welding equipment, be careful where you hammer it into the
ground. You don’t want to hit any hidden conduits.
A cold-water pipe is often suggested as a good connection with the ground, but
(duh!) this will work only if the pipe is made of metal. Even if your home is
plumbed with copper pipes, a section may have been repaired and replaced with
plastic at some time in the past.
Probably the most reliable option is to attach the wire to the screw in the cover
plate of an electrical outlet, as the electrical system in your house will be
ultimately grounded. But be sure to anchor the wire securely, so there is
absolutely no risk of it touching the sockets in the outlet. I would prefer not to
insert the ground wire in the ground socket of the outlet, because there is the risk
of poking it into the live socket by mistake.
Now you need a couple of slightly hard-to-find items: a germanium diode, which
functions like a silicon-based diode but is better suited to the tiny voltages and
currents that you’ll be dealing with, and a high-impedance earphone. The kind of
earphones or ear buds that you use with a media player will not work here; this
has to be an old-school item, like the one shown in Figure 5-69. If it has a plug
on the end, you’ll have to snip it off and then carefully strip insulation from the
tip of each wire.

Figure 5-69. This is the type of earphone you need for your no-power radio.

The parts are assembled with test leads and alligator clips, as shown in Figure 570. The real-world version that I built isn’t as neat as the diagram, but the
connections are still the same, as shown in Figure 5-71. Notice that the test lead
at the bottom can latch on to any of the taps on your coil. This is how you will be
tuning your radio.

Figure 5-70. The assembled components.

Figure 5-71. The real-world version.

If you followed the instructions, and you live within 20 or 30 miles of an AM
radio station, and your hearing is reasonably good, you will be able to listen to
the faint sounds of radio on your earphone—even though you are not applying
any power to the circuit that you built. This project is many decades old, but can
still be a source of surprise and wonder. (See Figure 5-72.)
If you live too far from a radio station, or you can’t put up a very long antenna,
or your ground connection isn’t very good, you may not hear anything. Don’t
give up; wait till sunset. AM radio reception changes radically when the sun is
no longer exciting the atmosphere with its radiation.
To choose among radio stations, move the alligator clip at the end of your test
lead from one tap to another on your coil. Depending on where you live, you

may pick up just one station, or several, playing individually or simultaneously.

Figure 5-72. The simple pleasure of picking up a radio signal with ultra-simple components
and no additional power.

It may seem that you’re getting something for nothing here, but really you are
taking energy from a source of power—the transmitter located at a radio station.
A transmitter pumps power into a broadcasting tower, modulating a fixed
frequency. When the combination of your coil and antenna resonates with that
frequency, you’re sucking in just enough voltage and current to energize a highimpedance headphone.

The reason you had to make a good ground connection is that power will only
flow through your coil if it has somewhere to go. You can think of the ground as
being an almost infinite power sink, with a reference voltage of zero. The
transmitter at an AM radio station is also likely to have a potential relative to
ground. See Figure 5-73.

Figure 5-73. Your no-power radio takes just enough energy from a distant transmitter to
create a barely audible sound in your earphone.

Enhancements
If you have difficulty hearing anything through your earphone, try substituting a
piezoelectric transducer, also known as a piezo beeper. You need the type that
does not have an oscillator built in, and functions passively, like a loudspeaker.
Press it tightly against your ear, and you may find that it works as well as an
earphone, or better.
You can also try amplifying the signal. Ideally you should use an op-amp for the
first stage, because it has a very high impedance. However, I decided to put opamps in Make: More Electronics, where I had room to explore the topic more
thoroughly. As a substitute, you can feed the signal directly into the same
LM386 single-chip amplifier from Experiment 29.

Figure 5-74 shows how simple the circuit can be. The germanium diode can
connect directly with the LM386 input, as I don’t think you’ll need a volume
control. Be sure to include the 10µF capacitor between pins 1 and 8, to increase
the amplification of the chip to its maximum value. Even where I live, about 120
miles from Phoenix, Arizona, I was able to pick up a station broadcasting from
the Phoenix area.

Figure 5-74. The LM386 single-chip amplifier can make your crystal-set radio audible
through a loudspeaker.

If you want to improve the selectivity of your radio, you can add a variable
capacitor to tune the resonance of your circuit more precisely. Variable
capacitors are uncommon today, but you can find one at the same specialty
source that I recommended for the earphone and the germanium diode: the
Scitoys Catalog.
This source is run by a smart man named Simon Quellan Field, whose site
suggests many fun projects that you can pursue at home. One of his clever ideas
is to remove the germanium diode from your radio circuit and substitute a lowcurrent LED in series with a 1.5-volt battery. This didn’t work for me, because I

live in a remote location; but if you’re close to a transmitter, you may be able to
see the LED varying in intensity as the broadcast power runs through it.

Theory: How Radio Works
High-frequency electromagnetic radiation can travel for miles. To make a radio
transmitter, I could use a 555 timer chip running at, say, 850 kHz (850,000
cycles per second), and would pass this stream of pulses through an extremely
powerful amplifier to a transmission tower—or maybe just a long piece of wire.
If you had some way to block out all the other electromagnetic activity in the air,
you could detect my signal and amplify it.
This was more or less what Guglielmo Marconi did when he performed a
groundbreaking experiment in 1901, except that he had to use a primitive spark
gap, rather than a 555 timer, to create the oscillations. His transmissions were of
limited use, because they had only two states: on or off. You could send Morse
code messages, and that was all.
Marconi is pictured in Figure 5-75.

Figure 5-75. Guglielmo Marconi, the great pioneer of radio (photograph from Wikimedia
Commons).

Five years later, the first true audio signal was transmitted by imposing lower
audio frequencies on the high-frequency carrier wave. In other words, the audio
signal was “added” to the carrier frequency, so that the power of the carrier
varied with the peaks and valleys of the audio. This is shown in Figure 5-76.

Figure 5-76. Using a carrier wave of fixed frequency to transmit an audio signal.

At the receiving end, a very simple combination of a capacitor and a coil
detected the carrier frequency out of all the other noise in the electromagnetic
spectrum. The values of the capacitor and the coil were chosen so that their
circuit would resonate at the same frequency as the carrier wave. The basic
circuit is shown in Figure 5-77, where the variable capacitor is represented by a
capacitor symbol with an arrow through it.

Figure 5-77. When a variable capacitor is added to the previous circuit, it enables better
discrimination among different signals sharing the spectrum.

The carrier wave fluctuates up and down so rapidly, an earphone cannot possibly
keep up with the positive-negative variations. It will remain hesitating at the
midpoint between the highs and lows, producing no sound at all. A diode solves
this problem by blocking the lower half of the signal, leaving just the positive
voltage spikes. Although these are still very small and rapid, they are now all
pushing the diaphragm of the earphone in the same direction, so that it averages
them out, approximately reconstructing the original sound wave. This is shown
in Figure 5-78.

Figure 5-78. How a simple AM radio receiver decodes the signal and reproduces it on an
earphone.

When a capacitor is added to a receiving circuit, an incoming pulse from the
transmitter is initially blocked by the self-inductance of the coil, while it charges
the capacitor. If an equally negative pulse is received after an interval that is
properly synchronized with the values of the coil and the capacitor, it coincides
with the capacitor discharging and the coil conducting. In this way, the right
frequency of carrier wave makes the circuit resonate in sympathy. At the same
time, audio-frequency fluctuations in the strength of the signal are translated into
fluctuations in voltage in the circuit.
If you are wondering what happens to other frequencies pulled in by the antenna,
the lower ones pass through the coil to ground, while the higher ones pass
through the capacitor to ground. They are just “thrown away.”
The waveband allocated to AM radio ranges from 300kHz to 3MHz in carrier
frequencies. Many other frequencies are allocated for special purposes, such as

ham radio. It’s not so difficult to pass the ham radio exam, and with appropriate
equipment and a well-situated antenna, you can talk directly with people in
widely scattered locations—without relying on any communications network to
connect you.

Experiment 32: Hardware Meets Software
I’m guessing that many readers of this book—perhaps most readers—have heard
of the Arduino. This experiment, and the next two, will show you how you can
set up an Arduino and then write programs for it, instead of just downloading
applications that you find online.

What You Will Need
Arduino Uno board, or compatible clone (1)
USB cable with A-type and B-type connector at opposite ends (1)
A desktop or laptop computer with an available USB port (1)
Generic LED (1)

Definitions
A microcontroller is a chip that works like a little computer. You write a program
consisting of instructions that the microcontroller can understand, and copy them
into some memory in the chip. The memory is nonvolatile, meaning that it will
preserve its contents even when the power is switched off.
Normally I would suggest jumping right in and writing a program, but learning
to use a microcontroller entails a bigger investment of time and mental energy
than was required by the components that I have dealt with previously. How do
you know if you want to get into this, until you know some more details?
Therefore, I must begin with an explanation and orientation. After that, this
experiment will take you through the process of setting up an Arduino and
performing the most basic test. Experiments 33 and 34 will take you further into
programming the Arduino and using other components in conjunction with it.
The setup-and-test procedure may take an hour or two. You should allocate the

time when you will be able to follow the instructions without distraction. Once
you have gone through this initial process, everything will be much easier.

Real-World Applications
A typical microcontroller application might run like this:
Receive an input from a rotational encoder that is functioning as a volume
control on a car stereo.
Figure out which way the encoder is rotating.
Count the pulses from the encoder.
Tell a programmable resistor how many equivalent steps it should take, to
adjust the volume of the stereo up or down.
Wait for more inputs.
A microcontroller could also handle a much larger application, such as all the
inputs, outputs, and decisions associated with the intrusion alarm system in
Experiment 15. It would scan sensors, activate a siren through a relay after a
delay period, receive and verify a keypad sequence when you want to shut off
the alarm—and much more.
All modern cars contain microcontrollers, which deal with complex tasks such as
timing the ignition in the engine—and simple matters such as sounding a chime
if you don’t fasten your seat belt.
A microcontroller can handle small but important tasks that I discussed in
previous experiments, such as debouncing a pushbutton or generating an audio
frequency.
Bearing in mind that one little chip can do so many different things, why don’t
we use it for everything?

The Right Tool for the Job?
A microcontroller is versatile and powerful, but is more suitable in some
situations than others. It is ideal for applying logical operations along the lines,
“If this happens, do that, but if that happens, do something else,” but it adds cost
and complexity to a project, and of course it entails a major learning process:

you have to master the computer language that tells the microcontroller what to
do.
If you don’t want to learn the language, you can download and use programs that
other people have written. Many Makers use this option, because it provides
immediate results. You can find thousands of Arduino programs in libraries
online, and they cost nothing.
But a program probably won’t do exactly what you want. Inevitably, you will
need to modify it—and you will be back in a situation where you need to
understand the language in order to get full use out of the chip.
Writing a program for the Arduino can be relatively simple, depending on the
application. However, it is not a one-step operation. The code has to be tested,
and the processes of revision and debugging can be time-consuming. One little
error will create unexpected results, or can stop anything from happening at all.
You have to re-read your code, find the mistakes, and try again.
After you have everything working, the results can be impressive. For this
reason, personally I think that programming a microcontroller is worthwhile, so
long as your expectations are realistic.
You will have to try it for yourself to find out if it’s something you want to
pursue actively.

One Board, Many Chips
I’ll begin with the most basic question. What is an Arduino?
If you think that it’s a chip, you are not quite correct. Each product with the
Arduino name on it consists of a small circuit board designed by Arduino,
containing a microcontroller chip made by a completely different company. The
Arduino Uno board uses an Atmel ATmega 328P-PU microcontroller. The board
also includes a voltage regulator, some sockets that enable you to plug in wires
or LEDs, a crystal oscillator, a power-supply connector, and a USB adapter that
enables your computer to communicate with the board. See Figure 5-79 for a
photograph of the board with some of the components identified.

Figure 5-79. An Arduino Uno board, featuring the ATmega 328P-PU microcontroller made
by Atmel.

If you buy an ATmega 328P-PU on its own from a component supplier, it will
cost you less than one-sixth the retail price of an Arduino board containing the
chip. Why should you have to pay so much more, just to get that little circuit
board? The answer is that development of the board and the clever software that
enables you to use it was not a trivial matter.
The clever software is called an IDE, which is an acronym for integrated
development environment. After you install it on your computer, the IDE is a
user-friendly place in which to write a program and then compile it, meaning that
it converts the C language instructions (which human beings can understand)
into machine code (which the Atmel chip will understand). You then copy it to

the ATmega chip.
In case this is confusing, I’ll summarize the story so far.
An Arduino is a circuit board into which is plugged an Atmel microcontroller.
IDE software written by the Arduino company enables you to write a
program on your computer.
After you write your program, the IDE software compiles it, to create code
that the chip understands.
The IDE software sends the code to the Atmel chip, which stores it.
Once your code is in the chip, the chip doesn’t really need the Arduino board
anymore. Theoretically, you could unplug the ATmega328 and use it somewhere
else—in a breadboard, or in a circuit that you solder around it. The chip will still
do what you programmed it to do, because the code remains stored in the chip.
In reality there are some little snags associated with this, but you can learn about
them by reading a very good book titled Make: AVR Programming by Elliot
Williams. It tells you exactly how to transplant the ATmega chip.
If you learn how to do this, the implications are significant. You will only need
one Arduino board, while you can buy a lot of Atmel chips very cheaply. Put one
chip into the board, program it, remove it, and use it in a standalone project. Put
another chip into the board, transfer a different program into it, and use it in a
different project.
This is relatively easy if you have the version of the Arduino Uno where the
microcontroller is a through-hole chip mounted in a socket. You can pry it out
with a miniature screwdriver, and substitute another chip by pushing it in with
your finger and thumb. (Another version of the Uno comes with a surfacemounted microcontroller, soldered in. This version does not allow you to
relocate the chip.)

Beware of Imitations?
Now that I have explained the basics, I’ll explain how to set everything up.
While various models of Arduino exist, the one I’m going to deal with here is
the Arduino Uno, and my instructions will apply to version R3 or later.

You can buy the Arduino board from many sources, because it was designed and
marketed as an “open source” product, allowing anyone to create a copy of it,
just as any manufacturer can make a 555 timer (although for slightly different
reasons).
Mouser, Digikey, Maker Shed, Sparkfun, and Adafruit all sell genuine Arduino
products. On eBay, however, you can find unlicensed copies of the Arduino
board for one-third of the price. You can see that they are unlicensed, because
they don’t have the Arduino logo printed on them. To help you in distinguishing
the real boards from the imitations, you can see the logo at Figure 5-80.

Figure 5-80. Only the boards manufactured or licensed by Arduino are supposed to have this
logo on them.

The unlicensed boards are completely legal. This is not like buying pirated
software or music. The only feature that Arduino chose to control is its
trademark, which may not be used by other manufacturers. (Actually, some
scammers use the logo illegally, but you’ll know they are not genuine Arduino
boards, because they’re so cheap.) Just to make things more complicated,
because of a dispute between Arduino and its former manufacturer, authentic
Arduino boards are marketed under the name Genuino outside of the United
States.
If you buy an imitation board, will it be reliable? I would trust the ones from
Adafruit, Sparkfun, Solarbotics, Evil Mad Scientist, and a few others. I can’t buy
and test them all, so you have to make up your own mind about this, based on
feedback from other buyers and your general impression of a supplier. But
remember, you only have to buy one board, after which you can use it to

program multiple Atmel chips, using the plan I described above. So maybe it’s
not such a big deal to pay a little extra for the genuine Arduino product. By
doing so, you help the company to continue its development of new products in
the future.
Personally, I bought a genuine Arduino board.

Setup
I will assume, now, that you have acquired an Arduino Uno, or an imitation that
you believe is trustworthy. You will also need a standard USB cable with a type
A plug on one end and a type B plug on the other end, as shown in Figure 5-81.
This is not usually supplied when you buy the board on its own. If you don’t
have a spare cable, you can borrow one from another device while you do your
setup and initial test. Cables are cheaply available online from sites such as
eBay.

Figure 5-81. You will need this type of USB cable to attach your Arduino board to a USB
port on your computer.

You have the board and the cable, so now you need the IDE software. Go to the
Arduino website and click the “download” tab. Then choose the IDE software
that is appropriate for your computer. It is currently available in variants for Mac

OS, or Linux, or Windows. I will be using version 1.6.3, but my instructions
should also apply to later versions. You can download the IDE software for free.
Note that you need a computer running Windows XP or later, or running Mac
OS X 10.7 or later, or Linux 32-bit, or Linux 64-bit. (These requirements are
valid at the time of writing. Arduino may change its requirements in the future.)
The procedure for setup under the three different operating systems is described
below, primarily based on instructions in the nice little introductory guide titled
Getting Started with Arduino by Massimo Banzi and Michael Shiloh. You can
also find installation instructions on sites such as SparkFun and Adafruit. Lastly,
there are instructions on the Arduino website as well.
Unfortunately, all these instructions are slightly different. For instance,
Arduino’s website tells me to plug in my board before running the installer, but
the Getting Started book tells me to run the installer before plugging in my
board. This makes my task difficult, because both the Arduino website and the
Getting Started book were written in collaboration with Arduino developers.
Below I will give you my best guess about what will work on each system.

Linux Installation
This is likely to be the most challenging, as there are so many variants of the
operating system. I will have to refer you to the Arduino site for guidance.
I regret that I can’t help you, myself, with Linux.

Windows Installation
I am inclined to use the procedure recommended in Getting Started with
Arduino. This is also recommended at the website maintained by Sparkfun.
Do not plug in the board yet. First, identify the IDE installation program that you
downloaded. Its name may be something like arduino-1.6.3-windows.exe,
although by the time you read this, the version numbers almost certainly will
have changed. The .exe at the end of the file name may not be visible, depending
on the system settings on your computer.
Some guides refer to the installation download as being a zipped file, which
has to be unzipped. So far as I can determine, file zipping has been

discontinued by Arduino. You can run it as is.
Double-click the icon, and you should see an installation sequence that is
familiar to you from installing other software from other vendors.
You have to agree to the terms of a licensing agreement (if you don’t agree, you
can’t run the software).
You are asked if you want shortcuts on your desktop and in your Start menu.
Allow the shortcut to be added to your desktop. The Start menu is up to you.
You will be asked to approve the installation folder for the IDE software, and
you should accept the default that is suggested.
If you are a dinosaur like me, still using Windows XP (and actually, there are
quite a few million of us), you may see a warning such as the one shown in
Figure 5-82. The exact look of this will depend on your version of Windows.
Ignore the warning by choosing to “continue anyway.” If you are asked
permission to install device drivers, say “yes.”

Figure 5-82. Users of the old WinXP operating system can ignore this warning.

On Windows 8, a security feature prevents you from installing unsigned
device drivers. This should not be an issue with modern versions of the
Arduino IDE installer, but if you somehow obtain older versions from
somewhere else, you can Google:
sparkfun disable driver signing
which should take you to the section of the Sparkfun site that contains helpful
advice on the topic.
After installing the IDE software, plug your Arduino into your computer with
the USB cable.
You don’t need to use the circular power input jack on the Arduino board, so
long as the board is connected with a USB port on your computer. The board
receives power through the USB cable. Bear in mind that a shorter, thicker cable
will minimize voltage drop. Also, if you are using a laptop computer, especially
if it is an older one, it may limit the power that you can draw from a USB port to
250mA. Even on a desktop computer, which is supposed to deliver 500mA via
USB, that power may be shared across three or four USB ports. A device such as
an external hard drive can take a significant amount.
Watch the board while it identifies itself to the computer. You should see a green
LED that lights up steadily, and a yellow LED that blinks. A couple more LEDs
nearby on the board, labeled TX and RX, should flicker briefly. They show that
data is being transmitted and received.
On your computer, go to the shortcut for the IDE software. It is simply named
“Arduino,” and the installer placed it on your desktop. If you don’t want it on the
desktop, drag it to a different location. Double-click it to launch the Arduino IDE
software.
In the window that opens, pull down the Tools menu, go to the Ports submenu
(which is currently named Serial Ports in the Mac version), and you should see a
list of serial ports on your computer. They will be named COM1, COM2, and
upward.
What is a serial port? In the early days of Windows (and before that, MS-DOS)
computers didn’t have USB connectors. They used “serial protocol” through Dshaped connectors, and the computer kept track of the connector that it was
using by assigning it a “port number.” This system is still buried in Windows,

even though decades have passed since it was established and the protocol has
become rare for domestic applications.
All you need to know is if the Arduino IDE software and Windows have agreed
on the port number that has been assigned to your Uno board. Ideally, when you
choose Tools > Ports in the IDE software, you will see the Uno in the list with a
check mark beside it, and everything is fine. If so, skip the troubleshooting
section that follows, and go directly to the Old Arduino Blink Test, below (see
“The Old Arduino Blink Test”).

Windows Troubleshooting
There are two bad possibilities that can affect your port assignment.
In the Port submenu of the Arduino IDE software, you may see the Arduino
Uno listed, but it is not checkmarked. Another port may be checkmarked
instead. Try checkmarking the correct port. You may see a warning if the IDE
software doesn’t approve of the Uno board that you are using. Ignore the
warning, click the box saying “Don’t show me this again,” and proceed to the
Old Arduino Blink Test (see “The Old Arduino Blink Test”).
You may see no port in the list labeled Arduino Uno. In that case, make a
note of the COM ports that are listed. Close the IDE menus. Unplug the Uno
board. Wait five seconds. Open the IDE Port submenu again, and see which
COM port has disappeared. Close the submenu. Plug the Uno back in.
Reopen the submenu. Click the port that has reappeared, to checkmark it.
Proceed to the Old Arduino Blink Test (see “The Old Arduino Blink Test”).
Windows allows you an option to verify your port settings. Click your Start
menu and choose the Help and Support service. In the window that opens, type
the words “Device Manager” as your search term. It should be the first hit in the
list of search results. Open Device Manager. If you are using Windows XP,
Device Manager shows you a Ports list. On versions of Windows later than XP,
when you go to Device Manager you may have to select View > Show Hidden
Devices to reveal the Ports list.
You should see your Arduino Uno listed there. If there is a yellow circle beside
it, or an exclamation point, right-click it to find out what’s wrong.
If Windows complains that it cannot find the device driver for your board, tell it

to look in the Arduino folder containing all the files that were extracted by the
installer.
One known issue with the Arduino Uno and Windows ports is that the IDE
software can get confused if you have more than nine ports already assigned.
This is unusual, but if you have this problem, try unassigning some ports, or
manually assign an unused port that has a single-digit number.
If you are still having difficulties, go to “If All Else Fails” below.

Mac Installation
After completing the IDE installer download, locate the icon that the computer
has created, double-click it, and you’ll see a disk image that contains the
Arduino IDE software. You can drag this into your Applications folder.
Now plug your Arduino into your computer with the USB cable.
You don’t need to use the circular power input jack on the Arduino board, so
long as the board is connected with your computer. The board takes its power
through the USB cable.
Watch the board while it identifies itself to the computer, and you should see a
green LED that lights up steadily, and a yellow LED that blinks. A couple more
LEDs nearby on the board, labelled TX and RX, should flicker briefly. They
show that data is being transmitted and received.
If a window opens telling you that a “new network interface” has been detected,
click Network Preferences, and then Apply. It doesn’t matter if the Uno is
described as “not configured.” Close the window.
Double-click the program icon for the Arduino IDE that you dragged into your
Applications folder. You need to select the correct port for communication with
the Uno board. In the Tools menu of the IDE software, click the Serial Port
option, and select devcu.usbmodemfa141 (or a similarly named port) from the
list that pops up.
If everything has proceeded as described here, you can continue with the Old
Arduino Blink Test (see “The Old Arduino Blink Test”).

If All Else Fails

This book may stay in print for a while. At least, I hope it does! Software, on the
other hand, changes frequently. My installation instructions for the Arduino IDE
may be out of date by the time you read this.
I will try to revise my instructions in each new printing and each new ebook
version, so that they will be as accurate as possible. But of course you may
happen to be reading an older printing or an older ebook.
What to do? Your best bet is to go to the Arduino site, or the Sparkfun site, and
follow installation procedures listed there. A website is more easily and quickly
updated than a book.

The Old Arduino Blink Test
I am assuming that you have launched the IDE software. Its main window
should look something like the screenshot in Figure 5-83, although subsequent
versions may change somewhat.

Figure 5-83. Default window that opens when the Arduino IDE is launched.

Before you can make your Arduino do something, you have to check that the
IDE software has correctly identified the version of the board that you connected
with your computer.
In the IDE main window, pull down the Tools menu, open the Boards submenu,

and verify that the Arduino Uno has a bullet point beside it, as in Figure 5-84. If
it doesn’t, click it to select it.

Figure 5-84. When you are using the Arduino Uno, it should have a bullet point beside it in
the Boards Manager submenu.

Now you are ready to give your Arduino some instructions. At the top of the
workspace in the main IDE window, you’ll see the word “sketch” followed by
today’s date and the letter “a.” What is this “sketch”? Is it a picture that you are
going to draw?
No, in the Arduino world, “sketch” means the same thing as “program.” Perhaps
this is because the developers didn’t want to make people feel intimidated by the
idea that they were going to program a computer. Similarly, while he was still
alive, Steve Jobs seemed to feel that users of handheld devices would be more
comfortable if he referred to programs as “apps.” Jobs was probably right, but
where Makers are concerned, I don’t think they are so easily intimidated. In fact

I think they want to program computers. Otherwise, why would you be reading
this?
“Sketch” means “program” for the Arduino, but I will continue to use the word
“program,” because that is what it really is, and I feel silly calling it a “sketch.”
When you read source materials online, people use the word “program” at least
as often as they use the word “sketch.”
Now I need to remind you of the sequence of events that we are going to follow.
First, you write a program in the IDE window. Then you compile it by selecting
a menu option, to convert it into instructions that a microcontroller can
understand. Then you upload it to the Arduino board, and then the board
automatically runs the program.
The IDE window on my computer contains some default text shown in Figure 583. Future versions of the IDE may do things a little differently, but the principle
will be the same. You will see some lines beginning with two slash marks, like
this:
// put your setup code here, to run once.
This is known as a comment line. It is for human interest, to explain what’s
going on.
When the program that you write is compiled for the microcontroller, the
compiler will ignore all lines that begin with // marks.
The next line reads:
void setup() {
This is a line of program code, for the compiler and the microcontroller to
understand. But you need to know what it means, because the setup routine has
to be at the beginning of every Arduino program, and I’m hoping you will start
to write your own programs in the future.
The word void tells the compiler that this procedure won’t generate any
numerical result or output.
The term setup() says that the following procedure is something that has to be
done once only, right at the beginning.
Notice that there is a { mark following setup().

Every complete function in C language should be contained within a { mark
and a } mark.
Because a { mark must always be followed by a } mark, there must be a } mark
somewhere on the opening screen. Yes, it’s a couple of lines farther down.
There’s nothing between the { mark and the } mark, so there are no instructions
in this procedure. This is because you are going to write them.
It doesn’t matter if { and } are on separate lines. The compiler for the
Arduino ignores line breaks and all whitespace larger than a single space
between words.
The { and } are properly known as braces.
It’s time to type something on the empty line beneath “put your setup code
here.” Try this:
pinMode(13, OUTPUT);
You have to type it exactly. The compiler won’t tolerate typographical errors.
Also, because the C language is case sensitive, you must distinguish between
uppercase and lowercase letters. pinMode must be pinMode, not pinmode or
Pinmode. OUTPUT must be OUTPUT, not output or Output.
The word pinMode is a command to the Uno, telling it how to use one of its pins.
The pin can receive data as an input, or can send data as an output. 13 is the pin
number, and if you check your board, you’ll find one of the little connectors is
identified as 13, right beside the yellow LED. I have selected 13 as an arbitrary
choice.
A semicolon marks the end of the instruction.
A semicolon must be included at the end of each instruction. Always. Don’t
forget!
Now move on down to the empty line below the message that says:
// put your main code here, to run repeatedly.
You can tell from the double slash marks that this is another comment line for
your information. The compiler will ignore it. Below it, carefully type these
instructions:

void loop() {
digitalWrite(13, HIGH);
delay(100);
digitalWrite(13, LOW);
delay(100);
}

If you have any prior familiarity with an Arduino, you’ll be groaning, now, as
you think to yourself, “Oh no, it’s the old blink test!” Yes indeed, and that’s why
I subtitled this section, “The Old Arduino Blink Test.” This is the program that
almost everyone uses as a preliminary test (although I have changed the delay
values, for reasons that will become apparent). Please humor me by typing the
program into the IDE. I will be getting to some more challenging projects soon
enough.
Also, you may be just a little sketchy on what some of the statements actually
mean.
void means the same as before.
loop() is an instruction telling the Arduino to do something over and over
again. What does it have to do? It has to obey the procedure between the braces.
digitalWrite is a command to send something out of a pin. Which pin? I am
specifying 13 because its mode was defined previously.
You can’t use a digital pin unless you have previously specified what its
mode will be.
What should the pin do? Go to a HIGH state.
Don’t forget the semicolon at the end of the instruction.
delay tells the Arduino to wait for a while. How long? 100 means 100
milliseconds. There are 1,000 milliseconds in a second, so the Arduino is going
to wait for one-tenth of a second. During that time, pin 13 will stay high.
I think you can figure out what the next two lines mean.
In a moment, you can activate the program. But first, go to your board and insert
the leads of an LED between connector 13 and the connector labelled GND,
right beside it.
Make sure the short lead of the LED is in the GND connector.

The LED does not need a series resistor, as this is built in to connector 13.
The little yellow LED on my board was already blinking, by default, as soon as I
plugged in the board. The LED that I just inserted also starts blinking, because
the yellow surface-mount LED built into the board is wired in parallel with pin
13.
In previous versions of the Uno, the onboard LED did not start blinking as soon
as you plugged in the board. In future versions, Arduino may disable this
“blinking by default.” Either way, it doesn’t matter, because your program is
going to change the blink rate.

Verify and Compile
Next you must check if you made any typographical errors. Pull down the
Sketch menu and choose Verify/Compile, as shown in Figure 5-85. The IDE
examines your code, and if it sees any problems, it complains about them.

Figure 5-85. Choose the Verify/Compile option before sending your program to the Arduino.

You can test this. In your program listing, change pinMode to piMode, then
Verify/Compile, and see what happens.
You get an error message in the black space at the bottom of the IDE window.
You can stretch this black space by dragging its upper border with your mouse,

so you can see more than two lines at a time, without scrolling them. The error
message that I get says, "piMode was not declared in this scope.”
You see, there are reserved words and defined functions in the C language, which
have special meanings. You have used a couple of them already, such as
digitalWrite and delay.
But piMode doesn’t exist as a reserved word or defined function, so the compiler
complains that you have not declared it, to say what it is.
Fix your program text till you can Compile/Verify without any errors.

Upload and Run
Now pull down the File menu, and choose Upload. Personally I always imagine
that I am downloading from my big computer into the little Arduino, but
everyone calls it uploading, so I guess that’s what it is.
If the upload is successful, you’ll see the message “Done Uploading” just above
the black error window.
If it is not successful, and the uploading process never quite ends—this is not
good. It means you still have some communications problems, probably because
the COM port assignments don’t match. Go back to the troubleshooting section
for your type of computer, above. But save your program first. Pull down the
File menu, choose Save, and give your program a name. After you fix your
COM issues, you will be able to reload the program, if necessary, and try again.
If everything worked as planned, the onboard yellow LED, and your LED, are
now blinking rapidly—on for 1/10th of a second, and off for 1/10th of a second,
in accordance with the instructions in your program.
You may feel that this is a small achievement after taking so many steps, but we
have to start somewhere, and a blinking LED is usually where microcontroller
programming begins. In the next experiment, you will write a new program that
will do something much more useful.
Here’s a summary of what you may have learned so far, and what you generally
have to do, to program the Arduino:
Start a new program (or “sketch,” as Arduino prefers to call it).
Select the New option from the File menu if necessary.

Every program must begin with a setup function, which will run once only.
You must declare the number of a digital pin, and its mode, by using the
pinMode command, before you can do something with the pin later.
The mode of a pin can be INPUT or OUTPUT.
Some pin numbers are not valid. Look at your Uno board to see the
numbering system that is used.
A pair of braces must enclose every function or block in a program. But they
can be on separate lines.
The compiler ignores line breaks and extra whitespace.
Every instruction in a function or block must end in a semicolon.
Every Arduino program must contain a loop function (after the setup
function), which will run repeatedly.
digitalWrite is a command to make a pin that is set for output have a state
that is specified as HIGH or LOW.
delay makes the Arduino do nothing for a specified number of milliseconds
(thousandths of a second).
The numbers in parentheses after a command are parameters telling the
Arduino how the command must be applied.
Use the Verify/Compile option in the Sketch menu to check your program
before you try to upload it to the Arduino.
You must fix any errors found in the Verify/Compile operation.
Reserved words are a vocabulary of commands that the Arduino understands.
You have to spell them correctly. Uppercase is considered different from
lowercase.
After you upload your program, it will start running automatically, and will
continue to do so until you disconnect power from the board or upload a new
program.
There is a Reset button (a tactile switch) beside the USB connector on the
Uno board. When you press it, the Arduino restarts your program at the
beginning, with all the values reset.

Caution: Lost Code
If you modify your program and upload it to the microcontroller, the new version
will overwrite the old version. In other words, the old version will be erased. If
you didn’t save it on your computer under a different filename, it may be gone
forever. Be very careful when uploading revised programs. Saving each version
on your computer, under a new name, is a sensible precaution.
After program instructions have been uploaded into the microcontroller, there is
no way to read them back out again.

Programming Entails Detail
I don’t know if you noticed, but the summary of points to remember, in this
experiment, has been much longer than the summaries in any experiments where
you used individual components. Writing a program entails a lot of detail, and
you have to get everything exactly right. Personally I enjoy this, because once
you get it right, it will always be right, and it will always work the same way.
Programs never wear out. If you save them in a suitable medium, they can last
forever. The software that I wrote in the 1980s will still run 30 years later in a
DOS window on my desktop computer.
Some people don’t enjoy detail work, or they tend to make typing errors, or they
don’t like the way in which a computer language makes inflexible demands
(such as always insisting that you begin a program with a Setup function, even
if you don’t have a setup). Different kinds of people enjoy different aspects of
electronics, and that’s the way it should be. If everyone wanted to write
programs, and no one ever wanted to touch a piece of hardware, we wouldn’t
have any computers. It’s up to you to decide what activity suits you.
Personally, I’m going to continue with another experiment that uses the Arduino
in a more interesting way. I want to show you how a microcontroller can do
things more easily than individual components in some cases.
Before I end this experiment, though, you may be wondering what happens if
you disconnect the Arduino from your computer.
The Arduino needs power to run your program.
The Arduino does not need power to store your program. The program is
stored automatically in the microcontroller, like data in a flash drive.

If you want to run your program when the board is not connected with your
computer, you have to provide power in the round black socket next to the
USB socket on the board.
The power supply can range from 7VDC to 12VDC. It does not have to be
regulated, because the Arduino board contains its own regulator, which
changes your power input to 5VDC on the board. (Some Arduinos use
3.3VDC, but not the Uno.)
The power supply jack is 2.1mm in diameter, with center pin positive. You
can buy a 9V AC-to-DC adapter with that kind of plug on its output wire.
If you connect external power while the Arduino is also connected with a
USB cable, the Arduino automatically uses the external power.
You can disconnect your Arduino from the serial cable anytime, without
bothering to use the “Safely Remove Hardware” option that exists in some
versions of Windows.

Background: Origins and Options Among Programmable
Chips
In factories and laboratories, many procedures are repetitive. A flow sensor may
have to control a heating element. A motion sensor may have to adjust the speed
of a motor. Microcontrollers are perfect for this kind of routine task.
A company named General Instrument introduced an early line of
microcontrollers in 1976, and called them PICs, meaning Programmable
Intelligent Computer—or Programmable Interface Controller, depending on
which historical source you believe. General Instrument sold the PIC brand to
another company named Microchip Technology, which owns it today.
Arduino uses Atmel microcontrollers, but PICs are still an alternative, and are
used as the basis for a hobby-education version licensed by a British company
named Revolution Education Ltd. They call their range of chips the PICAXE,
for no apparent rational reason other than they must think that it sounds cool.
(I’m not so sure that they’re right about that.)
The PICAXE comes with its own IDE, which uses a different computer language
named BASIC. In some ways this is a simpler language than C. Another range of

microcontrollers, the BASIC Stamp, also uses BASIC, with additional, more
powerful commands.
If you search for PICAXE on Wikipedia, you’ll find an excellent introduction to
all the various features. In fact, I think it’s a clearer overview than you’ll get
from the PICAXE website.
Unlike the Arduino, you don’t need to buy a special board to program PICAXE
chips. A customized USB cable is all you need—in addition to the appropriate
IDE software, which you can download for free.
The first edition of this book contained some introductory information about
PICAXE products. You can probably find that edition secondhand, if you’re
interested.

Fundamentals: Advantages and Disadvantages
Now that you have learned some basics, I need to discuss issues that may affect
your decision about whether to use a microcontroller in a project.

Longevity
The flash memory that stores a program in an ATmega328 is guaranteed by the
manufacturer for 10,000 read-write operations, with provision for automatically
locking out memory locations that go bad. This would seem to be ample, and we
may hope that a microcontroller will last almost indefinitely. However, we don’t
know yet if it will really have the same longevity as an old-school logic chip,
some of which are still working 40 years after they were manufactured. Does
this matter? You have to make up your own mind about that.

Obsolescence
Microcontrollers are maturing rapidly as a technology. When I wrote the first
edition of this book, the Arduino was relatively new, and its future was
uncertain. The Arduino now dominates the hobby-electronics field, but what will
the situation be another five years from now? No one knows. A product such as
the Raspberry Pi is an entire computer on a chip. No one can predict whether it,
or something else like it, will displace the Arduino.

Even if the Arduino remains the microcontroller system of choice, we have
already seen new versions of the hardware, and updates to the IDE software that
must be used when you program the chip. One way or another, you may have to
keep yourself informed about developments in the field as they occur, and you
may even have to abandon one brand of microcontroller and switch to a different
brand.
By comparison, in most cases, individual components in through-hole format
have reached the end of their development cycle. Some relatively recent
innovations have been introduced, such as rotational encoders or small dotmatrix LED and LCD displays. However, most of these new products are
designed for use with microcontrollers. In the simple world of transistors,
diodes, capacitors, logic chips, and single-chip amplifiers, the knowledge that
you acquire today should be valid 10 years from now.

Hybrid Circuits
Last, and perhaps most important, microcontrollers cannot be used alone. They
always require some other component, even if it’s just a switch, a resistor, or an
LED, and the other components must be properly compatible with the inputs and
outputs of the microcontroller.
Therefore, to make practical use of a microcontroller, you still have to be
familiar with electronics generally. You need to understand basic concepts such
as voltage, current, resistance, capacitance, and inductance. You should probably
know about transistors, diodes, alphanumeric displays, Boolean logic, and other
topics that I have covered so far in this book. And if you are going to build
prototypes, you will still need to know how to use a breadboard or make solder
joints.
Bearing all this in mind, I can summarize the pros and cons.

Individual Components: Advantages
Simplicity.
Instant results.
No programming language needed.

Cheap, for small circuits.
Today’s knowledge will be valid tomorrow.
Better for analog applications such as audio.
Still necessary when using microcontrollers.

Individual Components: Disadvantages
Capable of performing one function only.
Circuit design is challenging for applications involving digital logic.
Not easily scalable. Large circuits are difficult to build.
Revisions to a circuit may be difficult or even impossible.
More components in a circuit generally require more power.

Microcontrollers: Advantages
Extremely versatile, able to perform many functions.
Additions or revisions to a circuit can be easy (just rewrite the program code).
Huge online libraries of applications, freely available.
Ideal for applications involving complex logic.

Microcontrollers: Disadvantages
Relatively expensive for small circuits.
Significant programming skills required.
Time-consuming development process: write code, install code, test, revise-anddebug, reinstall—in addition to troubleshooting the circuit hardware.
Rapidly evolving technology requires a continuing learning process.
Each microcontroller has individual quirks and features, requiring study and
memorization.
Greater complexity means more things that can go wrong.
Requires a desktop or laptop computer, and data storage for programs. Data may
be lost accidentally.

Requires a regulated power supply (usually 5VDC or 3.3VDC), like a logic chip.
Limited output of 40mA per pin, or less. Cannot drive a relay or a loudspeaker,
as a 555 timer can. You must buy a separate driver chip if you need to deliver
more power.

Summing Up
Now I am ready to answer the question, “Should I use microcontrollers or
individual components?”
My answer is that you need both. That is why I am including microcontrollers in
a book that is primarily about individual components.
In the next experiment, I’ll show how a sensor and a microcontroller can work
together.

Experiment 33: Checking the Real World
A switch is either “on” or “off,” but most of the inputs we receive from the real
world tend to vary between those extremes. A thermistor, for instance, is a sensor
that varies its electrical resistance over a wide range, depending on its
temperature.
A microcontroller would be very useful if it could process that kind of input. For
instance, it could receive the input from the thermistor, and then it could function
like a thermostat, turning on a heater if the temperature falls below a minimum
value, and turning off the heater when the room is warm enough.
The ATmega328 that is used in the Arduino Uno can do this, because six of its
pins are classified as “analog inputs,” meaning that they don’t just evaluate an
input as “logic-high” or “logic-low” on a digital basis. They convert it internally
using what is called an analog-to-digital converter, or ADC.
On the 5-volt version of the Arduino, an analog input must range from 0VDC to
5VDC. (Actually, the upper limit can be modified, but that introduces some
complexity that I will leave until later.) A thermistor doesn’t generate any
voltage; it just varies its resistance. So, I’ll have to think of a way in which a
change in resistance can deliver a change in voltage.
Once that problem has been dealt with, an ADC inside the microcontroller will

convert the voltage on the analog pin into a digital value ranging from 0 through
1023. Why that numeric range? Because it can be expressed in 10 binary digits,
and the ADC isn’t accurate enough to justify a wider range with smaller
increments.
After the ADC has supplied a number, your program can compare it with a target
value, and can take appropriate action—such as changing the state of an output
pin, which can supply voltage to a solid-state relay, which can activate a room
heater.
The sequence beginning with the thermistor and ending with the digital value is
shown visually in Figure 5-86.

Figure 5-86. A simplified view of the plan for processing the status of a thermistor.

The following experiment will show you how to do this.

What You Will Need
Breadboard, hookup wire, wire cutters, wire strippers, test leads, multimeter
Thermistor, 10K, 1% or 5% accuracy (1) (This must be the NTC type,
meaning that its resistance drops as the temperature increases. A PTC
thermistor behaves oppositely)
Arduino Uno board (1)
Laptop or desktop computer with an available USB port (1)
USB cable with A-type and B-type connector at opposite ends (1)

6.8K resistor (1)

Using a Thermistor
The first step is to get to know your thermistor. It has very thin leads, because
they must not conduct heat into or out of the tip where the temperaturemeasuring junction is located. The leads are probably too thin to plug into your
breadboard reliably, so I suggest you grab them with a couple of alligator test
leads, and use the leads to grab the probes of your meter, as shown in Figure 587.

Figure 5-87. Testing a thermistor.

The thermistor that I am recommending is rated at 10K. That’s its maximum
resistance when it gets really cold. Its resistance doesn’t change much as the
temperature rises until around 25 degrees Celsius (77 degrees Fahrenheit). After
that, the resistance declines more rapidly.
You can test it with your meter. At room temperature, the thermistor should have
a resistance around 9.5K. Now grip it between your finger and thumb. As it
absorbs your body heat, its resistance goes down. At body temperature
(arbitrarily agreed to be 37 degrees Celsius or 98.6 degrees Fahrenheit) its
resistance is around 6.5K.
How can you convert this resistance range to the 0V to 5V required by the
microcontroller?
First bear in mind that the maximum value corresponding with room temperature
should actually be lower than 5V. The real world is an unpredictable place. What
if your thermistor gets much hotter than you expected, for some surprising
reason? Maybe you place your soldering iron beside it, or maybe you rest it on a
warm piece of electronic equipment.
Here we have the first lesson in analog–digital conversion: allow for unexpected,
extreme values when measuring the everyday world.

Range Conversion
The simplest way to convert the thermistor’s resistance into a voltage value is to
choose a resistor approximately equal to the average resistance of the thermistor
in the temperature range that interests us. Put the resistor and the thermistor in
series to create a voltage divider, apply 5VDC at one end and 0VDC at the other
end, then take the voltage at the midpoint between the components, as shown in
Figure 5-88.

Figure 5-88. The simplest circuit for deriving a voltage from the changing resistance of a
thermistor.

Normally, to set up this circuit, you would need to install a voltage regulator to
provide the 5VDC. However, the Arduino has its own voltage regulator, and
conveniently provides a 5VDC output (see Figure 5-79). You can tap into this
output and take it across to your breadboard with a jumper wire. You’ll also need
to tap one of the ground outputs from the Arduino, and take that to your
breadboard as well.
When I tried that, and varied the thermistor temperature from around 25 to 37
Celsius, my meter measured a voltage from 2.1V to 2.5V. You should try that
yourself, to check my numbers.
Obviously we run no risk of endangering the microcontroller with those
voltages. But now I see a different problem: the range isn’t wide enough to
achieve optimal accuracy.
Figure 5-89 shows the conversion between input voltage and internal digital
equivalents. The range from 2.1V to 2.5V is defined by the darker blue
rectangle. It will be converted into digital values from around 430 to 512, which
is a spread of 82—only a small fraction of the complete range from 0 through
1,023.

Figure 5-89. Conversion graph from Arduino input voltage to ADC values. The blue
rectangle identifies approximate voltages derived from a 10K thermistor in series with a
6.8K resistor, for temperatures between 75 and 95 degrees Fahrenheit.

Using this limited range will be like using a small number of pixels from a highresolution photograph. Inevitably, there will be a lack of detail. Wouldn’t it be
nice if we could somehow convert our voltages into a digital range covering
maybe 500 values instead of 82 values?
One way to do that would be by amplifying the voltage, but that will entail using
an additional component, such as an op-amp. This is possible, but then we will
need resistors to control feedback, and everything will get complicated. The
whole idea of the microcontroller was to keep it simple!

There is another option, which is to use a feature of the Arduino that sets a lower
maximum voltage for the range. But this requires me to supply a sample of the
new maximum voltage to one of the pins. To create that voltage, I would need to
use another voltage divider, and then calculate a new conversion from voltage
inputs to ADC values. Really, I want to avoid that kind of thing, at least until I
have a simple program running.
After thinking about this a bit more—maybe I can live with a range of 82 values
to represent a range from approximately 75 to 95 degrees Fahrenheit. That’s an
accuracy of about 1/4 degree for each digital step created by the ADC. It’s not
good enough for a clinical thermometer, but perfectly adequate for room
temperature.

Connections
So let’s give it a try. But wait—are we still going to use a separate breadboard
with that funky-looking Uno board on which the microcontroller is mounted?
Yes, that’s the plan. There are three ways to hook everything up:
You can buy a gadget called a protoshield, which is like a mini-breadboard
that sits on top of the Uno board and plugs into the connectors. I am not a fan
of this device, because it leads us away from an eventual finished circuit on a
regular breadboard.
You can pry the microcontroller off the Uno board and plug it into a
breadboard, where you can connect components with its pins in a normal
manner. But if you do that, you have no way to load a program into the
microcontroller, and you will need a crystal oscillator to make the
microcontroller run at the same speed as when it was on the Arduino board.
You can mount your thermistor and resistor on a regular breadboard, and then
run the voltage across from the thermistor circuit to the Uno board on a
jumper wire, in the same way that you are already supplying positive voltage
and ground from the Arduino to the breadboard. It’s messy, but it is what
most people seem to do. If you finish a program and mount it permanently on
the microcontroller, then maybe you can move the chip to a more convenient
location.
Figure 5-90 shows the arrangement. Figure 5-91 shows how it looks in a

photograph. I have to admit, this is one occasion where those little wires with
plugs at each end are convenient, although I still don’t entirely trust them.

Figure 5-90. Wiring the thermistor circuit to the Arduino.

Figure 5-91. Using jumper wires to connect the thermistor circuit with the Arduino.

What, No Output?
Now you’re all set to convert an analog input to an internal digital value. But
wait—something is missing, here. You don’t have an output!
In an ideal world, the Uno board would be sold with a nice little alphanumeric
display, so that you could use it like a real computer. In fact, you can obtain
displays like that which will work with the Uno, but once again this would entail
some complexity. Like almost everything in the microcontroller world, it is not
plug-and-play. The microcontroller has to be programmed to send text to the
display.
So, I will keep things simple. I will use the little yellow LED on the Uno board
as an indicator. I will pretend that the indicator represents a room heater, which
comes on if the temperature is low and switches off when the temperature is
high.

Hysteresis
Suppose we’re heating a greenhouse where we want the temperature to be a
toasty 85 degrees Fahrenheit. Suppose the voltage from the resistor-thermistor
combination is 2.3V at that temperature. Look it up on the graph in Figure 5-89
and you’ll see that the ADC inside the microcontroller will convert this to a
digital value of around 470.
So, 470 is our threshold. If the number goes down to 469, we put on the heat (or
simulate it, by lighting the LED). If the number goes up to 471, we turn off the
heat.
But wait. Does this make sense? It means a fractional increase in temperature
sensed by the thermistor will trigger the LED, and a fractional decrease will
switch it off. The system will be forever fluctuating.
A real thermostat doesn’t respond to every little temperature variation when
someone opens or closes a door. When it switches on, it stays on, until the
temperature is a bit above the target. Then when the heat is off, it stays off, until
the temperature is a bit below the target.
This behavior is known as hysteresis, and I discuss it in more detail, in relation
to a component called a comparator, in my sequel to this book, Make: More
Electronics.
How can we implement hysteresis in a microcontroller program? We need a
broader range of values than 469 through 471. The program could say something
like, “If the LED is on, keep it on until the temperature value exceeds 490. Then
switch if off.” And, “If the LED is off, keep it off until the temperature value
drops below 460. Then switch it on.”
Can we do this? Yes, quite easily. The program listed in Figure 5-92 uses this
logic. I derived it from a screen capture of the Arduino IDE, so I have good
reason to think that it works.

Figure 5-92. Program listing for control of an imaginary heating device.

The program also introduces some new concepts—but first, type it into the IDE.
You don’t need to include all the comment lines, which I just added as
explanations. You can type the much shorter version in Figure 5-93 where the
comment lines have been omitted.

Figure 5-93. The same program as before, with the comment lines omitted.

Verify/Compile your program, and fix any typing errors (probably there will be a
semicolon missing in one place or another—that’s the most common error).
Plug in your Arduino, upload the program, and if the temperature of your
thermistor is below 85 degrees Fahrenheit, the yellow LED should switch on.

Hold the thermistor between your finger and thumb to make the thermistor think
that the room temperature has increased. After a few seconds, the LED goes out.
Now let go of the thermistor, and it cools down—but the LED stays on for a
while, because the hysteresis in the system is telling it to wait until the
temperature is sufficiently low. Eventually, the LED switches on again. Success!
But how does the program work?

Line by Line
This program introduces the concept of a variable. This is a little space in the
microcontroller’s memory where a digital value can be stored. You can think of
it as a “memory box.” On the outside of the box is a label that has the name of
the variable. On the inside is a numeric value.
int digitemp = 0; means I have invented a variable named digitemp. It is an
integer (a whole number), and it starts with a value of zero.
int ledstate = 0; means I have invented another integer variable, to keep
track of whether the LED on the board is on or off. There’s no easy way I can get
the microcontroller to look at the LED and tell me what its state is, so I will have
to keep track of it myself.
The setup of the program just tells the microcontroller to use pin 13 as an
output. I don’t need to tell it to use pin A0 as an input, because analog pins are
inputs by default.
Now comes the heart of the program, in the loop. First, I use the command
analogRead to tell the microcontroller to read the state of an analog port. Which
one? I specify 0, which means analog port A0. This is where the connection
from my breadboard is plugged in.
What do I do with the information from the ADC after it reads the port? There is
only one sensible place to put it: in the variable named digitemp that I created
for this purpose.
Now that digitemp contains a value, I can examine it. First I want to say, if the
heat is on (the LED is illuminated) and the temperature value is greater than 490,
it’s time to turn the heat off. The “if” part is tested like this:
if (ledstate == 1 && digitemp > 490)

The double == means, “make a comparison and see if these two items are the
same.” A single equals sign means, “assign this value to a variable,” which is a
different operation.
The double && is a “logical AND.” Yes, we have Boolean logic here, just as if
we were using an AND logic gate. But instead of wiring up a chip, we just type a
line of code.
The > symbol means, “is greater than.”
The “if” test is contained in parentheses. If the statement in the parentheses is
true, the microcontroller performs the following procedure, between the braces.
In that procedure, ledstate = 0 records the fact that the LED is going to be
switched off. digitalWrite (13, LOW); actually switches it off.
The second “if” test is very similar, except it only applies if the LED is off, and
the temperature has fallen much lower. Then, we switch the LED on.
Finally there is a delay of 1/10th of a second because we don’t need to check the
temperature more often than that.
And that’s it.

Additional Details
I have thrown in some pieces of syntax, such as the “if” test, and the double
equals sign, and the && logical operator, without giving you a whole list of all
the syntax that you can use in C language. You can find that kind of list online. I
don’t have space for it here.
Notice a couple of things about the program:
Lines are indented to clarify the logical structure. The compiler ignores extra
white space, so you can feel free to add as much of it as you like.
The IDE uses color to help you see if you made any typing errors.
When you make up a name for a variable, you can use any combination of
letters, numerals, and underscore characters—so long as the combination is
not the same as a word that already has a special meaning in the C language.
For instance, you can’t have a variable named void.
Some people like to begin variable names with a capital letter, and some

don’t. It’s your choice.
Each variable should be declared at the beginning of the program, so that the
compiler knows what to expect.
An integer (declared with the int term) can have a value ranging from
-32,768 to +32,767. The C language on this microcontroller allows you other
types of variables that have a wider range of values, or that can have
fractional values. But I won’t need to use a larger numeric value until
Experiment 34.
For a beginning language reference, go to the main Arduino website, click the
Learning tab, and choose Reference from the menu that drops down. You can
also pull down the Help menu from the Arduino IDE and choose the Reference
submenu.

Enhancements
This program does the job that I set out to do, but it’s very limited. The biggest
limitation is that it uses specific numbers for the minimum and maximum
temperature values. That’s like having a thermostat that is glued into just one
position and can never be adjusted. How could the program be enhanced so that
the user can adjust the threshold temperature for the heat to go on and off?
I think the way to do it would be to add a potentiometer. The ends of the
potentiometer’s track would be connected to 5V and 0V, and the wiper would be
connected to another analog input on the microcontroller. This way, the
potentiometer functions as a voltage divider and supplies the full range from
0VDC to 5VDC.
Then I would add another procedure in the loop where the microcontroller would
check the potentiometer setting, and digitize it.
The result would be a number in the full range from 0 through 1,023. I would
have to convert this to a number compatible with the likely range of values for
the digitemp variable. Then I would put the result in a new variable named,
perhaps, usertemp. Then I would see if the actual room temperature, measured
by the thermistor, is significantly above or below usertemp.
Notice that I skipped over one little detail: exactly how I would convert the

potentiometer input to the range suitable for usertemp. All right, I’ll deal with
that now.
If the likely range of values for the thermistor is 430 through 512 as I estimated
previously, that range can be thought of as having a middle value of 471, plus or
minus 41. The potentiometer has a middle value of 512, plus or minus 512 for its
full range. Therefore:
usertemp = 471 + ( (potentiometer - 512) * .08)
where potentiometer is the value from the potentiometer input, and the asterisk
symbol is used by the C language as a multiplication sign. That would be close
enough.
Yes, arithmetic does tend to be involved in programming, sooner or later,
somewhere or other. There is no way to pretend otherwise. But it seldom goes
beyond high-school math.
In the enhanced version of the program, I would still have to take care of
hysteresis. The first “if” statement would have to be converted so that it says
something like,
if (ledstate == 1 && digitemp > (usertemp + 10) )
then switch off the LED. But
if (ledstate == 0 && digitemp < (usertemp - 10) )
then switch on the LED. That would give me a hysteresis range of plus-or-minus
10, using the values from the ADC.
Now that I’ve described this modification, maybe you can consider making it
yourself. Just remember to declare each new variable before you use it in the
body of the program.

Experiment 34: Nicer Dice
In this last experiment, I’m going to revisit Experiment 24, which used logic
chips to create dice patterns. Instead of logic chips, we can now use “if”
statements with logical operators in a microcontroller program. We can replace
several pieces of hardware with a dozen lines of computer code, and instead of a
555 timer, a counter, and three logic chips, we will need just one microcontroller.

This is a great example of an appropriate application. (Of course, it does still
require some LEDs and series resistors.)

What You Will Need:
Breadboard, hookup wire, wire cutters, wire strippers, test leads, multimeter.
Generic LED (7).
Series resistor, 330 ohms (7).
Arduino Uno board (1).
Laptop or desktop computer with an available USB port (1).
USB cable with A-type and B-type connector at opposite ends (1).

The Limits to Learning by Discovery
Learning by discovery works well when you’re getting to know an electronic
component. You can put it on a breadboard, apply power, and see what happens.
Even when you’re designing a circuit, you can use some trial and error and make
modifications as you go along.
Writing programs is different. You have to be disciplined and logical; otherwise,
you will tend to write buggy program code that doesn’t work reliably. Also, you
have to plan ahead; otherwise, you will waste a lot of time redoing previous
work or throwing it away entirely.
I don’t enjoy planning, but I dislike wasting time even more. So, I do plan, and
in this final project, I’m going to describe the planning process. I’m sorry that
you won’t get some immediate pleasure from just putting some parts together
and seeing what happens, but if I don’t explain the software development
process, I will be creating a misleading impression by making programming
seem simpler than it really is.

Randomicity
The first question seems obvious: “What do I really want this program to do?”
The question is necessary because if you don’t define your goals clearly, there is
no way the microcontroller can figure them out for you. This is similar to the

process that I described in Experiment 15, of making a “wish list” for the
intrusion alarm; but for a microcontroller, greater detail is required.
The basic requirement is very simple. I want a program that will choose a
random number and display it in some LEDs that resemble the spots on a die
(the word “die” being the singular of “dice,” as I mentioned once before).
Because choosing a random number is fundamental to this program, you need to
be properly informed on the subject. So let’s check the Arduino website, where
there is a language reference section. It is not as comprehensive as I would like,
but is a good starting point.
To find it, go to the Arduino home page, click the Learning tab, and select
Reference, and you will find a section titled Random Numbers. When you click
that, you find there is a function specifically created for the Arduino, named
random().
This is not entirely surprising, because almost all high-level computer languages
have some kind of random function built in, and it always works by using
mathematical trickery to generate a stream of numbers that are unpredictable to a
human observer and continue for a very long time before the sequence repeats.
The only problem is that because they are created mathematically, the sequence
will start from the same place each time you run the program.
What if you want the sequence to start at a different place? There is another
Arduino function named randomSeed() that initializes the number generator by
looking at the state of a pin on the microcontroller that is not connected with
anything. As I have mentioned before, a floating logic pin picks up any
electromagnetic radiation that may be around, and you never know what to
expect from it. So randomSeed() can be genuinely random, and sounds like a
good idea—although we would have to remember not to use that unconnected,
floating pin for anything else.
Setting aside the issue of seeding the random number generator for the time
being, let’s suppose I use the Arduino’s random() function to choose a number
for the output of the dice program. How should this actually work?
I think the player will press a button, at which point the randomly selected
pattern of dice spots can be displayed. Job done! Then if you need to “throw the
die” a second time, you just press the button again, and another randomly

selected pattern of dice spots will be created.
That sounds very convenient—but I don’t think it will look very interesting. It
may not seem very plausible, either. People may wonder if that number is really
random. I think the problem is that control of the procedure has been taken away
from the user.
Going back to the hardware version of this project, I liked the way it displayed a
rapid blur of patterns, and I liked that the player could press a button to stop the
sequence arbitrarily.
Maybe the program should emulate this, instead of using the random() function.
It can count through numbers 1 through 6 over and over again, very fast—like
the counter chip in the hardware version of Nice Dice.
But this worries me in a different way. When the program counts from 1 to 6,
and then repeats, I think the microcontroller will take an extra few microseconds
to go back to the start of the loop. So, a 6 will always be displayed for a fraction
longer than the other numbers.
Maybe I can combine the two concepts. I can use the random number generator
to create a series of numbers, and I will display them in very quick succession,
until the player presses a button to stop at an arbitrary moment.
I like that plan. But then what? I could have another button to restart the rapid
number display. But, no, that’s not necessary: the same button can do it. Press to
stop, press to restart.
You see, now I am getting a clearer idea of what I want this program to do. This
will help me to take the next step, figuring out the instructions to get the
microcontroller to do it.

Pseudocode
I like to write pseudocode, which is a series of statements in English that will be
easily converted into computer language. Here is my pseudocode plan for the
program that I am naming Nicer Dice. Bear in mind that these instructions will
be executed extremely fast, so that the numbers are a blur.
Main loop:
Step 1. Choose a random number.

Step 2. Convert it to a pattern of dice spots, and light up the appropriate
LEDs.
Step 3. Check to see if a button has been pressed.
Step 4. If a button has not been pressed, go back to Step 1 and choose another
random number, so that the sequence will repeat rapidly. Otherwise…
Step 5. Freeze the display.
Step 6. Wait for the player to press the button a second time. Then go back to
Step 1 and repeat.
Do you see any problems with this sequence? Try to visualize it from the
microcontroller’s point of view. If you were receiving the instructions in the
program, would you have everything you need to get the job done?
No, you wouldn’t, because some instructions are missing. Step 2 says, “light up
the appropriate LEDs,” but—there is no instruction anywhere to switch them
off!
You always have to remember:
The computer only does what you tell it to do.
If you want the illuminated LEDs to be switched off before a new number is
displayed, you have to include an instruction to do that.
Where should I put it? Well, I need to blank the display immediately before each
new number is chosen and displayed. Therefore, the right place to zero the
display is at the beginning of the main loop. I’ll include it as Step 0.
Step 0. Switch off all the LEDs.
But wait. Depending on the number that was displayed in the previous cycle,
some of the LEDs in the pattern will be on, and some will be off. If we switch
off all the LEDs to clear the display, this will include some of the LEDs that
were off already. The microcontroller won’t care, but it will waste some time
executing that instruction. Maybe it would be more efficient just to switch off the
LEDs that were previously on, and ignore the ones that are already off.
That will entail more complexity in the programming, and it may not be
necessary. In the very early days of computing, people had to optimize a program
to save processor cycles, but I think even a microcontroller is fast enough, now,

for us not to care about the time that will be wasted by switching off two or three
LEDs that were off already. I’ll use an all-purpose routine to switch off all the
LEDs, regardless of their current states.

Button Inputs
What else is missing from the list of pseudocode instructions?
There is a button issue.
Once again, I need to visualize what I want the program to do. The rapid display
is cycling through numbers very quickly. The player presses a button to stop it.
The display freezes, showing the current number. In Step 6 the microcontroller
waits indefinitely until the player presses the button again, to create a new rapid
display.
Wait a minute. How can the player press the button “again” without releasing it
first?
With the pseudocode in its current form, this is what the microcontroller will
actually do, bearing in mind that it performs tasks very, very quickly:
Program tells the microcontroller to check the button.
Microcontroller finds that the button is pressed.
The display freezes. Microcontroller waits for the button to be pressed again.
But it finds that the button is still being pressed, because the player hasn’t had
time to stop pressing it.
Microcontroller says, “Oh, the button is pressed, so I should resume the rapid
display.”
Consequently the frozen display will only last for an instant.
Here’s the solution to the problem. An extra step in the sequence:
Step 5A. Wait for the player to release the button.
This will stop the computer from running ahead and displaying more numbers,
until the player is ready.
Is this it? Are we done, yet?
No, I’m afraid not. You may think this is getting a bit laborious, but in that case I

have to say, I’m sorry, but this is what programming is like. If someone tells you
that you can just throw some instructions together and see them work, I’m afraid
this is often not the case.
One more button problem still exists. Step 6 says, wait for the button to be
pressed again to restart the rapid display. OK, the player presses the button, the
display resumes—but the microcontroller is so fast, it will zip through the
process of zeroing the current display and displaying a new die pattern, and once
again it will recheck the button before the player has time to stop pressing it.
Consequently, when the microcontroller gets to Step 4, it will find that the button
is still being pressed, so it will freeze the display again.
Now what? Maybe I should add a new Step 7, telling the microcontroller to wait
for the button to be released before resuming the rapid display.
That’s counter-intuitive. I don’t think anyone will understand that you have to
press the button, and release it, before the rapid display resumes. We could just
say, “Oh, you have to do that, because the program requires it.” But that is a very
bad way of thinking.
A program has to do what the user expects. We should never force the user to
do things to satisfy the program.
In any case, the idea of waiting for the button to be released before the rapid
display resumes still won’t work. There’s another issue: contact bounce. This
happens when the button is pressed, and when the button is released.
Consequently, if someone lets go of a button and the process resumes, and the
program checks the button again a millisecond later, the contacts may still be
vibrating, and they may appear to be open or closed, on an unpredictable basis.
This is the kind of thing we run into when a microcontroller interacts with the
physical world. The microcontroller wants everything to be precise and stable,
but the physical world is imprecise and unstable.
I had to think carefully about this particular problem before I decided how I
wanted to solve it.
One solution would be to go back to having two buttons, one to start the rapid
display, and one to stop it. This way, as soon as the “start” button is pressed, the
microcontroller can ignore its status and its contact bounce, and just wait for the
“stop” button to be pressed.

But from the player’s point of view, I like the simplicity of just having one
button. Surely, there’s a way to make it work?
I went back to describing what I wanted the program to do, as clearly as
possible. I said to myself: “I want the program to resume showing the rapid
sequence as soon as the button is pressed for a second time. But after that, the
program should ignore the button until after it is released, and until the contacts
have stopped bouncing.”
Why not simply lock out the button for a second or two? Actually this will be a
good idea, because the random display should run for a little while before the
player can stop it again. This will make the display look “more random,” as it
runs through all those numbers.
Suppose I lock out the button for, say, two seconds after the rapid display begins.
Step 4 should be rewritten like this:
Step 4. If a button has not been pressed, OR the rapid display has been
running for less than two seconds, go back to the top and choose another
random number. Otherwise…
Notice the OR word. Those Boolean operators really come in handy.

The System Clock
I think I have resolved all the button problems, but now I have a new problem. I
need to measure two seconds.
Is there a system clock inside the microcontroller? Probably there is. Maybe the
C language can access it, and ask it to measure a time interval.
Check the language reference. Yes, there is a function named millis() that
measures milliseconds. It runs like a clock, starting from zero each time a
program begins. This function is capable of reaching such a high number, it
doesn’t reach its limit and restart from zero until about 50 days have passed.
That should certainly be enough.
But—no, there is one more little snag. The Arduino doesn’t allow my program to
reset the system clock on demand. The clock starts counting like a stopwatch
when the program starts running, but unlike a stopwatch, I can’t stop it.
How can I deal with this? I will have to use the system clock in the same way

that I would use the clock on my kitchen wall, in the real world. When I want to
cook a hard-boiled egg, I make a mental note of the time when the water starts
boiling. Let’s suppose it is 5:02pm and I want to boil the egg for seven minutes. I
say to myself, “5:02 plus seven minutes is 5:09, so I’ll take the egg out at 5:09.”
What I am doing, inside my head, is comparing the clock, which keeps running,
with my memorized time limit of 5:09. I am saying to myself, “Has the clock
reached 5:09 yet?” When the time on the clock is equal to 5:09, or greater, my
egg is cooked.
The way to do this in the dice program is to invent a variable that will work like
my memory of the time at the start of the egg-boiling process. Immediately
before the rapid display begins, I store the current value of the system clock in
the variable, plus two seconds. Then I can get the program to say, “Has the
system clock reached the value of my variable yet?” until it finally gets there.
Suppose I name the variable “ignore,” because it will tell me at what time in the
future the program should stop ignoring the button. Then Step 4 can ask the
microcontroller, “Has the system clock exceeded the ignore variable yet?” and if
it has, the program can resume paying attention to the button.
I cannot reset the system clock, but I can reset the “ignore” variable to match the
current value of millis(), plus two seconds, each time a new rapid display
session begins.

Final Draft of Pseudocode
Bearing all these issues in mind, here is the revised and, I hope, final sequence of
events for the program:
Before the loop begins, establish input and output of the logic pins, and set
the “ignore” variable to the current time, plus two seconds.
Step 0. Switch off all the LEDs.
Step 1. Choose a random number.
Step 2. Convert it to a pattern of dice spots, and light up the appropriate
LEDs.
Step 3. Check to see if the button has been pressed.
Step 4. Check to see if the system clock has caught up with the “ignore”

variable yet.
Step 4a. If the button has not been pressed, OR the system clock has not
caught up with the “ignore” variable yet, go back to Step 0. Otherwise…
Step 5. Freeze the display.
Step 5A. Wait for the player to release the button.
Step 6. Wait as long as it takes for the player to press the button once more, to
restart the display.
Step 7. Reset the “ignore” variable to the system clock, plus two seconds.
Go back to Step 0.
Do you think it will work? Let’s find out.

Hardware Setup
Figure 5-94 shows seven LEDs wired on a breadboard to display the spots on a
die. The concept is the same as in Figure 4-146, except that the Arduino can
deliver 40mA from each output pin, and therefore I don’t have to drive pairs of
LEDs in series. A single output pin can easily drive a pair of LEDs in parallel,
and for each generic LED, a 330-ohm resistor is ample.

Figure 5-94. Seven LEDs wired on a breadboard to display the spot patterns of a die.

The numbers on the wires are the same as the numbering system in Figure 4146. They have nothing to do with the die values. It’s just an arbitrary way to
identify each wire. Also, I can plug the wires numbered 1 through 4 into digital
outputs numbered 1 through 4 on the Uno board. This will help to make
everything clear.
I’ll use digital connection 0, on the Uno board, as an input that checks the status

of the pushbutton. However, note that the Uno uses digital pins 0 and 1 when
receiving USB data. If you have any problem uploading your program,
disconnect the wire from digital input 0 temporarily.
Don’t connect the ground wire from the breadboard to the Uno board just yet.
It’s safer to upload the program first, because the program will tell the
microcontroller which pins are outputs and which pins are inputs. A previous
program may have configured them differently, and so long as the Arduino board
is plugged in, it will want to run whatever program is in its memory. This may
not be safe for the Arduino outputs, because:
You must be very careful not to apply any voltage to a digital pin that is
configured as an output.

Now, the Program
Figure 5-95 shows the program that I wrote to match the pseudocode. The same
program is listed in Figure 5-96 with the comments removed, so that you’ll be
able to copy-type it more quickly. Please type it in the IDE editing window.

Figure 5-95. The Nicer Dice program listing.

Figure 5-96. The same program listing with comments removed.

While you are typing it, you will find that the second “if” statement contains a
character that you haven’t seen before. In fact, you may have never typed it,
ever, on your keyboard. It is a vertical line, sometimes called the “pipe” symbol.
On a Windows keyboard, you are likely to find it above the Enter key. You
create it by pressing Shift and the backslash \ character. The listing uses two
pairs of pipe symbols in the second “if” statement, and I will explain them when
I go through the program line by line.
When you finish, choose the Sketch > Verify/Compile option in the IDE to see if
you made any errors.
Some of the error messages can be difficult to understand, and they refer to line
numbers. But line numbers are not displayed with the program! This seems like
a cruel joke, telling you which line your error is on, but not showing you the
number. Maybe there is a way to switch on line numbering? If you check the
Help, and search for “line numbers,” I don’t think you’ll find anything. Check
the Arduino forums, and you will find a lot of people complaining that they can’t
display line numbers.
Ah, but the forums show the oldest posts first. If you scroll all the way down to
the newest posts, you find that the problem finally was solved. Arduino just
didn’t get around to documenting it. Go to File > Preferences, and you will see
an option to switch on the line numbers.
Of course the error messages can be a bit difficult to understand, but here are the
most common causes of errors, which you should check before you try to fix
anything.
You may have forgotten to put a semicolon at the end of an instruction.
You may have left out a closing brace. Remember, braces { must always } be
in pairs.
Although a command word often contains a mix of uppercase and lowercase
letters, as in pinMode, you may have typed it in all lowercase letters. The IDE
should display the command words in red, when they are correctly typed. If
you see one that is in black, it contains a typing error.

You may have omitted parentheses from a function name such as void
loop().
You may have used a single = sign where you should have two == signs.
Remember, = means “assign a value” while == means “compare a value.”
You may have typed only one | symbol or only one & symbol where they
should be used in pairs.
When your Verify/Compile operation finds no additional error messages, upload
the program. Now plug in the ground wire connecting your breadboard with the
Uno board, and the LEDs should start flashing. Wait a couple of seconds, then
press the button, and the display stops, displaying a random spot pattern. Press
the button again, and the display resumes. Hold down the button, and after the
two-second “ignore” period, the display stops again.
The pseudocode has been successfully implemented!
Now, how does the program work?

Short and Long Integers
The program includes some words that you haven’t seen before, and one really
important new concept.
One new word is long. Until now, you have typed int (meaning “integer”)
before each variable name. But the value of int is limited between -32,768 to
+32,767. When you need to store a bigger number than that, a long integer can
be used, allowing a range of values from -2,147,483,648 to 2,147,483,647.
Why not use long integers for everything? Then we don’t have to worry about
the limit for a regular integer. True, but a long integer takes twice as long to
process (or more), and takes twice as much memory. We don’t have a whole lot
of memory on the Atmel microcontroller.
The system clock uses the millis() function to count milliseconds. If we only
allowed it to count up to 32,767, that would be enough for just over half a
minute. We may need more than that, so the function stores its value in a long
integer. (How do I know this? I read it in the language reference. You have to
read the documentation to use a computer language.)

When I created my “ignore” variable to memorize the current value of the
system clock, the variable had to be defined so that it is compatible with the
clock; so, it has to be defined as a long integer, by using the word long.
What happens if you try to store a number outside of the permitted range in an
integer (or long integer) variable? Your program will produce unexpected
results. It’s up to you to make sure that this never happens.

Setup
The setup section of the program is fairly straightforward. You haven’t used
those pinMode() instructions before, but they are easy to understand.
The first one has a parameter, INPUT_PULLUP, which is very useful: it activates a
pullup resistor built into the microcontroller, so you don’t have to add a pullup
resistor yourself. But, bear in mind, it is a pullup resistor, not a pulldown resistor.
Therefore, the input state of the pin is normally high, and when you use a button,
it must ground the pin of the chip, to make it low. Remember:
When the button is pressed, the digitalRead() function returns a LOW value.
When the button is released, the digitalRead() function returns a HIGH
value.

The “for” Loop
At the beginning of the void loop() function, there is a different kind of loop.
It is called a “for” loop because it begins with the word for. This is a very basic
and convenient way to make the microcontroller count through a series of
numbers, storing each new number in a variable, and throwing out the previous
value. The syntax works like this:
The reserved word for is followed by three parameters in parentheses.
Each parameter is separated from the next by a semicolon.
The first parameter is the first value that will be stored in the specified
variable. (It is properly known as the initialization code.) In this program, the
first value is 1, stored in a variable which I created, named outpin.
The second parameter is the value where the loop stops counting (properly

known as the stop condition). Because the loop stops at that point, the final
value in the variable will actually be one less than the limit. In this program,
the limit is < 5, meaning “less than 5.” So the loop will count from 1 through
4, using the outpin variable.
The third parameter is the amount that the loop adds to the variable in each
cycle (properly known as the iteration expression). In this case, we are
counting in ones, and the C language allows me to specify that by using two
++ symbols. So, outpin++ means, “add 1 to the outpin variable in each
cycle.”
“For” loops allow you to specify all kinds of conditions. They are extremely
flexible. You should read up on them in the language reference. This “for” loop
just counts from 1 through 4, but it could count as easily from 100 to 400, or to
any range you like, limited by the type of the integer used in the loop (int or
long).
During each cycle of the loop, the microcontroller is told to do something. The
procedure it performs is listed in braces after the loop is defined. Like any
procedure, it can contain numerous operations, each ending in a semicolon.
There is only one operation in this procedure: write a LOW state to the pin
specified by the variable outpin. Because outpin is going to count from 1
through 4, the “for” loop is going to create a low output on digital pins 1 through
4.
Ohhhh, now you can see what this is all about. The loop is switching off all the
LEDs.
Isn’t there a simpler way to do this? Sure, you could use these four commands:
digitalWrite (1, LOW);
digitalWrite (2, LOW);
digitalWrite (3, LOW);
digitalWrite (4, LOW);

But I wanted to introduce you to the concept of a “for” loop, because it’s basic
and important. Also, what if you wanted to turn off nine LEDs? Or what if you
wanted the microcontroller to flash an LED 100 times? A “for” loop is often the
best way to make a procedure efficient when repetition is involved.

The Random Function
After the “for” loop has zeroed the die display, we get to the random() function,
which chooses a number between the limits in the parentheses. We want a die
value from 1 through 6, so why is the range listed from 1 through 7? Because
actually the function is choosing fractional values from something like
1.00000001 to 6.99999999 and throwing away the numbers which follow the
decimal point. So, 7 is a limit that is never actually reached, and the output will
be from 1 through 6.
Whatever the random number is, it is stored in another variable that I made up,
named spots, meaning the number of spots on the face of a die.

The “if” Statement
Now it’s time to see what the value of spots is, this time around, and light up
the appropriate LEDs.
The first “if” statement is simple enough. If we have 6 spots, this will be the only
occasion where we write a high value through output pin 1, which is connected
with the left and right LEDs.
Why don’t we switch on all the diagonal LEDs, too? The answer is, they will be
switched on for other die values also, and it’s more efficient to minimize the
number of “if” tests. You’ll soon see how this works.
The next “if” uses the pipe symbol that I mentioned previously. A pair of ||
symbols means OR in the C language. So, the function says that if we have a die
value of 1, OR 3, OR 5, we light up the center LED, by putting a high state on
pin 2.
The third “if” says that if the spots value is greater than 3, we need to light two
of the diagonally placed LEDs. These will be required to display the patterns for
a 4, 5, or 6.
The last “if” says that if the spots value is greater than 1, the other diagonally
placed LEDs must be illuminated, too.
You can test the logic of these “if” functions by looking back at the spot patterns
in Figure 4-146. The logic gates in that figure were chosen to fit the binary
output from the counter chip, so they’re different from the logical operations in

the “if” functions of the program. Still, the LEDs are paired in the same way.

Flash Speed
After the “if” functions, I inserted a delay of 20 milliseconds, because I think it
makes the display more interesting. Without this delay, the LEDs flash so
rapidly, they are just a blur. With the delay, you can see them flashing, but
they’re still too fast for you to stop at a number that you want—although you can
try!
You may wish to adjust the delay value to a number higher or lower than 20.

Creating a New Function
Now comes the important part. In the pseudocode that I wrote, we have reached
Steps 3, 4, and 4a. To refresh your memory:
Step 3. Check to see if the button has been pressed.
Step 4. Check to see if the system clock has caught up with the “ignore”
variable yet.
Step 4a. If the button has not been pressed, OR the system clock has not
caught up with the “ignore” variable yet, go back to Step 0. Otherwise…
These steps can be combined in one “if” function. In pseudocode, it would be
like this:
If (the button is not pressed OR the system clock is less than the “ignore”
value), go back to step 0.
But there is a problem with this. The term “go back to…” suggests that I want to
direct the microcontroller to a specific part of the program. This may seem a
natural thing to do, but when you write in C, you should try to avoid transferring
control from one section of a program to another.
The reason is that a lot of “go here” and “go there” instructions make the
program difficult to understand—not just for other people, but for you, too, when
you take another look at it six months from now, and you can’t remember what
you had in mind.
The concept of C is that each part of a program is contained in a separate block,

and the program runs by calling them when you want them. Think of each block
of instructions as an obedient servant who only does one thing, such as washing
the dishes or taking the garbage out. When you need that task to be executed,
you just call the servant by name.
The blocks are properly known as functions, which is confusing, because we
have been dealing with functions such as setup() and loop() already. But in
fact you can write your own function, which works in basically the same way.
I decided that the correct way to write this program is to split off the buttonchecking function into—well, a function. I have called it checkbutton(), but I
could have called it anything at all, so long as the word wasn’t already being
used for some other purpose.
You see the checkbutton() function at the bottom of the listing, preceded by
the word void, because this function doesn’t send any value back to the rest of
the program.
void checkbutton() is the header for the function, after which the procedure
is contained within braces, as usual. All this function does is:
Wait 50ms for the contact to stop bouncing.
Wait for the button to be released.
Wait another 50ms for the end of the contact bounce created by releasing the
button.
Wait for the button to be pressed again (in other words, wait for the released
state to end).
Reset the ignore variable.
When the microcontroller gets to the end of the function, where does it go?
Simple: back to the line immediately following the one that called the function.
Where is that? Immediately below the “if” function, above. That is how you call
a function: you just state its name (including the parentheses, which sometimes
have parameters inside them, although not in this case).
You can, and should, create as many functions as you like in a program, using
each one to perform a separate task. To learn about this, I suggest you read any
general reference on the C language. The Arduino documentation doesn’t go into
much detail on functions, because—well, they’re a little difficult to understand,

if they start to pass values to and fro. Still, they are at the heart of the C
language.

Structure
The line that begins if ( millis() > ignore has the same purpose as Step 4
in my pseudocode, except that it now works the other way around. Instead of
deciding whether to send the microcontroller back to the beginning, it
determines whether to call my checkbutton() function. Previously I
summarized the logic as, “if (the button is not pressed OR the system clock is
less than the “ignore” value), go back to step 0.” The revised version says, “if the
button-ignore period is over, AND the button is pressed, make a detour to the
checkbutton() function.”
After the microcontroller does that and returns, it reaches the end of the main
loop function, and the loop function always repeats automatically.
Really, this program does only one thing. It selects random numbers and displays
them as spot patterns, over and over again. If the button is pressed, it pauses and
waits, but when the button is pressed again, the program resumes doing what it
was doing before. The button-checking routine is just a momentary interruption.
Therefore, the natural structure for this program is to have a main loop that just
selects and displays numbers, and then if the button is pressed, the
microcontroller is sent on a brief detour to the checkbutton() function and
back again.
The Arduino documentation doesn’t say anything about structure, because it
wants to get you started in making things happen as quickly as possible. So the
Arduino simply forces you to use the mandatory setup function, followed by the
loop function, and that’s it.
But as soon as a program begins to grow in size, you really need to divide it into
your own functions, to keep it from becoming a complicated mess. A standard
C-language tutorial will explain this in more detail.
Of course, if you just want to use the Arduino to do one simple thing, such as
switch on a heater when a room gets cold, you can put all the procedures in the
main loop function, and that will be all you need. But this is a waste of the

microcontroller’s capabilities. It can do so much more. The trouble is, when you
try to do something more ambitious—such as simulate the throw of a die—the
instructions accumulate. Structuring them helps to keep everything clear.
There is another advantage to dividing a program into functions. You can save
the functions separately, and reuse them in other programs later. The
checkbutton() function could be reused in any game where you want to stop
the action by pressing a button and restart it by pressing the button a second
time.
Likewise, you can use other people’s functions in your own programs, provided
the authors don’t restrict you from doing so by controlling their copyright. A vast
number of functions in the C language are available freely online, many of them
specifically written for the Arduino. Functions exist to control almost any
alphanumeric display, for instance. This leads to a very important but often
ignored recommendation for programmers:
Don’t reinvent the wheel.
You don’t need to waste time writing your own function if someone else will let
you use theirs.
This is another reason why the concept of functions is so important in C.

But Is It Too Difficult?
The more you write programs, the easier it gets. The learning curve is steep at
the beginning, but after some practice you’ll write a “for” loop without thinking
much about it. Everything will seem obvious.
That’s what programmers like to say. Is it true?
Sometimes it is, and sometimes it isn’t. In the maker movement we tend to
assume that anyone can take control of the techno-world around us. In fact I
subscribe to this belief myself—but computer programming pushes this
philosophy to the limit.
I used to teach an introductory programming class, and I noticed a very wide
range of aptitudes among the students. Some of them found programming a very
natural thought process, while others found it extremely difficult, and this didn’t
always have much to do with intelligence.

At one end of the scale, at the end of my 12-week, 36-hour programming course,
one student wrote an entire simulation of a slot machine, including graphics
showing the spinning wheels, and money that came tumbling out.
At the other end of the scale, I had a student who was a pharmacist. He was a
very smart, well-educated man, but no matter how hard he tried, he couldn’t get
the syntax right, even in simple “if” statements. “This is really annoying me,” he
said, “because it makes me feel stupid. And I know I’m not stupid.”
He was right, he wasn’t stupid, but I came to the conclusion that I couldn’t help
him, because I had learned a fundamental fact.
To be good at writing programs, you must be able to think like a computer.
For whatever reason, the pharmacist couldn’t do that. His brain just didn’t work
that way. He could describe to me the pharmacology of a medication, its
molecular structure, and a lot more; but that was of no help to him in writing
programs.
When the Arduino was marketed, evangelists described it as a device for
creative people and others who didn’t think of themselves as programmers.
Supposedly, it would be so simple, everyone could use it.
The trouble is, I’m old enough to remember when HTML was introduced with
the same idea—that it would be so easy, everyone would be coding their own
web pages. Well, a few people did, but not “everyone.” Today, only a tiny
minority will hand-code HTML (I am one of them, but I’m eccentric for doing
so).
Going back even farther, to the dawn of computing as we know it, the BASIC
computer language was created with the idea that “everyone” could use it. In the
1980s, with the advent of desktop computers, evangelists predicted that people
would be writing little programs in BASIC to balance their checkbooks or store
recipes. Well, a lot of people gave it a try, but how many people today still do
so?
My purpose in emphasizing this is to reassure you that if you are one of the
people who finds it difficult, there’s no stigma attached to this. I am sure you
have other skills that you can pursue instead. In fact, building things with
individual components could be one of them, as I think it requires different
thought processes. Personally, I find writing programs much easier than

designing circuits, but for someone else, the reverse could be equally true.

Upgrading the Nicer Dice Program
As in the version of this program in Experiment 24, the obvious upgrade is to
add a second die display. This can be done very easily with the Arduino board,
because it has additional digital outputs that can drive a second set of LEDs. You
simply need to duplicate the section of the program that begins with zeroing the
display and ends with the delay(20); function. Substitute the new pin numbers
for your additional LEDs in the digitalWrite() functions, and job done!

Other Microcontrollers
I already mentioned the PICAXE. Its documentation is good, the tech support is
excellent, and the language is easier to learn than C. So why didn’t the PICAXE
capture everyone’s imagination? I don’t know; maybe because it has a wacky
name. I think you should check it out. Start by looking at its entry in Wikipedia.
The BASIC Stamp has a larger vocabulary of commands than the PICAXE, and
a bigger range of add-on devices (including displays with graphical capability,
and a little keyboard that is specifically designed for use with the controller).
You can buy it in the form of surface-mount components squeezed onto a tiny
board that will plug into a breadboard, as shown in Figure 5-97. A very nice
design.

Figure 5-97. The BASIC Stamp microcontroller consists of surface-mounted components on
a platform that has pins spaced at 1/10-inch intervals, for insertion in a breadboard or
perforated board.

On the downside, you’ll find that everything associated with the BASIC Stamp
is a bit more expensive than in the PICAXE world, and the download procedure
isn’t quite as simple.
New products such as the Raspberry Pi extend the functionality of a
microcontroller to the point where it becomes a real computer. By the time you
read this, still more alternatives will be emerging in this turbulent field. Before
you commit yourself to learning one of them in detail, I think it’s a good idea to
spend a day or two studying the online documentation and forums.
When I am thinking about learning something new, I do Google searches such
as:
microcontroller problems OR difficulties
(I would substitute the name of an actual product for “microcontroller” in this
search phrase.)
This is not because I am negative by nature. I just don’t want to spend a lot of
time on a product that turns out to have unresolved issues.

Unexplored Territory
It’s time, now, for me to do some general summing up.
If you’ve taken the time to complete most of the projects in this book with your
own hands, you have gained a very rapid introduction to the most fundamental
areas of electronics.
What have you missed along the way? Here are some topics that remain wide
open for you to explore. Naturally you should search online if they interest you.
The informal approach of Learning by Discovery that I have used in this book
tends to be light on theory. I’ve avoided most of the math that you’d be expected
to learn in a more rigorous course on the subject. If you have mathematical
aptitude, you can use it to gain a much deeper insight into the way in which
circuits work.
We didn’t go very far into binary code, and you didn’t build a half-adder, which
is a great way to learn how computers function on the most fundamental level.
But in Make: More Electronics, I show you how to do this.
I avoided going deeply into the fascinating and mysterious properties of
alternating current. Here again, some math is involved, and just the behavior of
current at high frequencies is an interesting topic in itself.
For reasons already stated, I avoided surface-mount components—but you can
go into this area yourself for a relatively small investment, if you like the idea of
creating fascinatingly tiny devices.
Vacuum tubes were not mentioned, because at this point, they are mainly of
historical interest. But there’s something very special and beautiful about tubes,
especially if you can enclose them in fancy cabinetwork. In the hands of a
skilled craftsperson, tube amplifiers and radios become art objects.
I didn’t show you how to etch your own printed circuit boards. This is a task that
appeals only to certain people, and the preparation for it requires you to make
drawings or use computer software for that purpose. If you happen to have those
resources, you might want to do your own etching. It could be a first step toward
mass-producing your own products.
I didn’t cover static electricity at all. High-voltage sparks don’t have any
practical applications, and they entail some safety issues—but they are

stunningly impressive, and you can easily obtain the necessary information to
build the equipment. Maybe you should try.
Op-amps and higher-level digital logic are other topics that I haven’t touched
here. However, they are included in Make: More Electronics.

In Closing
I believe that the purpose of an introductory book is to give you a taste of a wide
range of possibilities, leaving you to decide for yourself what you want to
explore next. Electronics is ideal for those of us who like to do things ourselves,
because almost any application—from robotics, to radio-controlled aircraft, to
telecommunications, to computing hardware—can be pursued by just one
person, working at home, with limited resources.
As you delve deeper into the areas of electronics that interest you most, I trust
you’ll have a satisfying learning experience. But most of all, I hope you have a
lot of fun.

Chapter 6. Tools, Equipment,
Components, and Supplies
This chapter is divided into five parts.
Kits. Various kits have been prepared, containing components and supplies that
you can use to complete the projects in the book. See “Kits” just below, for
details.
Searching and Shopping Online. Instead of buying kits, you may prefer to do
your own shopping. I have compiled some tips to help you. See “Searching and
Shopping Online” just below, for details.
In Checklists of Supplies and Components you will find an itemization of
everything that you need. The lists of supplies begin at “Supplies”, and the lists
of components begin at “Components”.
Buying Tools and Equipment. I have listed all the tools that are discussed at the
beginning of each chapter of the book, and I have some suggestions about where
to find them. See “Buying Tools and Equipment”.
Suppliers is a list of sources. Abbreviations in this list are used in the buying
guides. See “Suppliers”.

Kits
Kits of components for the experiments in this book are still being finalized as
the book goes to press. One kit should contain all the parts that you need for
Chapters One, Two, and Three of the book. An additional kit should offer parts
for Chapter Four. A separate soldering kit may also be available.
For information, please visit www.plattkits.com.
The page will be updated as more options become available. Please note that kits
may be offered by independent suppliers who are not affiliated with Maker
Media in any way.

Searching and Shopping Online
I’m including some general advice about searching for parts because many
readers of the first edition of this book seemed to have difficulty getting the
results they were looking for. I’ll start with the most basic considerations, and
work up. Even some seasoned shoppers may find a couple of tips here that are
useful.
For a comprehensive list of all suggested suppliers, see “Suppliers”. Here are the
ones that I consider primary:
Electronic components are available from large retail vendors online, most of
which don’t impose minimum quantities. Mouser, Digikey, and Newark are the
obvious choices, maintaining huge inventories. Find them at:
Mouser Electronics ships from Texas
DigiKey ships from Minnesota
Newark element 14 ships from Arizona
In addition, don’t forget eBay, where prices are often lower than from other
sources, especially if you use Asian sellers. eBay is not so useful for parts for
which there is less demand, such as logic chips.
Tools and equipment are available from eBay, Amazon, and Sears, but if you
want a truly monumental selection, McMaster-Carr is unbeatable.
They also have excellent tutorials—for instance, on the properties of different
types of plastic, or the relative advantages of different drill bits.

The Art of Searching
The easiest search is for a specific part number, if you have one. You can enter it
into the search field on a site such as mouser.com, where the algorithm is smart
enough to allow some flexibility. For example, suppose you want a 7402 logic
chip. Mouser will helpfully suggest that a SN7402N from Texas Instruments
may be what you want, bearing in mind that Texas Instruments adds SN to the
front and N to the end of the basic chip type.
However, the search will not be helpful if there is an additional code in the
middle of a part number. When you search for a 7402, Mouser won’t think of

showing you any chips in the 74HC02 family, because HC is added in the
middle.

Try the Chat Option
Suppose you only have an incomplete part number, or you don’t know if the part
is obsolete, or you generally need a bit of help. Don’t overlook the option to
make a voice call. A large distributor will have sales representatives who can
assist you. It doesn’t matter that you are an individual buying small quantities.
Better still, open a chat window. This will allow you to copy-paste a part number
into the window and get a fairly quick answer advising you of similar options if
the part is unavailable.

Parts on Google
If you want to do comparison shopping, use a generic search engine. I’ll assume
that Google is your default, because I feel it’s the most appropriate for our
purposes.
If a part number is long and complicated, you will have a better chance of
finding what you want, and not being offered things that you don’t want.
Searching for a 7402 on Google will generate results including a Pantone ink
color and an Institutes of Health standard. Searching for 74HC02 will narrow the
results to logic chips.
Unfortunately, you are now likely to get hits from a lot of datasheet resellers.
These companies harvest datasheets from electronics manufacturers and
repackage them for you with ads that pay for this “service.” It wouldn’t matter,
except that the reseller often shows you just one datasheet page at a time,
because each page will have a new set of ads, all of which make money for the
reseller. Waiting for each page to display is a waste of time, so I often use a
hyphen as a minus sign to block datasheets when I search for components on
Google, like this:
74HC02 -datasheet
Note that when you specify a part number, the search engine is less likely to
compensate for any little errors that you make. Google understands that if you
type “compoments” you probably meant “components,” but it will not know that

an 84HC02 chip should really be a 74HC02.

Datasheets
What if you actually want to see a datasheet, because you need to check the
specification of a component before buying it? Go to one of the big distributors,
find the part that you want, and you will see the option to click a datasheet icon.
This will link you with a printable multipage document (almost always in PDF
format) maintained by the component manufacturer itself. For me, this is a lot
quicker than dealing with datasheet resellers on Google.

General Search Techniques
If you are looking for a component type, a search term that is brief and vague is
usually inadequate. Suppose you search for:
switch
In my location, the first hit from this search was for light switches, the second hit
was for a local wine bar, and I was then offered a variety of network switches
(which are like routers). I also found a company named Switch that helps people
to find a new job. How can you avoid these irrelevant hits?
As a first step, add a word to define your area of interest. For example, this may
help:
switch electronic
Better still, if you want a DPDT toggle switch rated for 1 amp, just say so:
"toggle switch" dpdt 1a
Note the use of quote marks to nail down a specific phrase, discouraging Google
from showing near-miss search results that are not quite what you asked for.
Also note that search terms are not case-sensitive; there’s no advantage in
putting a term such as dpdt in caps.
You can narrow your search even further by naming a source, such as:
"toggle switch" dpdt 1a amazon
Why mention Amazon, if you can go to amazon.com and do your searching
there? Because the search capability at amazon.com has fewer features than

Google. In this example, it would not recognize the use of quote marks.
Fortunately Amazon allows Google to crawl all over its site and index
everything, so that a search from Google can jump you straight to an Amazon
list of toggle switches.

Exclusions
Use the minus option to avoid items that you don’t want. For instance, if you are
only interested in a full-size toggle switch, you could try this:
"toggle switch" dpdt 1a amazon -miniature
Note that the minus sign is another piece of syntax that Amazon’s search feature
doesn’t understand.

Alternatives
Don’t forget the AND and OR logical operators. If a single-pole, double-throw
switch will work just as well for you as a double-pole, double-throw switch, you
could try this on Google:
"toggle switch" dpdt OR spdt 1a -miniature
But even this may cause some problems, because naming conventions in
electronics can be inconsistent. Some people refer to a DPDT switch as a 2P2T
switch. Some call a SPDT switch a 1P2T switch. You’ll need a lot of ORs to
cover these alternatives.

Too Much Typing?
Personally I find that a carefully constructed, detailed search will save time by
avoiding subsequent searches. However, if you don’t want the chore of typing an
elaborate search term, you have other options. One is to click the word “Images”
which Google displays immediately above each set of search results, adjacent to
the word “Web.” Google Images will show you pictures of every conceivable
kind of switch, and because our brains are well equipped to recognize images
quickly, scrolling through a lot of pictures can be a more efficient way to find
what you want than scrolling through a lot of text.
Alternatively, you can click the “Shop” option above Google’s search results.

This will give you the ability to list items in order of price from dozens or
hundreds of different vendors. Some vendors will not be included, however.

Vendor Categories
Another option is to go to a vendor’s site and use their system of categories. At
mouser.com, digikey.com, and newark.com, if you search for “switch” you’ll be
shown a list of different kinds of switches. Click the type you want, and you’ll
be offered additional options, to narrow your search one step at a time.
Ultimately on mouser.com and other large-vendor sites you are likely to see little
windows listing attributes such as voltages, amperages, and other values. This
can be frustrating, because the lists are not intelligently managed. Some switches
rated for half an amp, for instance, are grouped under 0.5A, while others are
grouped separately as 500mA. These ratings are identical, but the people who
create the listings just seem to copy the specifications from datasheets, some of
which use amps while others use milliamps.
What to do? Use your Control-click option (Command-click on a Mac). Holding
down the Ctrl key (or Command key) while you click the additional selection
allows you to select the 0.5A switches and the 500mA switches and any others
that might be suitable—including 1A switches, as a higher current rating will
work fine at lower currents.

Which to Click First?
When using categories on a vendor site, it’s useful to begin by choosing the
attributes that you absolutely, positively need. For instance, if you are shopping
for logic chips, begin by selecting through-hole versions, because you definitely
won’t want the tiny surface-mount versions. But note that a “DIP” package
(meaning, dual-inline pin) is almost the same thing as a “PDIP” (plastic DIP)
package, which is the same as a “through-hole” version.
Conversely, any chip format identified by an acronym beginning with S is almost
always a surface-mount version, which you do not want. SMT, in particular,
means surface-mount.

A Real-Life Search

Here’s an example of an actual search that I performed for a part that I used in
this book. I knew what I wanted it to do, but I didn’t know the part number.
I wanted a counter with a 3-bit output for use in the “Nice Dice” circuit (see
“Experiment 23: Flipping and Bouncing”). So I went to Mouser Electronics and
I started by searching for:
counter
While I was typing my search term, Mouser suggested an autocomplete:
Counter ICs
An IC is an integrated circuit, which is the same thing as a chip. So I clicked the
autocomplete suggestion, which took me to a page suggesting 821 matches.
Little scrolling windows would allow me to narrow the search by manufacturer,
counter type, logic family, and much more. How should I proceed?
I scrolled horizontally to the window allowing me to choose the mounting style.
Only two options: SMD/SMT (which are surface mount chips) and through-hole
(the chips that plug into breadboards, not requiring a magnifying glass). I clicked
the through-hole option and then clicked the Apply Filters button. That gave me
177 matches.
All the logic chips in this book are HC type in the 7400 family, so I went to the
Logic Family window, and clicked 74HC. But, not so fast! I know that Mouser
often lists the same thing under different names, so I scrolled through the other
options. Sure enough I found HC listed separately from 74HC. I Control-clicked
it to select both terms.
Now I had 52 options to choose from. As Counter Type, I selected Binary,
because I wanted a binary output. This left me with 33 remaining matches.
There were no 3-bit chips, but I could use a 4-bit chip and ignore the highest bit.
I saw two options in Number of Bits: 4 and 4-bit. I Control-clicked to select
them both.
Counting sequence could be Up, or Up/Down. I only wanted Up, so I clicked
that. Now only nine matches left! Time to inspect the results. I wanted to use the
most commonly available chip, which I determined by seeing how many of each
one were in stock. I saw more than 7,000 of the SN74HC393N by Texas
Instruments.

I clicked the datasheet link to make sure it would do what I wanted. A 14-pin
chip providing maximum continuous output current of plus-or-minus 25mA with
a nominal 5-volt supply (“nominal” means “typically used”). Yes, this was a
standard logic chip in the 74HCxx family. Actually it contained two 4-bit
counters, and I only needed one, but I wasn’t going to quibble over that, and in
fact I realized I could make use of the second counter in the chip, if I enlarged
the scope of my project.
The 74HC393 would cost me about 50 cents. Might as well put six of them in
the shopping cart. That’s only $3, so maybe I should look for something else,
reasonably small and light, so that I could add it without paying any additional
shipping charge. But first I printed the datasheet for the 74HC393 and added it to
my paper-based file-folder system.
You can see that this process entailed a lot of clicking. But it took me less than
10 minutes, and I found exactly what I wanted.
I could have followed a different path. Because I knew I wanted a chip in the
74xx family, I could have gone to this URL, which I keep bookmarked for easy
reference:
www.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_7400_series_integrated_circuits
This includes all the 74xx logic chips that have ever been made. If you go to this
page, you can press Control-F to search the text, and then type in:
4-bit binary counter
It has to be an exact match, which means you must type 4-bit, not 4 bit. The
search yields 13 hits, and you can compare the features of the chips. After you
choose one, you can copy its number and paste it into the search field of a site
like Mouser, which takes you to that one component.
The only problem is, the Wikipedia page doesn’t tell me which chips are old and
almost out of production, and which are still popular. For my purposes, writing a
book that I hope will be around for a while, I have to stick with the most popular
components. This may be a good idea from your point of view, too, because if
you build a circuit around an old chip, you are locking yourself into the past.
I could have used yet another approach, doing a Google search for people
discussing and advising each other about counter chips. But you get the general
idea. You don’t need a part number, to find what you want.

eBay Options
I buy a lot of parts through eBay because I find bargains there, and also because
most companies selling through eBay are extremely quick and reliable. To
minimize your time and trouble, you need to know a few search basics that are
specific to eBay.
First, don’t hesitate to click the little “Advanced” option just to the right of the
Search button on eBay’s home page. This will allow you to specify attributes
such as the country of origin (if you want to avoid overseas suppliers), and can
limit your search to Buy It Now items. You can also specify a minimum price,
which can be useful to eliminate stuff that is too cheap to be any good. Then,
before starting the actual search, I usually click the display option for Price +
Shipping: Lowest First.
Once you find what you want, it’s time to check the seller’s feedback. For sellers
within the United States, I want 99.8% or better. I’ve never had a problem with
sellers rated 99.9%, but I have been disappointed sometimes with service from
sellers rated 99.7%.
If a supplier is in an Asian nation such as China, Hong Kong, Thailand, or
others, you can be less fussy about feedback, because a lot of buyers give bad
feedback when they don’t receive something as quickly as they expect. Overseas
sellers will warn you that a small packet will take 10 to 14 days in transit, but
buyers complain anyway, and this drags down the feedback rating. In reality, in
my experience, every item that I have ordered from overseas sources has always
turned up, and has always been what I wanted. You just need to exercise a little
patience.
After you find what you want on eBay, you may want to click the Add to Cart
button, rather than the Buy it Now button, because you can look for additional
items from the same seller, and you’ll save time by grouping them into one
shipment. This should also reduce shipping costs.
Click the Visit Store option in the Seller Information window, or if the seller
doesn’t have an eBay store, click to See Other Items. You then have the option to
search within that seller’s list of products. After you add as many as you want to
your cart, it’s checkout time.
You can make direct contact with overseas suppliers, instead of finding them

through eBay. Tayda Electronics in Thailand (abbreviated tay in my list—see
“Suppliers”) is a popular source.

Amazon
I don’t think amazon.com is very useful for components, but it can be a good
source for tools and for supplies such as wire or solder. The only problem I have
is that Amazon doesn’t like to show me the cheapest stuff first. You have to
choose that option repeatedly after every search, and if the products are scattered
among different store categories, the option to resequence the results will not
exist. Even when you can prioritize the list by cheapness, Amazon (unlike eBay)
is not smart enough to factor in the shipping cost. Pliers with a price of $4.95
and $6 shipping will be listed as being cheaper than pliers selling for $5.50 with
$3 shipping. On the other hand, Amazon ships fast and if you buy a bunch of
items at one time, all of them warehoused by Amazon themselves, you may be
able to spend enough to get free shipping.

Killing Autocomplete
One last tip regarding Google. The default mode of the search engine will
prompt you with a pop-up list of similar terms while you are still trying to type
your search string. I get really annoyed with the interference of this
autocomplete option, so I have disabled it—and you can, too.
In the address bar of your browser, use this URL to launch Google:
http://www.google.com/webhp?complete=0
Now save it as one of your favorites, and when you click the favorite, Google
won’t try to tell you what it thinks you are looking for. It will wait quietly for
you to finish typing.
You can also use the URL as the default page that will open every time you
launch your browser.

Is Searching Worth the Trouble?
You may feel that you don’t want to memorize all these searching techniques.
OK, that’s why Maker Shed and myself are offering kits to go with this book.

Buy a kit, and you should have all the components that you need, with no
searching necessary.
But what are you going to do if you get interested in projects outside of this
book? Suppose you see a circuit online—or suppose you want to modify a
circuit, or design your own. At that point, I think you’ll have to buy your own
parts, and even if you try to obtain them all from one source, search techniques
can be valuable.

Checklists of Supplies and Components
Photographs and general information are provided at the beginning of each
chapter of this book. See “Necessary Items for Chapter One”, “Necessary Items
for Chapter Two”, “Necessary Items for Chapter Three”, and “Necessary Items
for Chapter Four”.
Below you will find listings of all the components and supplies. But I need to
clarify the distinction between these two words.
Supplies are items such as solder or wire that I suggest you buy in a one-time
purchase, sufficient for all the experiments. It doesn’t make sense to consider
how many inches of wire you will need for each project.
Components become an integral part of a project. You may be able to reuse
these items, but only if you remove them from a previous project. Therefore, to
take one example, a breadboard is included with components.

Supplies
The following supplies will be sufficient for all the projects. See “Suppliers” for
a list of sources from which you can buy these supplies, and abbreviations that I
will use to refer to them.
Hookup Wire
You need 22 gauge, solid conductor, in at least two colors (red and blue), and
preferably two more colors (your choice). Automotive wire is acceptable, so
long as it is solid-core. Search eBay or Google for
solid wire 22 gauge OR awg

or check discount suppliers such as all, elg, and jam, or hobby suppliers such as
ada and spk. (AWG is an acronym for American Wire Gauge.)
Quantities? If you want to do the experiments in Experiments 26, 28, 29, 30, and
31 that explore the world of inductance, you really need 200 feet of wire.
Different colors can be joined together temporarily when winding coils. The
wire can be unwound afterward and reused for other purposes.
If you are willing to skip the inductance experiments, I suggest you buy three
spools of 25 feet each. You can find smaller lengths than 25 feet, but the price
per foot goes up rapidly.
Jumpers
Personally I prefer not to use precut jumper wires, but if you choose them, one
box should be sufficient. In addition you will need 25 feet of raw hookup wire,
to make connections that are longer than the longest precut jumper. To find
precut jumpers, you have to use the right search term. On Google, search for:
jumper wire box
The word “box” is the key to finding what you want. It automatically eliminates
the type of undesirable flexible jumpers with plugs at each end, which are
generally sold in bundles, not boxes. I don’t think they are a good idea.
Stranded Wire
This is an optional addition, for situations where flexibility is important. One 25foot spool will be enough.
Solder
This is usually sold by weight. See “Essential: Solder” for the pros and cons of
solder containing lead. Either way, be sure you buy electronic solder with a rosin
core. The thickness may range from 0.02” to 0.04” (0.5mm to 1mm). If you only
want to solder a couple of projects, three feet of solder will be sufficient, and
some sources on eBay will sell very small quantities. Otherwise, try all, elg, jam,
ada, amz, and spk.
Heat-Shrink Tubing
This is optional, but useful. One assortment of three or four (small) sizes will be
enough. Because it has automotive applications, you can find it from hardware

suppliers such as hom, har, and nor as well as hobbyist sources.
Perforated Board (unplated)
Only required in Experiment 14, although you can use it to build a permanent
version of any projects in the book if you are willing to solder point-to-point
wiring. A small piece, perhaps 4” x 8”, will be enough for three average projects.
Finding unplated board can be difficult, as most of it has copper or nickel solder
pads. I think these are undesirable when doing point-to-point wiring, as they
increase the risk of short circuits. Search for:
perforated board bare -copper
Also try searching for “prototyping board,” or “proto board,” or “phenolic
board.” Note that unplated board is also known as “unclad” in some places. At
the time of writing, Keystone Electronics makes very small, cheap pieces of
unplated perforated board, available through mou and dgk. You can also find
unplated board at jam.
Perforated Board (plated)
This type of board is used for the finished version of Experiment 18, but of
course you can use it for other projects where you want to make a permanent
version. For convenience, use the type that has copper traces in the same pattern
as connections inside a breadboard. This can be hard to find, because there are
many different patterns, and the pattern that you want does not have a generally
agreed name.
The BusBoard SB830 describes it as a “solderable breadboard” and it is
currently available through amz. At ada, you find something similar named
“Perma-Proto.” GC Electronics 22-508 is another option, available through jam.
The Schmartboard 201-0016-31 (available through mou) is a two-part package
consisting of a breadboard and a matching perforated board. The manufacturer
suggests placing the perforated board over the breadboard and inserting
components through both of them while developing and testing the circuit. Then
lift up the perforated board, and the components are already in position, ready
for soldering. Unfortunately this may not work for components with very short
leads.
Machine Screws (bolts)

These and nuts with nylon inserts are available from hardware stores, but
probably not in the small sizes necessary for attaching perforated board to the
inside of a project box, or similar tasks. I suggest you buy #4 size flat-headed
bolts in lengths of 3/8” and 1/2”. My favorite source for this kind of hardware is
McMaster-Carr.
Project Boxes
These vary a lot in price. Those made of ABS plastic are usually the cheapest.
Try discount suppliers such as all, elg, and jam, or hobby suppliers such as ada
and spk.

Components
Quantities and specifications for resistors, capacitors, and other components are
listed below. See “Suppliers” for a list of sources, and abbreviations that I will
use to refer to them. The biggest suppliers are dgk, eby, mou, and nwk. You may
find lower prices at all, elg, jam, and spk, but the selections will be smaller, and
you should compare the shipping costs of buying from multiple suppliers with
the cost of buying all your components in one shipment from a source where the
prices are slightly higher.
Resistors
Any manufacturer is acceptable. Lead length is usually unimportant. All projects
in this book can use a quarter-watt power rating (the most common value). A
tolerance of 10% is acceptable, and the color bands on 10% resistors are easier
to read than the bands on 5% or 1% resistors. However, you can buy 5% or 1%
resistors if you wish.
The total number of resistors used in each section of the book is shown in
Figure 6-1, but because resistors and capacitors are cheaply available in quantity,
I don’t think it makes sense to buy specific numbers for individual experiments.
You will save time and money by buying packaged assortments.
To buy sufficient resistors for all the projects in this book (with some to
spare), get at least 10 of each of these values: 47 ohms, 220 ohms, 330 ohms,
1K, 2.2K, 4.7K, 6.8K, 10K, 47K, 100K, 220K, 330K, 470K, 680K, 1M. Also,
get 20 of 470 ohms. Prepackaged assortments are your best bet. The
quantities I have specified assume you will reuse some resistors after they

serve their purpose in simple demonstration experiments.

Figure 6-1. The number of resistors used in experiments in each chapter of the book.

Capacitors
Find them at the same sources listed for resistors, above. Any manufacturer is
acceptable. Radial leads are preferred, meaning that both leads emerge from the
same end of the capacitor, instead of a lead at each end. A working voltage of at
least 16VDC is recommended for power supplies up to 12VDC. You can

substitute capacitors with higher working voltages, but the components will be
physically larger. Other ratings such as temperature and impedance are not
important for our purposes.
Ceramic capacitors are likely to last for many decades, while the longevity of
electrolytic capacitors is a subject of some debate. For larger values, you have to
use electrolytics, because the cost of ceramics becomes prohibitive. Personally I
would use ceramics for values below 10µF and electrolytics for 10µF and
upward, but you’ll probably save money if you use electrolytics for values of
1µF and upward.
If you want to know the exact number of capacitors required in each chapter of
the book, see Figure 6-2.
To buy sufficient capacitors for all the projects in this book (with some to
spare), get at least five of each of these values: 0.022µF, 0.047µF, 0.33µF,
1µF, 2.2µF, 3.3µF, 10µF, 100µF, 220µF. Also get at least 10 of values 0.01µF
and 10µF. You only need two of each of these values: 15µF, 22µF, 68µF,
1,000µF. The quantities I have specified assume you will reuse some
capacitors after they serve their purpose in simple demonstration
experiments.

Figure 6-2. The total number of capacitors used in experiments in each chapter of the book.

Figure 6-3. Minimum numbers of components, assuming you will reuse items from each
experiment in subsequent experiments. Items for Chapter Four are additional to items listed
for Chapters One, Two, and Three.

Other Components
For components other than resistors and capacitors, the minimum necessary
quantities to build all the projects in Chapter One, Chapter Two, and Chapter
Three of the book are shown in Figure 6-3. These quantities assume you will
reuse all the components from each experiment in subsequent experiments.
Components for Chapter Four are additional to those for previous sections of the
book. Components for Chapter Five are not listed here, as the experiments are so
diverse; see the beginning of each experiment in Chapter Five for a summary of
options.
If you are concerned about burning out chips or transistors, which are vulnerable
to damage, please add at least 1 to each quantity in Figure 6-3.
What if you may want to keep some of the projects that you build, instead of
reusing the components for subsequent projects? In that case, please consult the
tables for individual experiments that follow, and add the numbers of
components for those experiment(s) which interest you.
The information that you need for finding and buying components is also
provided below.
See “Suppliers” for a list of suppliers that are referred to by abbreviations of
their names. For most electronic components, go to all, eby, elg, jam, and spk for
special deals, or dgk, mou, and nwk for one-stop shopping where everything will
be available.

Components for Chapter One
Components for Chapter One, other than resistors and capacitors, are listed in
Figure 6-4.

Figure 6-4. Components other than resistors and capacitors, used in the first chapter of this
book.

Generic LEDs
The Lumex SLX-LX5093ID or Lite-On LTL-10223W are examples, but generic
LEDs can be from any manufacturer. Probably 5mm LEDs are easier to handle,
but 3mm LEDs can fit more easily into a crowded breadboard.
A typical forward current would be 20mA, typical forward voltage around
2VDC (blue and white LEDs will require a higher voltage). If you find a bunch
of LEDs bundled for a low price on a site such as eBay, they can be considered
generic.
Low-Current LEDs
These should be rated for 3.5mA forward current or less. The Kingbright

WP710A10LID is an example, although the manufacturer, physical size, and
color are unimportant. You could actually use this type of LED in all the
experiments, but if you do, you should double the values of all the series
resistors to protect it, as its maximum rating may be as low as 6mA.
Batteries
Nine-volt batteries can be the everyday alkaline type, available from
supermarkets and convenience stores. Rechargable 9-volt batteries are an
acceptable alternative.
The AA-size 1.5-volt batteries used in Experiment 2 must be alkaline. Do not
use any type of rechargeable battery in this experiment.
Battery Connectors and Carriers
Just one carrier for a 1.5-volt battery will be necessary and sufficient. Note that a
battery carrier may also be described as a battery holder or battery receiver.
Make sure you get the type that holds only one AA battery (not two, three, or
four). The Eagle 12BH311A-GR is an example.
You should buy at least three connectors for 9-volt batteries, because you may
want to leave them attached to circuits that you build. Nine-volt connectors are
sometimes described as snap connectors or battery snaps. Typical examples are
the Keystone model 235 or Jameco Reliapro BC6-R. Buy whatever is cheapest,
but make sure it terminates in wire leads.
Fuse
The 3A fuse in Experiment 2 ideally should be the automotive type, as its blades
are easy to grip with alligator clips. Any automotive parts source will stock this
type of fuse. The physical size is unimportant. Alternatively buy a 2AG size
cartridge fuse, which is the smallest cartridge size, from an electronics supplier.
It should be the fast-blow type, not a delay-fuse or “slow-blo” type. The voltage
rating is not important. Littelfuse 0208003.MXP is an example.
Potentiometer
The full-size 1K potentiometer required for Experiment 4 should ideally be 1” in
diameter, but sizes as small as half an inch are acceptable. Power rating, voltage
rating, tolerance, shaft type, shaft diameter, and shaft length are unimportant.
Select a potentiometer that has linear taper, and makes one turn, with panel

mounting style, and solder lug terminals. Buy two. The Alpha RV24AF-1015R1-B1K-3 and Bourns PDB181-E420K-102B are examples.
Juice and Brackets
If you use lemon juice in a squeeze bottle for Experiment 5, make sure it is
undiluted and unsweetened. Vinegar is an acceptable substitute.
The 1” brackets for Experiment 5 must be galvanized. Pipe straps and hanger
straps, to mount conduits and pipes, are an acceptable substitute. Any hardware
source will have them cheaply available.
Deionized Water
This is often known as distilled water. Your local supermarket should have this,
but make sure it is not “purified” and is not “spring water.” It must have zero
mineral content.

Components for Chapter Two
Components for Chapter Two, other than resistors and capacitors, are listed in
Figure 6-5.

Figure 6-5. Components other than resistors and capacitors used in the second chapter of
this book.

Breadboards
A breadboard is classified here as a component, because it cannot be separated
from the circuit; on the contrary, it is the foundation for the circuit. You have to
decide how many circuits you may want to keep on their breadboards, and how
many you are likely to disassemble so that the breadboard can be reused. Ideally,
each breadboard should have a single bus on each side, and 700 connection
points, as shown in Figure 2-10. Search Google or eBay for
solderless breadboard 700
However, if you prefer, you can use a dual-bus breadboard and ignore the extra
lines of holes.

Trimmer Potentiometer
Trimmers of the recommended type are shown at left and at right in Figure 2-22,
and a discussion of other types accompanies that photograph. The power rating
is not important. The preferred type is single-turn, and it must terminate in pins
that are spaced in multiples of 0.1” (2.54mm or 2.5mm). The Vishay
T73YP504KT20 is a low-cost 500K trimmer.
Transistors
Before purchasing any 2N2222 transistors, see “Essential: Transistors” for an
important cautionary note.
Toggle Switch
This should be panel-mount type, ideally with screw terminals, although pins or
solder lugs will be acceptable. It can be SPDT or DPDT. Voltage and current
ratings are unimportant for the experiments in this book. The NKK S302T is an
example, but you can find cheaper switches on eBay.
Tactile Switch
The type of tactile switch shown in Figure 2-19 is very strongly recommended,
with two pins 0.2” apart, ideal for insertion in a breadboard. Avoid buying the
more common tactile switches that have four pins or leads. The Alps
SKRGAFD-010 is preferred (currently available from Mouser). Any tactile
switch with 2 pins spaced 0.2” can be substituted, such as the Panasonic EVQ–
11 series.
Relay
See “Essential: Relay” for information about the recommended type of 9VDC,
DPDT relay. The Omron G5V-2-H1-DC9, Axicom V23105-A5006-A201, and
Fujitsu RY-9W-K have all been tested for suitability.

Components for Chapter Three
Components for Chapter Three, other than resistors and capacitors, are listed in
Figure 6-6.
Many of the components for projects in Chapter Three have already been
mentioned for Chapters One and Two; see above.

Figure 6-6. Components other than resistors and capacitors used in the third chapter of this
book.

AC Adapter
This must have an output of 9VDC. It may have additional outputs providing
different voltages. See “Essential: Power Supply” for a discussion of the options.
Minimum output should be 500mA (0.5A) DC.
If you want a multi-voltage adapter, finding one can be tricky, because if you
search for “ac adapter” you will find hundreds or even thousands of singlevoltage units. Your answer is to search a source such as eBay for:
ac adapter 6v 9v
This should provide you with several affordable multi-voltage options. Make
sure the photograph of the unit shows a little switch to select the various
voltages.
Diode

The 1N4001 switching diode is cheap and generic. Buy 8 or 10, and buy a
similar quantity of 1N4148 signal diodes at the same time.
Headers
These miniature plugs and sockets are an optional item. Examples are Mill-Max
part numbers 800-10-064-10001000 and 801-93-050-10-001000, or 3M part
numbers 929974-01-36RK and 929834-01-36-RK.

Components for Chapter Four
Components for Chapter Four, other than resistors and capacitors, are listed in
Figure 6-7.
Slide Switch
The recommended slide switch is SPDT with three pins spaced 0.1” apart, and is
shown in Figure 4-5. I suggest the EG1218 made by E-switch. If you buy an
alternative, it must terminate in solder pins for insertion in a breadboard. An
example is the NKK CS12ANW03, but if you search eBay for
slide switch breadboard
you will find some that are much cheaper. The type of contact plating, voltage
rating, and current rating are unimportant for the projects in this book.

Figure 6-7. Components other than resistors and capacitors used in the fourth chapter of
this book.

Integrated Circuit Chips
See “Fundamentals: Choosing Chips” for a discussion of chips. While all the
chips you will need are listed in Figure 6-7 (with the exception of one more 555
timer required for Experiment 29), it’s a good idea to buy an extra chip of each
type, as they are easily damaged by incorrect voltage, reversed polarity,
overloaded outputs, or static electricity.
Any manufacturer is acceptable. The “package” of a chip refers to its physical
size, and this attribute should be checked carefully when ordering. All logic
chips must be in a DIP package (meaning a dual-inline package with two rows of
pins that have 0.1” spacing). This may also be referred to as PDIP (meaning a
plastic dual-inline package). They are also described as “through hole.” The DIP
and PDIP descriptors may be appended with the number of pins, as in DIP-14 or
PDIP-16. This number can be ignored.
Surface-mount chips will have packaging descriptors beginning with S, as in
SOT or SSOP. Do not buy any chips with “S” type packages.
The chip family used exclusively in this book is HC (high-speed CMOS), as in
74HC00, 74HC08, and similar generic identifiers. These numbers will have
additional letters or numbers added by individual manufacturers as prefixes or
suffixes, as in SN74HC00DBR (a Texas Instruments chip) or MC74HC00ADG
(from On Semiconductor). These versions are functionally identical. Look
carefully, and you will see the 74HC00 generic number embedded in each
proprietary number.
Old TTL logic chips, such as the 74LS00 series, have compatibility issues. They
are not used or recommended for any of the projects in this book.
555 Timer
Unlike the logic chips, you do want the TTL version of the timer (also known as
the bipolar version), not the CMOS version. Here are some guidelines:
The TTL version (which you want) often states “TTL” or “bipolar” in its
datasheet, specifies a minimum power supply of 4.5V or 5V, specifies an
inactive current consumption of at least 3mA, and will source or sink 200mA.
Part numbers often begin with LM555, NA555, NE555, SA555, or SE555. If
you search by price, the TTL versions of the 555 timer are the cheapest.
The CMOS versions (which you don’t want) always state “CMOS” on the first

page of their datasheets, allow a minimum power supply of 2V in most cases,
claim an inactive current consumption in microamps (not milliamps), and will
not source or sink more than 100mA. Part numbers include TLC555, ICM7555,
and ALD7555. If you search by price, the cheapest CMOS version of the 555
timer still costs almost twice as much as the cheapest TTL version.
Seven-Segment Display
The display used in Experiment 19 must be an LED device, height 0.56”, lowcurrent red preferred, able to function at 2V forward voltage and 5mA forward
current. The Avago HDSP-513A is preferred, or Lite-On LTS-546AWC, or
Kingbright SC56–11EWA, or similar.

Components for Chapter Five
Components for Chapter Five, other than resistors and capacitors, are listed in
Figure 6-8.
Neodymium Magnets
I suggest K&J Magnetics as a source of supply, as the site maintains a very
informative primer on magnets.
In Europe, supermagnete.de is a popular source.
16-Gauge Wire
This is only required for the antenna in Experiment 31. If the cost is prohibitive,
try 50 or 100 feet of 22-gauge wire. If you live relatively close to an AM radio
station, it should be adequate.
High-Impedance Earphone
Only required for Experiment 31, this can be ordered from the the Scitoys
catalog.
You may also find them on Amazon. On eBay, search for:
crystal radio earphone
If you search eBay for crystal radio headphones instead of earphones, you’ll find
some antique items from the early days of radio.

Figure 6-8. Components other than resistors and capacitors used in the fifth chapter of this
book.

Germanium Diode
Available from the same sources as the high-impedance earphone, above. Some
may also be available from dgk, mou, or nwk.
Arduino Uno Board
For a discussion of sources, see “Beware of Imitations?”
Thermistor
The recommended thermistor for Experiment 33 is the Vishay 01-T-1002-FP. If
you make a substitution, use a 10K NTC-type thermistor rated at 1% or 5%
accuracy with wire leads.

Buying Tools and Equipment
See “Components” for a list of components and see “Supplies” for a list of
supplies.
Photographs and general information about tools and equipment are provided at
the beginning of each chapter of this book. See “Necessary Items for Chapter
One”, “Necessary Items for Chapter Two”, and “Necessary Items for Chapter
Three”. No additional tools are required for Chapters Four and Five.
Because products come and go, I have not included stock numbers or names of
manufacturers of tools and equipment. The specifications and photographs at the
beginning of each chapter should provide you with sufficient guidance, and if
you restrict your search to large sites such as amazon.com or ebay.com, you may
find everything you need fairly quickly, all in one place.
While it’s true that expensive tools may be manufactured with greater precision
and durability, the cheapest products should be satisfactory for the purposes of
this book.
See “Suppliers” for URLs that are referenced here with three-letter abbreviations

Tools and Equipment for Chapter One
For photographs and discussion of these items, see Chapter 1.
Only one of each item is required, unless otherwise specified.
Multimeter
For a discussion of multimeter features, see “The Multimeter”. Good sources
include all, amz, eby, and jam.
Test Leads
Double-ended test leads should terminate in alligator clips approximately 1”
long. The wire connecting them should measure 12” to 15” (not longer). You
need at least three red and three black. Additional colors are useful.
You don’t want the kind of test leads that have a plug at each end. Those are
sometimes known as “jumper wires.” Just search a site such as eBay for
test leads double ended alligator
and you should find what you want. Buy 10. Sources include all, eby, jam, or
spk.
Safety Glasses
Try amz, eby, har, hom, or wal. Ideally, look for glasses with ANSI Z87 rating
(you can use this as a search term). Avoid tinted glasses.

Tools and Equipment for Chapter Two
For photographs and discussion of these items, see Chapter 2.
Long-Nosed Pliers
They should measure approximately 5” end-to-end, with a flat inside jaw, not
round. From amz, eby, mcm, mic.
Wire Cutters
Also known as “side cutters,” and should measure approximately 5” end-to-end.
From amz, eby, har, hom, nor, or mcm.
Flush Cutters
These are optional. From amz, eby, har, hom, nor, or mcm.
Wire Strippers
You need the type with specifically sized holes for numbered wire gauges, but
the most common range (10 to 20 gauge) is not suitable.
I think you should buy wire strippers that have a specific provision for 22-gauge
wire, because there’s no point in making your task more difficult than it needs to
be. Search online for:
wire strippers 20 30
This should find tools with holes for 20–, 22–, 24–, 26–, 28–, and 30–gauge
wire. Alternatively, look on amz, eby, elg, jam, and spk.

Tools and Equipment for Chapter Three
For photographs and discussion of these items, see Chapter 3.
Low-Power Soldering Iron
This should be rated for 15W with a plated, slender, conical tip. Try all, amz,
eby, jam, and mcm.
General-Duty Soldering Iron
Should be rated at 30W or 40W. Try amz, eby, har, hom, mcm, nor, or srs.
Helping Hand
Can be found at ada, amz, eby, jam, or spk.
For a small, close-up magnifying lens try amz, eby, or wal. It may be listed as a
magnifier or a loupe.
Minigrabbers
The Pomona model 6244-48-0 is available from amz, dgk, mou, and nwk. For
cheaper alternatives try eby, which is also your first choice for meter probes
terminating in alligator clips.
Heat Gun
Usually sold as a general-purpose tool, and therefore is available from hardware
stores. Try amz, har, hom, or nor. For a miniature heat gun, try eby.
Desoldering Equipment
Various options are available from amz, elg, jam, spk, and eby.
Soldering Iron Stand
This will be found in the same places that sell soldering irons.
Miniature Saw
My personal favorite is the #15 X-Acto blade. You also need the handle that it
fits in. It is available online from Tower Hobbies, Hobbylinc, ArtCity, and many
other arts/crafts sources. Also look for the larger X-Acto saw blade, #234 or
#239, which you can use for cutting perforated board.
Deburring Tool

If your local hardware store does not stock this item, it is inexpensively available
from amz, eby, mcm, nor, srs, and some specialty sources. The standard blade in
this tool is intended for right-handed use. Left-handed blades are made, but can
be hard to find. Some blades are harder than others; an E300 means that it is
intended for soft metals and most plastics.
Calipers
I like Mitutoyo calipers, although many cheaper brands exist and will be
sufficient for everyday use. The Mitutoyo website will show you all their
available models, after which you can Google “Mitutoyo” to find retail sources.
Many people prefer calipers with a digital display, switchable between metric
and inches. I prefer calipers that do not require a battery.
Copper Alligator Clips
Available cheaply and in small quantities from the big general electronics
suppliers such as dgk, mou, or nwk.

Suppliers
The three-letter abbreviations preceding each supplier are used throughout the
text to suggest appropriate sources.
ada: Adafruit
all: All Electronics
amz: Amazon
dgk: DigiKey
eby: eBay
elg: Electronic Goldmine
evl: Evil Mad Scientist
har: Harbor Freight
hom: Home Depot
ins: Instructables
jam: Jameco

mcm: McMaster-Carr
mic: Michaels crafts stores
mou: Mouser Electronics
nwk: Newark Electronics
nor: Northern Tool
plx: Parallax
spk: Sparkfun
srs: Sears
tay: Tayda Electronics
Many of these sites also host extensive tutorials and other helpful information.
You can learn a lot by browsing through their pages.

Index
Symbols
1N4001 diode, Diodes
1N4148 diode, Diodes
2N2222 transistor, Essential: Transistors, The Finger Test
4026B decade counter, Fundamentals: The Counter, Fundamentals: The
Counter
(see also counter)
555 timer
applications, Fundamentals: Why the 555 Is Useful
astable, Timing the Pulse, Experiment 17: Set Your Tone, Theory:
Waveforms
audio frequency source, Test, 1-2-3
audio test, Astable Test
basics, Experiment 16: Emitting a Pulse
bipolar version, Caution: Not All Timers Are Equal
bistable, Fundamentals: Bistable Mode, A Control System, A Conceptual
Experiment
buying guide, Components for Chapter Four
calibration, Calibration
capacitor values, Fundamentals: Timer Duration
combinations, Chaining Chips
connected with counter, Pulse Generation
control pin, Timing the Pulse, Astable Modifications
delayed initial response, Step 1

diode, Fundamentals: Unequal On-Off Cycles
discharge pin function, Monostable Test
frequency, Theory: Output Frequency, Fundamentals: Unequal On-Off
Cycles
history, Background: How the Timer Was Born
internal function, Theory: Inside the 555 in Monostable Mode, Theory:
Inside the 555 in Astable Mode
monostable, Timing the Pulse, Progress Report
pin numbering, Know Your Chips
pinouts, Monostable Test
pulse duration, Timing the Pulse, Fundamentals: Timer Duration
pulse suppression, Fundamentals: Pulse Suppression, Chaining Chips,
Step 3
reset pin function, Monostable Test
resistor values, Fundamentals: Timer Duration
retriggering, Monostable Test
siren sound, Sounding Like a Siren
specifications, Fundamentals: 555 Timer Specifications
test circuit, Monostable Test, Astable Test
trigger pin function, Monostable Test
TTL and CMOS versions, Caution: Not All Timers Are Equal
unequal cycles, Fundamentals: Unequal On-Off Cycles
556 timer, Sounding Like a Siren
7402 quad 2-input OR, Fundamentals: Part Numbers and Functions
7404 hex inverter NOT, Fundamentals: Part Numbers and Functions
7410 triple 3-input NAND, Fundamentals: Part Numbers and Functions
7411 triple 3-input AND, Fundamentals: Part Numbers and Functions

7420 dual 4-input NAND, Fundamentals: Part Numbers and Functions
7421 dual 4-input AND, Fundamentals: Part Numbers and Functions
7427 triple 3-input NOR, Fundamentals: Part Numbers and Functions
7432 quad 2-input OR, Fundamentals: Part Numbers and Functions,
Breadboarding It
744002 dual 4-input NOR, Fundamentals: Part Numbers and Functions
744075 triple 3-input OR, Fundamentals: Part Numbers and Functions
747266 quad 2-input XNOR, Fundamentals: Part Numbers and Functions
7486 quad 2-input XOR, Fundamentals: Part Numbers and Functions
74HC00 quad 2-input NAND, Your First Logic Gate, Debouncing with
NANDs
74HC08 quad 2-input AND, The Logic Chip
74HC393 binary counter, A Binary Counter
74xx family (see chip, 74xx family)
A
AC (alternating current)
basics, Fundamentals: Direct and Alternating Current
symbol, Fundamentals: Basic Schematic Symbols
through a coil, Theory: Alternating Current Concepts
with capacitors, Alternating Current
AC adapter
basics, Essential: Power Supply
buying guide, Components for Chapter Three
modification, Wiring Your Power Source
single voltage type, Essential: Power Supply
universal type, Essential: Power Supply
alarm system project (see intrusion alarm)

alligator clip
copper, Essential: Copper Alligator Clips, What You Will Need, Where
the Heat Goes
test leads, Test Leads, Optional: Clip-on Meter Test Leads
alternating current (see AC)
ambient pressure, Theory: Waveforms
amp (see ampere)
amperage (see current)
ampere, Generating Heat with Current
(see also current)
basics, Background: Why Didn’t Your Tongue Get Hot?, Fundamentals:
Ampere Basics
conversion table, Fundamentals: Ampere Basics
measurement, Checking the Flow, Theory: Basic Measurements
Ampère, André-Marie, Generating Heat with Current, Background: Father
of Electromagnetism
amplifier chip LM386, A Single Chip, Enhancements
AND
7408 quad 2-input, The Logic Chip
7411 triple 3-input, Fundamentals: Part Numbers and Functions
7421 dual 4-input, Fundamentals: Part Numbers and Functions
74HC08 quad 2-input, Your First Logic Gate
demo, Your First Logic Gate
symbol, Fundamentals: Logic Gate Basics
truth table, Fundamentals: Logic Gate Basics
anode, Fundamentals: All About Diodes
anti-static wrist strap (see wrist strap)

Arduino
advantages and disadvantages, Fundamentals: Advantages and
Disadvantages
analog input, Experiment 33: Checking the Real World
blink test, The Old Arduino Blink Test
clock, The System Clock
comment line, The Old Arduino Blink Test
dice simulation program, Randomicity, Now, the Program
errors, Now, the Program
IDE, One Board, Many Chips, Setup
installation, Setup
integers, Short and Long Integers
introduction, Experiment 32: Hardware Meets Software
language reference, Randomicity
Mac installation, Mac Installation
protoshield, Connections
pseudocode, Pseudocode
random function, Randomicity, The Random Function
setup, Beware of Imitations?
sketch, The Old Arduino Blink Test
summary, Upload and Run
thermostat simulation program, Hysteresis
unlicensed copies, Beware of Imitations?
Windows troubleshooting, Windows Troubleshooting
Atmel, One Board, Many Chips, Background: Origins and Options Among
Programmable Chips
atomic structure, Theory: The Nature of Electricity

audio (see sound)
autoranging in multimeter (see multimeter, autoranging)
B
Bardeen, John, Background: Transistor Origins
base of a transistor, Fundamentals: Transistor Variants
BASIC Stamp, Other Microcontrollers
battery
attaching to breadboard, Power Up
basics, Batteries and Connectors
buying guide, Components for Chapter One
car, Caution: Use a Small Battery, Theory: The Math on Your Tongue
carrier, Batteries and Connectors, Generating Heat with Current
connector, Batteries and Connectors
electrolyte, Generating Heat with Current
how it works, Fundamentals: Inside a Battery, Generating Heat with
Current
internal resistance, Theory: The Math on Your Tongue
lemon juice, Experiment 5: Let’s Make a Battery
lithium, Caution: Use a Small Battery, Theory: The Math on Your
Tongue
parallel, Practically Speaking
primary, Theory: The Nature of Electricity
secondary, Theory: The Nature of Electricity
series, Practically Speaking
short circuit, Experiment 2: Let’s Abuse a Battery!, Generating Heat with
Current, Theory: The Math on Your Tongue
symbol, Fundamentals: Basic Schematic Symbols

Bell, Alexander Graham, Background: Origins of Loudspeakers
bias, Adding a Potentiometer
binary code, Fundamentals: Binary Code
binding posts, Final Test
board
cut-board, Optional: Perforated Board
perforated, Optional: Perforated Board, Bend Wires, Add Solder,
Finalizing
perforated errors, Most Common Perfboarding Errors
perforated, buying guide, Supplies
bolts, Optional: Machine Screws
bolts buying guide, Supplies
books recommended, Books
Boole, George, Background: Logical Origins
boolean logic, Background: Logical Origins
box, project, Essential: Project Boxes, The Project Box
Brattain, Walter, Background: Transistor Origins
breadboard
basics, Essential: Breadboards, Experiment 8: A Relay Oscillator
bus, Essential: Breadboards, Inside the Board
buying guide, Components for Chapter Two
component depiction, A Beginner’s Board
dual-bus, Essential: Breadboards
fault tracing, Fundamentals: Fault Tracing
interior connections, Inside the Board
mini, Essential: Breadboards
single-bus, Essential: Breadboards

break-to-make circuit, A Break-to-Make Transistor Circuit
bubble, Fundamentals: Logic Gate Basics
button blocker
breadboarded, Breadboarding It
phase 1, A Conceptual Experiment
phase 2, A Conceptual Experiment
phase 3, A Conceptual Experiment
phase 4, A Conceptual Experiment
phase 5, A Conceptual Experiment
schematic, A Conceptual Experiment
sequence, A Conceptual Experiment
C
C language, The Old Arduino Blink Test
calipers, Optional: Calipers
Camenzind, Hans, Background: How the Timer Was Born
capacitance, Values
capacitor
AC application, Alternating Current
basics, Essential: Capacitors, Fundamentals: Capacitor Basics
buying guide, Components
bypass, Still More Mods
ceramic, Essential: Capacitors, Fundamentals: Capacitor Basics
charge-discharge demo, Adding Capacitance, Charging a Capacitor
coupling, Capacitive Coupling, Still More Mods
DC blocking, Charging a Capacitor
displacement current, Displacement Current
electrolytic, Essential: Capacitors, Fundamentals: Capacitor Basics

filtering audio frequencies, Adventures in Audio
measuring the value, Values
polarity, Adding Capacitance, Caution: Observe Capacitor Polarity!
polyester, Background: Crossover Networks
RC network, An RC Network
shock hazard, Caution: Getting Zapped by Capacitors
symbol, Fundamentals: Capacitor Basics
tantalum, Caution: Observe Capacitor Polarity!
test circuit, Charging a Capacitor
time constant, Background: The Time Constant
variable, Enhancements
car battery, Caution: Use a Small Battery, Theory: The Math on Your
Tongue
carrier frequency, Theory: How Radio Works
cathode, Fundamentals: All About Diodes
ceramic capacitor (see capacitor, ceramic)
checklists of supplies and components, Checklists of Supplies and
Components
chip
4000 series, Background: The Confusing World of TTL and CMOS
74xx family, Fundamentals: Choosing Chips
buying guide, Components for Chapter Four
dual-inline package, Fundamentals: Choosing Chips
HC, Fundamentals: Choosing Chips
history, Background: How Chips Came to Be, Background: The
Confusing World of TTL and CMOS
LS series, Background: The Confusing World of TTL and CMOS

package, Fundamentals: Choosing Chips
part number, Fundamentals: Choosing Chips, Background: The
Confusing World of TTL and CMOS
pin numbering, Know Your Chips
size, Know Your Chips
socket, Optional: IC Sockets
static discharge damage, Caution: Protecting Chips from Static
surface-mount, Fundamentals: Choosing Chips, Fundamentals: Choosing
Chips
through-hole, Fundamentals: Choosing Chips
TTL and CMOS, Background: The Confusing World of TTL and CMOS
clipping, Background: Clipping
clocked flip-flop, Jamming Versus Clocking
CMOS output current, Fundamentals: The Counter
coil
AM radio, Step 1: The Coil, Theory: How Radio Works
audio filter, Test, 1-2-3, Adventures in Audio, Background: Crossover
Networks
compared with capacitor, Resistors, Capacitors, and Coils
inductance, Theory: Inductance
inductive reactance, A Collapsing Field
iron core, Fundamentals: Coil Schematics and Basics
loudspeaker, Procedure
power generation, Procedure
symbol, Fundamentals: Coil Schematics and Basics
tap, Step 1: The Coil
transformer, Fundamentals: Coil Schematics and Basics

voltage spike, Protection Diode
collector of a transistor, Fundamentals: Transistor Variants
combination lock
breadboarded, A Three-Part Circuit, Time to Build!
computer interface, The Computer Interface
enhancements, Enhancements
installation, The Computer Interface
introduction, Experiment 21: A Powerful Combination
logic diagram, A Three-Part Circuit
schematics, A Three-Part Circuit
testing, Testing
common anode, Fundamentals: LED Displays
common cathode, Fundamentals: LED Displays
comparator, Theory: Inside the 555 in Monostable Mode
components
checklist, Components
vendors, Searching and Shopping Online
conductor definition, Fundamentals: Ohms
connector, Essential: Power Connectors
contacting the author, Writer–Reader Communication
continuity testing, Values, Checking Continuity
conventional current (see current, conventional)
coulomb, Theory: Basic Measurements
counter
4026B, Fundamentals: The Counter
74HC393, A Binary Counter

binary, A Binary Counter
carry out, Fundamentals: The Counter
clock disable, Fundamentals: The Counter
clock input, Fundamentals: The Counter
coded outputs, Fundamentals: The Counter
decade, Fundamentals: The Counter, A Binary Counter
edge-triggered, Rising Edge, Falling Edge
modulus, The Modulus
reset pin, Rising Edge, Falling Edge
crossover network, Background: Crossover Networks
current
basics, Generating Heat with Current, Fundamentals: Direct and
Alternating Current
conventional, Introducing Schematics
danger, Theory: The Math on Your Tongue
displacement, Displacement Current
flow direction, Background: Positive and Negative
measurement, Checking the Flow
resistance, relationship, Background: Why Didn’t Your Tongue Get Hot?
uniform in a simple circuit, Checking the Current
D
Darlington array, Fundamentals: The Counter
datasheet, LED, Using Ohm’s Law
DC (direct current)
basics, Fundamentals: Direct and Alternating Current
plug-and-socket, Essential: Power Connectors
DeArmond, Harry, Background: Stomp-Box Origins

debouncing (see switch, bounce)
deburring tool, Optional: Deburring Tool
decimal points, Fundamentals: Decimals
desk lamp, Finishing the Job
desoldering braid, Optional: Desoldering Equipment
desoldering pump, Soldering Iron Terminology, Optional: Desoldering
Equipment
desoldering wick, Optional: Desoldering Equipment
dice simulation
introduction, Experiment 24: Nice Dice
logic diagram, Choosing the Gates
randomicity, The Slowdown Problem
schematic, The Finished Circuit
slowdown effect, Slowdown Alternatives
two dice, Chained Counters
diode
1N4001, Diodes
1N4148, Diodes
555 timer, Fundamentals: Unequal On-Off Cycles
anode, Fundamentals: All About Diodes
basics, Diodes, Fundamentals: All About Diodes
buying guide, Components for Chapter Three
cathode, Fundamentals: All About Diodes
germanium, Antenna and Ground
germanium buying guide, Components for Chapter Five
protection, Protection Diode
radio, Theory: How Radio Works

rectifier, Blocking Bad Voltage, Charging a Capacitor
symbol, Fundamentals: All About Diodes
voltage drop, One Problem Creates Another
with logic chip, Dealing with Diodes
DIP (see chip, dual-inline package)
direct current (see DC)
displacement current, Displacement Current
display, numeric
seven-segment display, Essential: Numeric Displays
distortion, Background: Clipping
double-throw switch (see switch, configurations)
DPDT (see switch, configurations)
drilling holes in plastic, The Project Box
Dummer, W. A., Background: How Chips Came to Be
E
earphone, Antenna and Ground
earphone buying guide, Components for Chapter Five
edge-triggered counter, Rising Edge, Falling Edge
electricity and magnetism, Fundamentals: A Two-Way Relationship
electrolyte, Generating Heat with Current
electrolytic capacitor (see capacitor, electrolytic)
electromagnet, Procedure
electron holes, Theory: The Nature of Electricity
electrons, Fundamentals: Inside a Battery, Generating Heat with Current,
Background: The Watt, Theory: The Nature of Electricity, Background:
Positive and Negative, Theory: Basic Measurements
emitter of a transistor, Fundamentals: Transistor Variants

Encyclopedia of Electronic Components, Books
errata reports, You Informing Me
error notifications, Me Informing You
F
farad
basics, Fundamentals: Farad Basics
conversion table, Fundamentals: Farad Basics
Faraday, Michael, Fundamentals: Farad Basics, Background: Michael
Faraday and Capacitors, Background: Joseph Henry
fault tracing, If Something Doesn’t Work, Fundamentals: Fault Tracing,
Fundamentals: Perforated Board Fault Tracing
feedback
from author to reader, Writer–Reader Communication
from reader to author, Writer–Reader Communication, You Informing
Me
filtering audio frequencies, Adventures in Audio
flip-flop, Theory: Inside the 555 in Monostable Mode, Fundamentals:
Bistable Mode, Dealing with Diodes, A Conceptual Experiment, What You
Will Need, Jamming Versus Clocking
floating pin, Monostable Test, Fundamentals: The Counter
flush cutters, Optional: Flush Cutters
forward current, Lighting an LED
forward voltage, Lighting an LED
Franklin, Benjamin, Background: Positive and Negative
fuse
automotive, Fuse, How to Blow a Fuse
buying guide, Components for Chapter One

cartridge, Fuse, How to Blow a Fuse
how to blow, How to Blow a Fuse
suitable types, Fuse
G
gauge of wire (see wire, gauge)
germanium, Background: How Chips Came to Be, Antenna and Ground
glasses, safety (see safety glasses)
ground
grounding yourself, Caution: Protecting Chips from Static
power outlet, Fundamentals: Direct and Alternating Current
radio, Antenna and Ground, Antenna and Ground
symbol, Fundamentals: Basic Schematic Symbols
H
Hammond organ, Background: Stomp-Box Origins
harmonics, Theory: Waveforms
HC generation (see chip, HC)
headers, Optional: Headers
headers buying guide, Components for Chapter Three
heat gun, Optional: Heat Gun, Caution: Heat Guns Do Get Hot!
heat sink, Where the Heat Goes
heat transfer, Theory: Heat Transfer, What You Will Need, Where the Heat
Goes
heat-shrink tubing, Optional: Heat-Shrink Tubing, Insulating the Solder
Joint, Step Two: Soldering, Twelve Steps to a Shorter Cord, Twelve Steps to
a Shorter Cord
heat-shrink tubing buying guide, Supplies
helping hand, Soldering Iron Terminology, Your First Solder Joint, Twelve

Steps to a Shorter Cord, What You Will Need
henry (unit of inductance), Theory: Inductance
Henry, Joseph, Theory: Inductance, Background: Joseph Henry
hertz, Theory: Output Frequency
Hertz, Heinrich, Theory: Output Frequency
holes (positive charges), Theory: The Nature of Electricity
hookup wire (see wire, hookup)
hysteresis, Hysteresis
I
IC (see chip)
inches
conversion of fractions, Background: Maddened by Measurement
conversion to metric, Background: Maddened by Measurement
inductance
basics, Fundamentals: Ohm’s Law
created by a coil, Theory: Inductance
inductive reactance, A Collapsing Field
insulator definition, Fundamentals: Ohms
integers, Short and Long Integers
integrated circuit (see chip)
internal resistance of a battery, Theory: The Math on Your Tongue
intrusion alarm
arming, Step 3
breadboard layout, Time to Breadboard
complete circuit, Step 3
installation, Alarm Installation

part one, Experiment 15: Intrusion Alarm, Part One
part two, Experiment 18: Intrusion Alarm (Almost) Completed
soldering, Finalizing
usage, Step 2
wish list, Wish List
inverter (see NOT)
J
jack plug, Background: Early Switching Systems
jam-type flip-flop, Jamming Versus Clocking
Jeopardy game, The Goal
joule, Background: The Watt
jumper wire
basics, Jumpers
how to make, Making Jumpers
precut, Jumpers
precut buying guide, Supplies
with plugs, Test Leads, Jumpers, Test, 1-2-3
K
keypad encoding, Enhancements
Kilby, Jack, Background: How Chips Came to Be
kilohm, Fundamentals: Ohms
kilovolt, Fundamentals: Volt Basics
kilowatt, Background: The Watt
knife switch (see switch, knife)
L
latch, Fundamentals: Bistable Mode
leads, test (see test leads)

learning methods, Learning by Discovery
LED
basics, Light-Emitting Diodes, Lighting an LED
buying guide, Components for Chapter One
datasheet, Using Ohm’s Law
display, Fundamentals: LED Displays
forward current, Lighting an LED
forward voltage, Lighting an LED
generic, Light-Emitting Diodes
heat damage, Experiment 13: Roasting an LED
indicator, Fundamentals: LED Displays
installation, Finishing the Job
low-current, Light-Emitting Diodes, Essential: Low-Current LEDs
low-current buying guide, Components for Chapter One
polarity, Lighting an LED
series resistor, Dimming Your LED, How Big a Resistor?
symbol, Introducing Schematics, Fundamentals: Basic Schematic
Symbols
test circuit, Lighting an LED
threshold voltage, Dimming Your LED
through-hole, Fundamentals: LED Displays
lemon battery, Experiment 5: Let’s Make a Battery
light-emitting diode (see LED)
lightning, Background: Positive and Negative
lithium battery (see battery, lithium)
LM386 amplifier chip, A Single Chip, Enhancements
LM7805 voltage regulator, Essential: Voltage Regulator, The Regulator

logic chip (see chip)
logic diagram
combination lock, A Three-Part Circuit
dice simulation, Choosing the Gates
NAND demo, Your First Logic Gate
logic gate, Your First Logic Gate
(see also AND, NAND, OR, NOR, XOR, XNOR, and NOT)
rules, Fundamentals: Rules for Connecting Logic Gates
voltages, Fundamentals: Rules for Connecting Logic Gates
logic probe, Necessary Items for Chapter Four
logic symbols, Fundamentals: Logic Gate Basics
logic-high, Your First Logic Gate
logic-low, Your First Logic Gate
loudspeaker
basics, Essential: Loudspeaker
coil, Procedure
disassembly, Experiment 27: Loudspeaker Destruction
enclosure, A Home for Your Speaker
history, Background: Origins of Loudspeakers
mounting in a tube, Background: Mounting a Loudspeaker
loupe, Essential: Magnifying Lens
M
machine screws, Optional: Machine Screws
machine screws buying guide, Supplies
magnet
buying guide, Components for Chapter Five

cautions, Caution: Blood Blisters and Dead Media
charging a capacitor, Charging a Capacitor
power generation, Procedure
wire, Lighting an LED
magnet wire, Background: Crossover Networks
magnetic field, A Collapsing Field
magnetic sensor (see switch, magnetic sensor)
magnetism and electricity, Fundamentals: A Two-Way Relationship
magnifying lens, Essential: Magnifying Lens, Finishing the Job
Make: More Electronics, Going Further, Jamming Versus Clocking,
Slowdown Alternatives, Books, Hysteresis
Marconi, Guglielmo, Theory: How Radio Works
measurement units, Background: Maddened by Measurement
megawatt, Background: The Watt
megohm, Fundamentals: Ohms
meter (see multimeter)
metric system
conversion to inches, Background: Maddened by Measurement
origins, Background: Maddened by Measurement
microamp, Fundamentals: Ampere Basics
microcontroller
applications, Real-World Applications
ATmega, One Board, Many Chips
history, Background: Origins and Options Among Programmable Chips
options, Other Microcontrollers
microfarad, Fundamentals: Farad Basics
microphone, Theory: Sound, Slectricity, and Sound

milliamp, Fundamentals: Ampere Basics
millivolt, Fundamentals: Volt Basics
milliwatt, Background: The Watt
minigrabbers, Optional: Clip-on Meter Test Leads
modulus of a counter, The Modulus
Moore, Gordon, Background: How Chips Came to Be
multimeter
autoranging, Ranging
basics, Values, Values, Setting Up Your Meter
best, The Multimeter
better, The Multimeter
BK, The Multimeter
buying options, The Multimeter
cheapest, The Multimeter
continuity testing, Values
current measurement, Caution: Meter Overload
Extech, The Multimeter
probes, Setting Up Your Meter
purpose, The Multimeter
ranging, Ranging
recommended, The Multimeter
setup, Setting Up Your Meter
sockets, Setting Up Your Meter
N
NAND
7410 triple 3-input, Fundamentals: Part Numbers and Functions
7420 dual 4-input, Fundamentals: Part Numbers and Functions

74HC00 quad 2-input, Your First Logic Gate
demo, Your First Logic Gate
gate, Your First Logic Gate
switch debouncing, How It Works, Debouncing with NANDs
symbol, Fundamentals: Logic Gate Basics
truth table, Background: Logical Origins, Fundamentals: Logic Gate
Basics
nanofarad, Fundamentals: Farad Basics
newton, Theory: Basic Measurements
nicerdice Arduino program, Now, the Program
NOR
7402 quad 2-input, Fundamentals: Part Numbers and Functions
7427 triple 3-input, Fundamentals: Part Numbers and Functions
744002 dual 4-input, Fundamentals: Part Numbers and Functions
switch debouncing, How It Works
symbol, Fundamentals: Logic Gate Basics
truth table, Fundamentals: Logic Gate Basics
NOT
7404 hex inverter, Fundamentals: Part Numbers and Functions
inverter, Fundamentals: Logic Gate Basics
symbol, Fundamentals: Logic Gate Basics
Noyce, Robert, Background: How Chips Came to Be
numeric display (see seven-segment display)
O
ohm
conversion table, Fundamentals: Ohms
definition, Fundamentals: Ohms

European notation, Fundamentals: Ohms
named after, Fundamentals: Ohms, Background: The Man Who
Discovered Resistance
Ohm's law
applications, Using Ohm’s Law, How Big a Resistor?, Background: Hot
Wires
basics, Making Measurements
units, Fundamentals: Ohm’s Law
Ohm, Georg Simon, Fundamentals: Ohms, Background: The Man Who
Discovered Resistance
omega symbol, Fundamentals: Ohms
OR
7432 quad 2-input, Fundamentals: Part Numbers and Functions,
Breadboarding It
744075 triple 3-input, Fundamentals: Part Numbers and Functions
symbol, Fundamentals: Logic Gate Basics
three or more inputs, A Conceptual Experiment
truth table, Fundamentals: Logic Gate Basics
oscillator, two-transistor, Coupling Capacitor
P
P2N2222 transistor, Essential: Transistors
part numbers for chips (see chip, part number)
PDIP (see chip, dual-inline package)
perforated board (see board, perforated)
PICAXE, Background: Origins and Options Among Programmable Chips,
Other Microcontrollers
picofarad, Fundamentals: Farad Basics

pinouts
4026B counter, Fundamentals: The Counter
555 timer, Monostable Test
7402 quad 2-input NOR, Fundamentals: Part Numbers and Functions
7404 hex inverter NOT, Fundamentals: Part Numbers and Functions
7410 triple 3-input NAND, Fundamentals: Part Numbers and Functions
7411 triple 3-input AND, Fundamentals: Part Numbers and Functions
7420 dual 4-input NAND, Fundamentals: Part Numbers and Functions
7421 dual 4-input AND, Fundamentals: Part Numbers and Functions
7427 triple 3-input NOR, Fundamentals: Part Numbers and Functions
7432 quad 2-input OR, Fundamentals: Part Numbers and Functions,
Breadboarding It
744002 dual 4-input NOR, Fundamentals: Part Numbers and Functions
7440750 triple 3-input OR, Fundamentals: Part Numbers and Functions
747266 quad 2-input XNOR, Fundamentals: Part Numbers and
Functions
7486 quad 2-input XOR, Fundamentals: Part Numbers and Functions
74HC00 quad 2-input NAND, Your First Logic Gate
74HC08 quad two-input AND, Your First Logic Gate
74HC393 binary counter, A Binary Counter
LM386 amplifier chip, A Single Chip
LM7805 voltage regulator, The Regulator
seven-segment display, Fundamentals: LED Displays
pliers (see tools)
plug and socket, Essential: Power Connectors
plywood, Optional: Plywood
point-to-point wiring, Bend Wires, Add Solder

pole of switch (see switch, pole)
potential difference
definition, Measuring Potential Difference
measuring, Measuring Potential Difference, Fundamentals: Ohm’s Law
potentiometer
basics, Potentiometer
buying guide, Components for Chapter One
internal parts, Look Inside Your Potentiometer
symbol, Fundamentals: Basic Schematic Symbols
test circuit, Experiment 4: Variable Resistance, Testing the Potentiometer
track, Look Inside Your Potentiometer
trimmer, Essential: Trimmer Potentiometer, Adding a Potentiometer
wiper, Look Inside Your Potentiometer
power
basic requirements, Batteries and Connectors
connector, Essential: Power Connectors
generation with magnet and coil, Procedure
outlet, Fundamentals: Direct and Alternating Current
supply, Essential: Power Supply, Essential: Power Supply, Finishing the
Job
symbol, Fundamentals: Basic Schematic Symbols
power cord, shortening, Pruning a Power Cord
power, watts, Background: The Watt
printed circuit, Fluctuations Revisited
program
Arduino IDE environment, The Old Arduino Blink Test

code, The Old Arduino Blink Test
compile, The Old Arduino Blink Test, Verify and Compile
pseudocode, Pseudocode
storage, Programming Entails Detail
upload, The Old Arduino Blink Test, Upload and Run
programmable unijunction transistor (see PUT)
project box, Essential: Project Boxes, The Project Box
project box buying guide, Supplies
protection diode, Protection Diode
prototyping board (see breadboard)
pseudocode, Pseudocode
pulldown resistor (see resistor, pulldown)
pullup resistor (see resistor, pullup)
pulsing glow project, Experiment 14: A Wearable Pulsing Glow
pushbutton, Essential: Tactile Switch
(see also switch, tactile)
switch, Optional Extras
symbol, Fundamentals: Basic Schematic Symbols
PUT, Why So Complicated?
R
radio
AM, Experiment 31: One Radio, No Solder, No Power, Antenna and
Ground, Theory: How Radio Works
amplifier, Enhancements
antenna, Step 1: The Coil
coil, Step 1: The Coil, Theory: How Radio Works
crystal, Experiment 31: One Radio, No Solder, No Power

enhancements, Enhancements
ground, Antenna and Ground
history, Theory: How Radio Works
randomicity, The Slowdown Problem, Randomicity, The Random Function
ranging in multimeter (see multimeter, ranging)
RC network, An RC Network, A Processed Pulse, Timing the Pulse
reactance, A Collapsing Field
reed switch (see switch, reed)
reference books, Books
reference sources online, Reference Sources Online
reflex tester
basics, Experiment 19: Reflex Tester
calibration, Calibration
circuit malfunction, Background: Development Issues
enhancements, Enhancements
operation, Testing
wish list, Time for a Plan
registering for updates, Me Informing You
relay
basics, Essential: Relay
buying guide, Components for Chapter Two
buzzer circuit, Making It Buzz
coil voltage, Fundamentals: Relay Terminology
combination lock, Triggering the Relay
datasheets, Other Relays
inductive load, Fundamentals: Relay Terminology
internal parts, What’s Going On Inside, What’s Inside?

intrusion alarm, A Break-to-Make Transistor Circuit, Step 2
latching, Essential: Relay, Other Relays, Self-Locking Relay
LED flasher, A Beginner’s Board
opening it up, Opening It Up
operating current, Fundamentals: Relay Terminology
oscillator, Experiment 8: A Relay Oscillator, Making It Buzz
pin functions, Other Relays
polarity of coil, Essential: Relay, Caution: Polarity Problems
power requirements, Enhancements
resistive load, Fundamentals: Relay Terminology
self-locking, Self-Locking Relay
set voltage, Fundamentals: Relay Terminology
small-signal type, Other Relays
switching capacity, Fundamentals: Relay Terminology
symbols, Other Relays
terminology, Fundamentals: Relay Terminology
test circuit, Procedure
transistor comparison, Fundamentals: Transistors and Relays
resistance
basics, Background: Why Didn’t Your Tongue Get Hot?
current, relationship, Background: Why Didn’t Your Tongue Get Hot?
parallel, Fundamentals: Series and Parallel
series, Fundamentals: Series and Parallel, How Big a Resistor?
skin, Further Investigation
tongue, Measuring Your Tongue, Further Investigation
water, Further Investigation
wires and heat, Background: Hot Wires

resistor
basics, Resistors
buying guide, Components
color codes, Fundamentals: Decoding Resistors
power rating, Background: The Watt
pulldown, Monostable Test, Fundamentals: The Counter
pullup, Monostable Test
standard multipliers, Background: Puzzling Numbers
storage, Setup
symbol, Fundamentals: Basic Schematic Symbols
value measurement, Setup, Checking a Resistor
rosin core, Soldering Iron Terminology
S
safety glasses, Safety Glasses
saw, miniature, Optional: Miniature Hand Saw
schematic
basics, Introducing Schematics, Introducing Schematics
color-coded, Colored Conductors
crossovers, Crossovers
layout, Schematic Layout, Caution: Beware of Pin-Shuffling!
pin-shuffling, Caution: Beware of Pin-Shuffling!
screwdrivers, Essential: Small Screwdrivers
Scribner, Charles E., Background: Early Switching Systems
search techniques, The Art of Searching
self-inductance, A Collapsing Field, Theory: Alternating Current Concepts
semiconductor, Fundamentals: All About NPN and PNP Transistors
seven-segment display, Essential: Numeric Displays, A Quick Demo,

Fundamentals: LED Displays
seven-segment display buying guide, Components for Chapter Four
Shannon, Claude, Background: Logical Origins
Shockley, William, Background: Transistor Origins, Background: How
Chips Came to Be
shopping online, Searching and Shopping Online
short-circuit a battery, Experiment 2: Let’s Abuse a Battery!, Theory: The
Math on Your Tongue
Siemens, Ernst, Background: Origins of Loudspeakers
Signetics, Background: How the Timer Was Born
sine wave, Theory: Waveforms
single-throw switch (see switch, configurations)
skin resistance, Further Investigation
slide switch (see switch, slide)
socket for IC (see chip, socket)
solder, Essential: Low-Power Soldering Iron, Soldering Iron Terminology,
Essential: Solder, Your First Solder Joint
solder buying guide, Supplies
soldering
alternatives, Background: Soldering Alternatives
errors, Fundamentals: Eight Soldering Errors
myths, Background: Soldering Myths
technique, Caution: Soldering Irons Do Get Hot!, Your Second Solder
Joint, Wiring Your Power Source, Twelve Steps to a Shorter Cord,
Finalizing
wave-soldering, Background: Soldering Alternatives
soldering iron

basics, Essential: Low-Power Soldering Iron
general duty, Essential: General Duty Soldering Iron, Your First Solder
Joint, What You Will Need
low-power, Essential: Low-Power Soldering Iron, Your Second Solder
Joint, What You Will Need
pencil type, Soldering Iron Terminology
pistol grip, Soldering Iron Terminology
stand, Optional: Soldering Stand
Weller, Soldering Iron Terminology
solderless breadboard (see breadboard)
sound
and electricity, Theory: Sound, Slectricity, and Sound
distortion, Background: Clipping
filtering frequencies, Adventures in Audio
frequency, Theory: Output Frequency
microphone, Theory: Sound, Slectricity, and Sound
siren, Sounding Like a Siren
waves, Theory: Sound, Slectricity, and Sound
sound synthesizer, Fluctuations
SPDT (see switch, configurations)
speaker (see loudspeaker)
SPST (see switch, configurations)
square wave, Theory: Waveforms, Background: Clipping
static electricity (see chip, static discharge damage)
stomp box, Background: Clipping
storage boxes, Customizing Your Work Area
subwoofer, Background: Crossover Networks

suppliers, Suppliers
supplies checklists, Supplies
switch
bounce, Experiment 23: Flipping and Bouncing
configurations, Fundamentals: All About Switches
continuity testing, Checking Continuity
domestic lighting, Introducing Schematics
jack-knife, Background: Early Switching Systems
knife, Fundamentals: All About Switches
magnetic sensor, Magnetic Sensor Switches, Optional Extras, Alarm
Installation
momentary, Fundamentals: All About Switches
pole, Fundamentals: All About Switches, Soldering the Switches
reed, Magnetic Sensor Switches
screw terminals, Essential: Toggle Switch
slide, Essential: Subminiature Slide Switch
slider buying guide, Components for Chapter Four
soldering, Soldering the Switches
sparking prevention, Sparking
symbol, Fundamentals: Basic Schematic Symbols
table of configurations, Fundamentals: All About Switches
tactile, Essential: Tactile Switch
tactile buying guide, Components for Chapter Two
tactile symbol, Fundamentals: Basic Schematic Symbols
telephone systems, Background: Early Switching Systems
test circuit, Experiment 6: Very Simple Switching
toggle, Essential: Toggle Switch, Fundamentals: All About Switches

toggle buying guide, Components for Chapter Two
T
tactile switch (see switch, tactile)
test leads, Test Leads, Optional: Clip-on Meter Test Leads
Texas Instruments, Background: How Chips Came to Be
thermistor, Experiment 33: Checking the Real World, Using a Thermistor
thermistor buying guide, Components for Chapter Five
Thomson, J. J., Background: Positive and Negative
time constant, Background: The Time Constant
timer, 555 (see 555 timer)
toggle switch (see switch, toggle)
tongue
resistance, Measuring Your Tongue, Further Investigation
test with 9V battery, Experiment 1: Taste the Power!
tools
buying guide, Buying Tools and Equipment
flush cutters, Optional: Flush Cutters
pliers, long-nosed, Essential: Small Long-Nosed Pliers
pliers, sharp-nosed, Optional: Sharp-Nosed Pliers, What You Will Need
screwdrivers, Essential: Small Screwdrivers
vendors, Searching and Shopping Online
wire cutters, Essential: Wire Cutters
wire strippers, Essential: Wire Strippers
transformer, Fundamentals: Coil Schematics and Basics
transistor
2N2222 substitutions, Essential: Transistors, The Finger Test

amplifying current, Voltage and Current
base, Fundamentals: Transistor Variants
basics, Essential: Transistors
bipolar, Fundamentals: Transistor Variants
collector, Fundamentals: Transistor Variants
damage, Caution: Fragile Component!
emitter, Fundamentals: Transistor Variants
fingertip demo, The Finger Test
history, Background: Transistor Origins
measuring the value, Values, Fundamentals: All About NPN and PNP
Transistors
NPN vs. PNP, Fundamentals: Transistor Variants
P2N2222, Essential: Transistors
principle, Inside the Finger Test, Adding a Potentiometer
relay comparison, Fundamentals: Transistors and Relays
summary, Fundamentals: All About NPN and PNP Transistors
tremolo, Background: Stomp-Box Origins
trimmer (see potentiometer, trimmer)
truth table, Background: Logical Origins, Background: Logical Origins,
Fundamentals: Logic Gate Basics
tweeter, Background: Crossover Networks
U
uncontrolled variable, Further Investigation, Experimental Verification
units of measurement, Background: Maddened by Measurement
V
vendors
components, Searching and Shopping Online

tools, equipment, Searching and Shopping Online
URLs, Suppliers
Venn diagram, Background: Logical Origins
vibrato, Background: Stomp-Box Origins
volt
conversion table, Fundamentals: Volt Basics
named after, Generating Heat with Current
Volta, Alessandro, Background: Inventor of the Battery
voltage
basics, Generating Heat with Current, Background: Why Didn’t Your
Tongue Get Hot?, Fundamentals: Volt Basics, Theory: Basic
Measurements
drop, One Problem Creates Another
regulator, Essential: Power Supply, Essential: Voltage Regulator, The
Regulator
W
wafer, Fundamentals: Choosing Chips
water, Further Investigation
resistance, Further Investigation
watt
basics, Background: The Watt, Practically Speaking
conversion table, Background: The Watt
formula, Background: The Watt
power, Background: The Watt
Watt, James, Background: The Origins of Wattage
waveform, Theory: Waveforms, Theory: Waveforms, Background: Clipping
Wheeler's approximation, Theory: Inductance

wire
bulk, Essential: Hookup Wire
color-coded, Jumpers, Colored Conductors
gauge, Essential: Wire Strippers, Essential: Hookup Wire, Making
Jumpers
hookup, Essential: Hookup Wire, Your First Solder Joint
hookup buying guide, Supplies
joining two pieces, Step Two: Soldering
magnet, Lighting an LED, Background: Crossover Networks
solid, Essential: Hookup Wire
spools, Essential: Hookup Wire
stranded, Essential: Hookup Wire, Optional: Stranded Wire, Soldering
the Switches
stranded buying guide, Supplies
wire cutters, Essential: Wire Cutters, Essential: Wire Strippers
wire strippers, Essential: Wire Strippers
wire, jumper (see jumper wire)
wire-wrap, Background: Soldering Alternatives
woofer, Background: Crossover Networks
work area layout, Customizing Your Work Area
work bench configuration, Customizing Your Work Area
wrist strap, Caution: Protecting Chips from Static
X
XNOR
747266 quad 2-input, Fundamentals: Part Numbers and Functions
symbol, Fundamentals: Logic Gate Basics
truth table, Fundamentals: Logic Gate Basics

XOR
7486 quad 2-input, Fundamentals: Part Numbers and Functions
symbol, Fundamentals: Logic Gate Basics
truth table, Fundamentals: Logic Gate Basics

About the Author
Charles Platt became interested in computers when he acquired an Ohio
Scientific C4P in 1979. After writing and selling software by mail order, he
taught classes in BASIC programming, MS-DOS, and eventually in Adobe
Illustrator and Photoshop. He wrote five computer books during the 1980s.
He has also written science-fiction novels such as The Silicon Man (published
originally by Bantam and later by Wired Books) and Protektor (from Avon
Books). He stopped writing science fiction when he started contributing to Wired
in 1993, and became one of its three senior writers a couple of years later.
Charles began contributing to Make: Magazine in its third issue and is currently
a contributing editor. Currently he is designing and building prototypes of
medical equipment in his workshop in the northern Arizona wilderness.
Colophon
The cover photograph is by Marc de Vinck.
The heading and cover font are BentonSans, the text font is Myriad Pro, and the
constant-width font is TheSansMonoCondensed.

