Copyright © 2014 by McGraw-Hill Education. All rights reserved.
Except as permitted under the United States Copyright Act of 1976, no
part of this publication may be reproduced or distributed in any form or
by any means, or stored in a database or retrieval system, without the
prior written permission of the publisher.
ISBN: 978-0-07-181926-8
MHID:

0-07-181926-6

The material in this eBook also appears in the print version of this title:
ISBN: 978-0-07-181925-1, MHID: 0-07-181925-8.
eBook conversion by codeMantra
Version 1.0
All trademarks are trademarks of their respective owners. Rather than
put a trademark symbol after every occurrence of a trademarked
name, we use names in an editorial fashion only, and to the benefit of
the trademark owner, with no intention of infringement of the
trademark. Where such designations appear in this book, they have
been printed with initial caps.
McGraw-Hill Education eBooks are available at special quantity
discounts to use as premiums and sales promotions, or for use in
corporate training programs. To contact a representative please visit
the Contact Us page at www.mhprofessional.com.
Information contained in this work has been obtained by McGraw-Hill
Education from sources believed to be reliable. However, neither
McGraw-Hill Education nor its authors guarantee the accuracy or
completeness of any information published herein, and neither
McGraw-Hill Education nor its authors shall be responsible for any
errors, omissions, or damages arising out of use of this information.
This work is published with the understanding that McGraw-Hill
Education and its authors are supplying information but are not
attempting to render engineering or other professional services. If such
services are required, the assistance of an appropriate professional
should be sought.
TERMS OF USE

This is a copyrighted work and McGraw-Hill Education and its licensors
reserve all rights in and to the work. Use of this work is subject to these
terms. Except as permitted under the Copyright Act of 1976 and the
right to store and retrieve one copy of the work, you may not
decompile, disassemble, reverse engineer, reproduce, modify, create
derivative works based upon, transmit, distribute, disseminate, sell,
publish or sublicense the work or any part of it without McGraw-Hill
Education’s prior consent. You may use the work for your own
noncommercial and personal use; any other use of the work is strictly
prohibited. Your right to use the work may be terminated if you fail to
comply with these terms.
THE WORK IS PROVIDED “AS IS.” McGRAW-HILL EDUCATION
AND ITS LICENSORS MAKE NO GUARANTEES OR WARRANTIES
AS TO THE ACCURACY, ADEQUACY OR COMPLETENESS OF OR
RESULTS TO BE OBTAINED FROM USING THE WORK,
INCLUDING ANY INFORMATION THAT CAN BE ACCESSED
THROUGH THE WORK VIA HYPERLINK OR OTHERWISE, AND
EXPRESSLY DISCLAIM ANY WARRANTY, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.
McGraw-Hill Education and its licensors do not warrant or guarantee
that the functions contained in the work will meet your requirements or
that its operation will be uninterrupted or error free. Neither McGrawHill Education nor its licensors shall be liable to you or anyone else for
any inaccuracy, error or omission, regardless of cause, in the work or
for any damages resulting therefrom. McGraw-Hill Education has no
responsibility for the content of any information accessed through the
work. Under no circumstances shall McGraw-Hill Education and/or its
licensors be liable for any indirect, incidental, special, punitive,
consequential or similar damages that result from the use of or inability
to use the work, even if any of them has been advised of the possibility
of such damages. This limitation of liability shall apply to any claim or
cause whatsoever whether such claim or cause arises in contract, tort
or otherwise.

To Stephen, from a very proud Dad.

About the Author
Dr. Simon Monk (Preston, UK) has a degree in cybernetics and
computer science and a Ph.D. in software engineering. He spent
several years as an academic before he returned to industry, cofounding the mobile software company Momote Ltd. He has been an
active electronics hobbyist since his early teens and is a full-time writer
on hobby electronics and open-source hardware. Dr. Monk is the
author of numerous electronics books, specializing in open-source
hardware platforms, especially Arduino and Raspberry Pi. He is also
co-author with Paul Scherz of Practical Electronics for Inventors, Third
Edition.
You can follow him on Twitter, where he is @simonmonk2.

Contents
Acknowledgments
1 Introduction
Printed Circuit Boards
Surface Mount and Through Hole
Prototyping
Solderless Breadboard
Perfboard
Stripboard
Installing EAGLE Light Edition
Installation on Windows
Installation on Mac
Installation on Linux
First Run
Load an Example Project
Install Third-Party Software
Installing the Adafruit and Sparkfun Libraries
Installing the Sparkfun Design Rules
Downloading the Book Examples
Light Edition Limitations
Summary
2 Quickstart
Creating a New Project
Drawing the Schematic
Add the Components
Join Them Together
Electrical Rule Check

Laying Out the Board
Dragging Components onto the Board
Resizing the Board
Routing
Summary
3 Components and Libraries
U.S. versus European Circuit Symbols
Resistors
Through-Hole Resistors
SMD Resistors
Capacitors
Through-Hole Capacitors
SMD Capacitors
Transistors and Diodes
Through-Hole Transistors
SMD Transistors and Diodes
Integrated Circuits
Through-Hole ICs (DIP)
SMD ICs
Connectors
Other Components
Buying Components
Paper PCB
Summary
4 Editing Schematics
The Anatomy of the Schematic Editor
The Command Toolbar
Common Commands
Other Commands
Nets
Buses
Worked Example

Starting the Schematic
Adding the Components
Adding the Supplies
Adding the Nets
Assigning Net Classes
Running the ERC
Summary
5 Laying Out a Printed Circuit Board
Experimenting
Layers
The Command Toolbar
Common Commands
Other Commands
The Grid
Sound Meter Layout (Through-Hole)
Create a Board from the Schematic
Decide on Board Size
Position and Rotate the Components
Add Mounting Holes
Get Some Design Rules
Run the Autorouter
Tweak the Result
Run the Design Rule Checker
Text on the Silk Screen
Add Text to the Bottom
Sound Meter Layout (Surface-Mount)
Create a New Schematic and Board
Swap Parts on the Schematic
Resize and Tidy the Board
Manual Layout
Summary
6 Printed Circuit Board Fabrication

Gerber Files
Loading a CAM Job
Running a CAM Job
Measure Twice, Cut Once
Submitting a Job to a PCB Service
Follow the Instructions
Photoetching
Milling PCBs
Toner Transfer
Summary
7 Soldering
Tools
General Tools
Tools for Surface-Mount Devices
Soldering Through-Hole PCBs
Through-Hole Soldering Step by Step
SMD Hand Soldering
Soldering Two- and Three-Legged Components
Soldering IC Packages
SMT with Hot-Air Gun
Soldering Two- and Three-Legged Components
Soldering IC Packages
Packages with Hidden Connections
Using a Reflow Oven
Get Everything Together
Applying Solder Paste
Populating the Board
Baking the Boards
Summary
8 Example: An Arduino Shield
Introducing Arduino
Shield Design

Arduino R3 Shield Template
A Four-Digit LED Example
Schematic
PCB Layout
Fabrication
Summary
9 A Raspberry Pi Expansion Board
Design Considerations
The Schematic
The Board
Laying Out the Power Supply
Laying Out the Power and Motor Tracks
Summary
10 Commands, Scripts, and User-Language Programs
Commands
Scripts
Built-in Scripts
Writing a Script
User Language Programs
Running ULPs
The ULP Language
Summary
11 Creating Libraries and Parts
Creating a Library
Copying a Device from Another Library
The Part Editor
Devices, Symbols, and Packages
Editing a Part
Creating a New Part
Making a Package

Making a Symbol
Making a Device
Summary
Appendix A: Resources
Official Documentation
Forums
Tutorials
Sources of Library Parts
Appendix B: EAGLE Layers
Layers Used in the Layout Editor
Layers Used in the Schematic Editor
Appendix C: User-Language Program Reference
Data Types
Strings
Arrays
Logical and Bitwise Operators
Control Structures
Special Constants
Dialog Functions
Other Built-in Functions
Index

Acknowledgments

M

any thanks to all those at McGraw-Hill who have done such
a great job in producing this book. In particular, thanks to my editor
Roger Stewart and to Patty Wallenburg.
I am most grateful to Mike Basset for his technical review of the
material.
And, last but not least, thanks once again to Linda, for her patience
and generosity in giving me space to do this.

CHAPTER 1

Introduction

I

n this chapter, you will learn how to install EAGLE™ Light Edition
and will discover the various views and screens that make up an EAGLE
project. EAGLE (Easily Applicable Graphical Layout Editor) is a product
of the German company Cadsoft. The company is now a subsidiary of
Premier Farnell, which also owns Newark Electronics in the United
States and CPC in the United Kingdom.
The software has been around for many years, and despite having a
user interface that can seem a little daunting to newcomers, it is a
powerful and flexible product. It has become a standard for hobby use
primarily because of its freeware version and the large set of component
libraries and general adoption as the standard tool for open-source
hardware (OSH) providers such as Sparkfun and Adafruit. Generally,
you will find EAGLE design files available for their OSH products as well
as for high-profile products such as the Arduino family of circuit boards.

Printed Circuit Boards
Because you are reading this book, you probably want to make a
printed circuit board (PCB) and already have a basic understanding of
what exactly a PCB is and how it works. However, PCBs come with their
own set of jargon, and it is worth establishing exactly what we mean by
vias, tracks, pads, and layers.

The main focus of the book will be on making double-sided
professional-quality circuit boards. This book assumes that you will
design circuit boards and then e-mail the design files to a low-cost PCB
fabrication service (as low as US$10 for 10 boards) that will actually
make the boards. The making of PCBs at home is now largely
redundant because they can generally be made at lower cost and to a
better standard than home PCB etching, with all its attendant problems
of handling and disposing of toxic chemicals or the need for expensive
milling machines.
Figure 1-1 shows the anatomy of a two-layer PCB. You will see
exactly how this PCB was designed later in this book, where it is used
as an example. For now, let’s briefly explain the anatomy of a PCB.
Referring to Figure 1-1, we have the following:

FIGURE 1-1 Anatomy of a double-sided PCB.
• Pads are where the components are soldered to the PCB.

• Tracks are the copper tracks that connect pads together.
• Vias are small holes through the board that link a bottom and top
track together electrically. Tracks on the same layer cannot cross,
so often, when you are laying out a PCB, you need a signal to
jump from one layer to another.
• Silk-screening refers to any lettering that will appear on the final
board. It is common to label components and the outline of where
they fit so that when it comes to soldering the board together, it is
easy to see where everything fits.
• Stop mask is a layer of insulating lacquer that covers both sides
of the board except where there are pads.

Surface Mount and Through Hole
Pads are either though hole, where components with leads are pushed
through from the top, soldered underneath, and then the excess lead
snipped off, or surface mount, where the components are soldered to
the top of the pad. Figure 1-2 shows a board that contains both surfacemount and through-hole components.

FIGURE 1-2 Through-hole and surface-mount components.
Surface-mount components are often referred to as surface-mount
devices (SMDs) and are replacing through-hole components in most
commercial products. This is so because SMD components are smaller
and cheaper than their through-hole counterparts, and the boards that
use them are also easier to make. You will also see the term surfacemount technology (SMT) used.
In commercial surface-mount PCB production, and increasingly for
hobbyists, boards are soldered by creating a mask that allows solder
paste to be deposited on the pads, then the components are placed
precisely on the pads, and then the whole board is baked in an oven that

melts the solder paste, soldering the components without the difficulty of
soldering each component separately.
SMD ovens are still too expensive for most hobbyists, but many
people have had success modifying toaster ovens to operate at the high
and precisely controlled temperatures required. Such experiments
usually require the safety features of the toaster oven to be disabled and
are therefore often referred to as “fire starters” for good reason.
However, like so many things in life, with care, common sense, and a
watchful eye, such things can be made to work safely.
The choice of surface-mount versus through-hole design is less cut
and dried for the hobbyist just wanting to make one or two boards for a
specific project. For a single project that is never intended to be made
as a commercial product, through-hole design is much simpler to solder
by hand. Through-hole component leads are nearly always at least 0.1
in. apart, whereas surface-mount chips can have pins that are just 0.5
mm apart. Although many SMDs are easy enough to solder by hand,
many others are just too small.
Figure 1-3 shows a selection of electronic components in both
surface-mount and through-hole “flavors.” As you can see, the SMDs
are very much smaller than their through-hole equivalents. This
generally means that you can get a lot more of them on the same area of
a PCB.

FIGURE 1-3 A selection of through-hole and surface-mount devices.

Prototyping
Ultimately, if you want to produce something of professional quality, then
PCBs are the only way to go. However, while you are prototyping a
design, it is a very good idea to test out your design before you start
getting PCBs manufactured. Every time you find something wrong with
your design and have to get a new batch of PCBs made, you will be
increasing costs, both in time and in money. It is far better to get the
design as perfect as possible before you commit to a board. This is a bit
like writing a book—you wouldn’t print and bind the first draft; you need
to be certain that the book is how you want it before you commit to
paper.
This is a book about the EAGLE PCB and building PCBs. It is not an
electronics primer, so if you need to learn more about electronics in
general, then take a look at the books Hacking Electronics and Practical
Electronics for Inventors, both from TAB Books.

Assuming that you have a schematic diagram for what you want to
build, there are a number of useful construction techniques that you can
use to build your prototypes quickly and easily.

Solderless Breadboard
Solderless breadboard (Figure 1-4) is very useful for quickly trying out
designs before you commit them to solder. You poke the leads of
components into the sockets, and metal clips behind the holes connect
all the holes on a row together.

FIGURE 1-4 Solderless breadboard.
Breadboard comes in all shapes and sizes, but a big one is probably
most useful. The breadboard in Figure 1-4 has 63 rows by 2 columns
with two supply strips down each side. It is also mounted on an
aluminum base with rubber feet to stop it from moving about on the
table. This is a very common size of breadboard, and most suppliers will
have something similar.
Figure 1-4b shows how the conductive strips are arranged
underneath the plastic top surface of the board. All the holes that share
a common gray area beneath are connected together in rows of five
connectors. The long strips down each side are used for the power

supply to the components, one positive and one negative. They are
color-coded red and green.
Breadboards are often modular and will clip together in sections to
make as big a board as you need. Figure 1-5 shows an example of a
simple breadboard prototype.

FIGURE 1-5 A breadboard prototype.
The main advantage of a solderless breadboard is that it’s, well,
solderless. Thus you can quickly and easily change the design just by
unplugging components and leads as you need to. The disadvantage is
that wires can fall out and leads of components can touch, so a

breadboard is only good for the first pass of a prototype. It probably
would not be wise to deploy a breadboard-built design for real use.
Eventually, something would work loose, and the prototype will stop
working. For something more durable as a prototype, there is really no
substitute for soldering.
The other disadvantage of breadboard is that the layout is fixed, so
components end up very spaced out from each other, often with a large
number of jumper wires linking everything together.

Perfboard
Perfboard (perforated board) is one of a number of types of board
designed specifically for prototyping. It is made from the same material
as a PCB but has no copper on it. It is just a board with an array of holes
in it on a 0.1-in. grid (Figure 1-6).

FIGURE 1-6 A perfboard prototype.
Component leads are pushed through from the top and soldered
together underneath using either their leads (if they will reach) or lengths
of solid-core wire. The perfboard effectively provides a rigid structure to
keep the components in position.
A variation on perfboard called protoboard is just like perfboard
except that behind each hole is a copper pad. The pads are not
connected together, but they serve to hold the components tight to the
board. This arrangement does, however, make it more difficult to move a
component once it is soldered. Generally, if a design uses dual in-line

(DIL) integrated circuits (ICs), then protoboard with solder pads is easier
to use than regular perfboard.
The advantage of perfboard and protoboard is that the layout of the
components can be closer to the schematic diagram because you are
not constrained to using fixed strips of connectors. Such designs can be
strong enough to deploy in a project permanently.

Stripboard
Stripboard (Figure 1-7) is a bit like general-purpose PCB. It is a
perforated board with conductive strips running underneath, rather like
breadboard. The board can be cut to the size you need, and
components and wires are soldered onto it.

FIGURE 1-7 Stripboard prototype.
As with breadboard, laying out a project on stripboard requires a bit
of skill to rearrange the logical layout of the schematic into something
that will work with the strips of the stripboard. Figure 1-8 shows the
stripboard layout for the prototype in Figure 1-7.

FIGURE 1-8 Stripboard layout.
The X’s underneath the IC are breaks in the track, which are made
with a drill bit, and one of the goals of a good stripboard layout is to try to
avoid too many breaks having to be made in the track. Breaks are
unavoidable for an IC such as this. If we did not make them, pin 1 would
be connected to pin 8, pin 2 to pin 7, and so on, and nothing would
work.

Installing EAGLE Light Edition

Having prototyped your design and being sure that it is time to start
making PCBs, let’s get on with installing and configuring EAGLE, the
design software that we will use to create PCBs. One of the great things
about EAGLE is that it is available for Windows, Mac, and Linux
platforms. Thus the first step in installation is to go to
www.cadsoftusa.com and click on the “Downloads” button. The
instructions are for Version 6.3 of EAGLE.
Select the download for your platform, and then follow the
instructions in the section for your operating system below.

Installation on Windows
For a Windows installation, you will need a machine running Windows
XP, Vista, or 7. Download the self-extracting archive (eagle-win6.3.0.exe), and allow it to run. After the file has been unzipped, the
dialog shown in Figure 1-9 will open. Click “Setup” to start the
installation process (Figure 1-10).

FIGURE 1-9 The EAGLE self-extracting archive.

FIGURE 1-10 The EAGLE installer.
You can just accept the defaults most of the way through the
installation until you get to the “EAGLE License” step. Here you should
select the option “Run as Freeware” (Figure 1-11).

FIGURE 1-11 Installing EAGLE as freeware.
Eventually you will get confirmation that the installation is complete.
You will find that the installer has added a new program group to the
Start menu from which you can launch EAGLE. You can now skip ahead
to the “First Run” section.

Installation on Mac
When installing on a Mac, EAGLE is distributed as a zipped package
installer rather than a disk image. After downloading the file eaglemac-6.3.0.zip, the file will extract to a package installer eagle6.3.0.pkg. Double-click it to start the installation process (Figure 112).

FIGURE 1-12 The Mac installer.
You can accept the default options for the whole installation, but
unlike the Windows installation, you will not be prompted to say what
kind of license you are using. Instead, this will happen the first time you
run the software (Figure 1-13). Select the option “Run as Freeware.”

FIGURE 1-13 Selecting license type on first run (Mac).

Installation on Linux
Having downloaded the installation file for Linux (eagle-lin6.3.0.run), try running it by opening a terminal session, changing to
the “Downloads” directory, and running the following command:

If you are lucky, the installer will run in a similar fashion to the
Windows installer. If you are unlucky, you might see something like
Figure 1-14.

FIGURE 1-14 Installation failure on Linux.
The root cause of this is incompatible versions of two libraries
(libssl.so.1.0.0 and libcrypto.so.1.0.0). EAGLE requires
32-bit versions of these libraries, and resolving this problem is not
always easy. Useful pointers on this can be found at
http://blog.raek.se/2012/01/06/running-cadsoft-eagle-version-6-inubuntu-gnulinux/.

First Run
Whatever operating system you are using, launch EAGLE. The following
screen shots are all for Windows, but you will find that it looks much the
same in Mac and Linux.

The first time you run EAGLE, you will get something like the
message shown in Figure 1-15.

FIGURE 1-15 Confirming creation of a documents folder.
This is asking your permission to create a documents folder into
which EAGLE will store the files for the projects that you are working on.
You should say “Yes” to this.
If all is well, EAGLE will then open up the EAGLE Control Panel
(Figure 1-16).

FIGURE 1-16 EAGLE Control Panel.
You will mostly use the Control Panel as a convenient way to access
your projects. It also allows you access to all the other different
documents that EAGLE uses. These includes
• Libraries of components
• Design rules that specify spacing between tracks and all manner
of other things
• User-language programs (You can write your own and download
programs to extend EAGLE.)
• Scripts that automate EAGLE activities
• CAM (computer-aided manufacturing) jobs that specify how the
EAGLE design is converted into files suitable for PCB fabrication

Load an Example Project
Within a project, the two main files you will be using are the schematic
file, which will have the extension .sch, and the board layout file, which
will have the extension .brd.
Navigate down the folders in “Projects” to demo2.brd, as shown in
Figure 1-16, and then double-click both demo2.brd and demo2.sch
to open both the board layout and the schematic (Figure 1-17). Later on,
when you are working on a project, you will need to make sure that the
schematic and board files are open for the project, or they can become
out of step, leading to all sorts of problems.

FIGURE 1-17 Example board and schematic files.

Install Third-Party Software
As part of the process of setting up our environment, we will download
some useful things from the Internet that will just help to get us started
and make EAGLE that much easier to use.

Installing the Adafruit and Sparkfun Libraries
You are going to load up two libraries of parts, one from Sparkfun and
one from Adafruit. Although EAGLE comes with a huge collection of
parts organized into libraries, the collection of parts is so huge that it can
be very difficult to “see the wood for the trees” and find the part that you
want. However, the Adafruit and Sparkfun libraries offer simplified lists
of the most common components, and of course, they include
components that the companies sell.
To
download
the
Sparkfun
library,
navigate
to
https://github.com/sparkfun/SparkFun-Eagle-Libraries
with
your
browser, and select the option to download a zip file (the icon looks like
a cloud with an arrow pointing down).
Once the zip file has downloaded, the .lbr files that it contains all
need to be extracted into the .lbr folder inside your EAGLE installation
folder (Figures 1-18 and 1-19).

FIGURE 1-18 EAGLE .lbr folder.

FIGURE 1-19 Extracting files straight into the EAGLE .lbr folder.
This will add about 17 .lbr files from LilyPad-Wearables.lbr
to SparkFun-Sensors.lbr to the .lbr directory. You can remove
the README file once it has been unzipped.
The installation for the Adafruit is a similar process. First navigate to
http://github.com/adafruit/Adafruit-Eagle-Library and again download
using the zip option and unzip the contents in the same way as you did
the Sparkfun library. However, the Adafruit parts are all contained in a
single library rather than a collection. Thus you can, if you wish, just add
the single .lbr file rather than contain it in a folder.
To check that both sets of libraries have been installed, go back to
your EAGLE Control Panel and expand the “Libraries” tab. You should
see a list something like Figure 1-20.

FIGURE 1-20 Sparkfun and Adafruit libraries installed.

Installing the Sparkfun Design Rules
Design rules specify all sorts of things about the design, the gaps
between pads and tracks, and other things like that. Sparkfun has put
together a useful default set of design rules that we will use in this book,
so it makes sense to install them now so that you can use them in any of
the EAGLE projects you create.
The Sparkfun design rules can be downloaded from the Sparkfun
site at www.sparkfun.com/tutorials/115. They are contained in a single
.drc file. You can right-click on this file on the web page and chose

“Save As” to directly save it into the drc folder within your EAGLE
installation.

Downloading the Book Examples
This book develops a number of example EAGLE projects. You will find
it useful to download these so that you can open them up and take a
look at them from within the EAGLE software. These files can be
downloaded from www.simonmonk.org. Just follow the link to this book.

Light Edition Limitations
The developers of EAGLE have to make some money somewhere, and
professionals will soon find that they need features of EAGLE that are
not available in the light edition. However, for most of us, the Light
edition will do just fine.
There are no restrictions on the number of projects you can design
using the software. The main restrictions of the light edition include the
following:
• The maximum size of a board that you can design with this edition
is 4 × 3.2 in. (100 × 80 mm). This may not sound very big, but
actually you can fit a lot of components in an area of that size.
Also, because the PCB fabrication services tend to get expensive
as boards get bigger, it is no bad thing to keep your designs
compact.
• A maximum of two layers is allowed. This means that you can
have copper tracks on the top of the board and on the bottom of
the board, but you cannot produce four-layer (or more) boards.
Again, this is not a problem for hobby use.
• You can only create one sheet on the Schematic Editor. When
designing a circuit, electronics engineers will often split a complex
design into a number of schematic diagrams with links from one
sheet to another. This restriction means that you have to fit all your
design onto a single schematic diagram. This is nowhere near as

restrictive as it might sound because there is no practical limit to
how big that sheet can be.
EAGLE Light can be used as freeware as long as the use is
noncommercial or for nonprofit applications. If you plan to build a
business out of a product that you design with EAGLE Light, then you
should buy a commercial license. For EAGLE Light, this is only $70 at
the time of this writing.

Summary
In this chapter you have learned a little about PCBs, installed EAGLE,
and run it for the first time. You can now move on to Chapter 2, where
you can start designing a simple project using EAGLE.

CHAPTER 2

Quickstart

I

n this chapter we will get to grips with EAGLE and create the
schematic and board files for a simple project that uses a 555 timer to
flash a light-emitting diode (LED).
As the chapter title suggests, this chapter is all about doing it quickly
rather than doing it with best practice. In later chapters, especially
Chapters 4 and 5, you will find a more thorough and considered
approach to design. Seasoned electronic engineers might need to avert
their eyes for some of this chapter.

Creating a New Project
The first step is to create a new project. Thus, from the “File” menu,
select “New” and then “Project” (Figure 2-1). This will allow you to edit
the name of the project (Figure 2-2).

FIGURE 2-1 Creating a new project.

FIGURE 2-2 Naming the new project.
You now need to create a new schematic diagram so that you can
start drawing out the circuit. To do this, right-click on the “Flasher”
project icon and select “New” and then “Schematic” from the popup
menu (Figure 2-3).

FIGURE 2-3 Creating a new schematic.
Initially, the schematic document will be labeled “Untitled.” It is a
good idea to save it by selecting “File” and then “Save As” from the
menu. Give it the name flasher.sch. You can actually have more
than one schematic and board file within the same project. However, this
can lead to confusion, and it is easier to just have one of each and give
the files the same name as the project. I like to use an uppercase initial
letter for the project and lowercase for the files.
Do not create a board file yet. We will do that after you have
designed the schematic.
Figure 2-4 shows the schematic window. As you can see, there are a
bewildering number of sometimes cryptic icons on the left. If you hover
the mouse over them, you will get some indication of what they do in the
status area at the bottom of the window.

FIGURE 2-4 Schematic window.
In Figure 2-4, the most important icons have been highlighted. The
“Add” icon is used when adding new components to the schematic, and
as you might expect, the “Delete” button removes them. Less obviously,
there is also an icon for “Move” as well as icons for “Name” and “Value”
that will change the properties of the components that have been added.
EAGLE operates on a different principle than most document editing
systems. As an example, in a word processor, you generally would
highlight some text and then click on the “Bold” icon to make the text
bold. You select the thing or things and then select an action to apply to
them. This is not the case for EAGLE. In EAGLE, it is the other way

around. First, you select the action (Move, Delete, Name, Value, Net,
etc.), and then you select the component you want to apply it to. This is
a little confusing at first, but after a while, it will become second nature.

Drawing the Schematic
You are now ready to start drawing the schematic diagram for this
project. This is really a two-stage process. For a simple project such as
this, it is easiest to add all the components and then start connecting
them together.

Add the Components
This project is a simple LED flasher that uses the 555 timer integrated
circuit (IC). Because this is the focus of the project, start by adding a
555 timer by clicking on the “Add” button. Having clicked on “Add,” you
will be greeted with the vast array of libraries shown in Figure 2-5.

FIGURE 2-5 Finding a component.
We need to find a 555 timer IC somewhere in there. You can do this
by searching. Start by entering “555” in the search field. The result is
shown in Figure 2-6.

FIGURE 2-6 Search results.
The result is only one component, and it’s not the right one. It’s a
556, which is the dual-timer version of the 555. The problem is that the
search uses entire words. To find any words that end in “555,” add an
asterisk (*) to the front of the search. Now we have found a good
selection of devices. Clicking on a device shows a preview of it. Thus
you can see the NE555 we are looking for highlighted in Figure 2-7.

FIGURE 2-7 Wild-card search.
Click “OK,” and move the cursor toward the middle of the schematic
window. Then click to drop the component on the schematic. Note that if
you click several times, you will end up with several copies of the
component. Make a couple of extra clicks so that you can practice
deleting things (Figure 2-8).

FIGURE 2-8 Too many 555s.
Note that to escape from component adding mode, you need to
press the “ESC” key and then click on “Cancel” in the “Add” window.
Remember that to delete the extra components, you first need to
switch to “Delete” mode by clicking on the “Delete” icon. Until you
change modes again, everything you click on will be deleted. So click on
all but one of the NE555 components (Figure 2-9).

FIGURE 2-9 Deleting components.
Time to add some new components. Let’s add the resistors. When
adding components such as resistors, you do not find resistors of any
particular value listed in the component libraries but rather components
of a particular type and size. We are going to go looking for ¼-W
through-hole resistors.
Searching the libraries for resistors is going to bring back rather a lot
of answers. Thus, to reduce that number, uncheck the box that says
“SMDs” (Figure 2-10).

FIGURE 2-10 Finding resistors.
There are still a lot of results, and it probably does not matter exactly
which one we select. Many of them will be nearly identical. Scroll down
to the Sparkfun results, and pick the resistor option shown in Figure 210. You will need to drop four of these onto the schematic window
(Figure 2-11).

FIGURE 2-11 Adding resistors to the schematic.
It does not matter yet where you drop them; later on, you will have to
move everything around anyway.
Now add an electrolytic capacitor to the schematic. It’s going to be a
1-μF capacitor, so it can be one of the smaller devices. Search for
“electrolytic capacitor,” and scroll down to the Sparkfun section again.
The “CAP_POL” sections are for polarized or electrolytic capacitors, so
look in there. There isn’t a 1-μF capacitor, but there is a 10-μF one
(CPOL-RADIAL-10UF-25V) that will do just fine.
Add two LEDs as well (search for “LED5mm”), and select the one
from the Adafruit library.

When all of these components have been added, your schematic will
look something like Figure 2-12.

FIGURE 2-12 Schematic with all the components.
The final part that we need to add to the schematic is not really an
electronic component but some means of supplying power to the circuit.
Let’s use a screw terminal. Even if we just end up soldering a battery
clip to the pads, at least we have two convenient pads to solder to.
Search for and add a two-way screw terminal. Use “terminal” as the
search term, and select the top result from Adafruit. Your schematic
should look like Figure 2-13.

FIGURE 2-13 Schematic with screw terminals added.
Now that all the components have been added, we can rearrange
them so as to be ready to connect them up. To do this, we will need to
change the orientation of some of the components. In particular, all the
resistors need to be vertical rather than horizontal, and the power
connector needs to be rotated through 180 degrees so that the
connections face toward the rest of the components.
Rotating components, like everything else in EAGLE, requires you to
switch to a particular mode. Select the “Rotate” mode by clicking on the
“Rotate” icon (see Figure 2-4). Click on each of the resistors to rotate

them through 90 degrees, and then click on the connector twice to rotate
it a full 180 degrees (Figure 2-14).

FIGURE 2-14 Rotating components.
To move the components, select the “Move” button, and drag the
components to their approximate locations, as shown in Figure 2-15.

FIGURE 2-15 Moving components.

Join Them Together
At last, the time has come to start connecting the components together.
To do this, we need to click on the “Net” icon (see Figure 2-4). Do not
be fooled into using the “Wire” icon; this is something entirely different.
To attach one component connection to another, click on the lead of
the component you want to attach to, and a green line will appear. You
can then click again anywhere you want the line to bend through 90
degrees until you come to some other component lead, where the

connection will finish. As an easy first one, connect the bottom of R3 to
the top of R4, and then add in the rest of the connections until your
schematic looks like Figure 2-16.

FIGURE 2-16 Connecting the components.
So far, so good, but none of our components have any values
marked for them. To add values, click on the “Value” icon to put EAGLE
into value-setting mode. Go through each of the components, setting
their values as shown in Figure 2-17.

FIGURE 2-17 Setting component values.
This is now our completed schematic. In later chapters we will find
out more things that we can do with the schematic, but for now, this
nice, simple diagram is good enough.

Electrical Rule Check
Before we start laying out the board, we should run an electrical rule
check (ERC). This will analyze our design and tell us if there are any

problems with it. To do this, from the “Tools” menu of the “Schematic”
window, select the option “ERC.” The result will be something like
Figure 2-18.

FIGURE 2-18 Results of an electrical rule check.
The first thing to note is that only one of the problems listed is an
error; the other four are warnings. The error is because we have left pin
5 of IC1 unconnected. The part specification for pin 5 says that this is
not allowed. We could just ignore the error, but checking the datasheet
for the 555 timer, it is normal to attach a 10-nF capacitor between pin 5
and ground (GND), so do that now. Search for “capacitor,” and then find
CAP-PTH-SMALL in the Sparkfun CAP section.
Add it, connect it up, and change the value to be 10 nF, and your
schematic now should look like Figure 2-19.

FIGURE 2-19 Schematic with capacitor for pin 5 added.
Close the “ERC” window, and run it again. Just the four warnings
should remain. The last two of these just say that the LEDs do not have
a value. We can either ignore these warnings or add a value of say Red
to indicate the color of the LEDs.
This just leaves us with two warnings. They will say something like
POWER pin IC1 GND connected to N$6. The N$6 probably will
be different because it depends on the order in which you connected
things together. N$6 is an automatically assigned name for a net. A net
is, if you like, a line, and all the lines that connect to it between one
component pin and another.

The warning is there because IC1 expects its GND pin to be
connected to a net called GND, but my ground net is called N$6. You can
discover the names of your nets by clicking on the “Show” icon in the
“Tools” menu (at the top; it looks like an eye). Clicking on a net will then
highlight it and show you its name in the status area at the bottom of the
screen (Figure 2-20).

FIGURE 2-20 Using the “Show” tool.
This is easy enough to remedy. GND is a much better name for the
net than N$6 anyway, so select the “Name” tool and then click on the
“N$6” net and change its name to GND.
Run the ERC again, and you should just be left with a warning like
this: POWER pin IC1 VCC+ connected to N$9. This is very
similar to the complaint about the GND connection but is for the positive
power supply to the IC (VCC+). Once again, anything for a quiet life, so
change the name of the net to VCC+ in the same way as you did the
GND net.
Now, when you run the ERC, no window will appear; you will just see
a message in the status area at the bottom of the screen that says ERC:
No errors/warnings.

Laying Out the Board
You can now start creating a board layout. The most convenient way to
do this is to select the option “Switch to Board” on the “File” menu of the

Schematic Editor. This will result in a prompt saying (and I paraphrase),
“There is no board, so would you like to create one from the
schematic?” This is just what we want, so click on “Yes.”
Initially, our board does not look very promising (Figure 2-21).
Clearly, we still have some work to do.

FIGURE 2-21 Board layout editor.

Dragging Components onto the Board

All the components are bunched up in the bottom left of the screen, and
there is the outline of a wire rectangle to the right. This rectangle
represents the borders of the circuit board itself. EAGLE has not
presumed any initial layout, so the first thing we must do is to use the
“Move” tool to drag all the components onto the board.
You will notice that all the legs of the components have yellow lines
attaching them to each other. These are called air wires. They indicate a
connection that at some point we will have to convert into tracks that
replace the air wire with a real connection. They do, however, help us to
decide where to place the components so as to minimize the crossing of
these lines.
This board is actually much bigger than we need for this simple
project, but it is often easier to at least place all the components before
adjusting the size of the board. The board has an origin at the bottom
left; as you move your mouse cursor around the board area, you will see
some numbers change just next to the “Show” (eye) icon. These
coordinates are in inches. Because through-hole components generally
conform to a 1/10-in. pin spacing, this is a more convenient unit to use
than metric units.
Select the “Move” tool, and move the components onto the PCB
area. Then use the “Rotate” tool so that the components look something
like Figure 2-22. Note that you will not be allowed to rotate a component
until it is on the board. This is just one of EAGLE’s little quirks.

FIGURE 2-22 Positioning the components.
Positioning and rotating the components are very much a matter of
trial and error. Every so often, click on the “Ratsnest” button near the
bottom left of the “Tool” pallet. This will redraw the air wires, keeping
them as short as possible. You can zoom in and out either using the
“Zoom” buttons on the toolbar or using the scroll wheel on your mouse.

Resizing the Board

Our components are only occupying the bottom-left quarter of the board,
so now is a good time to make the board smaller. Zoom out so that you
can see the whole board, and then select the “Move” tool and drag in
the left and top sides of the board until they just enclose all the
components (Figure 2-23).

FIGURE 2-23 The board resized.

Routing

The next stage of the process is to route the tracks. EAGLE can
automatically route your design for you, and for a simple design like this,
we might just as well let it. In Chapter 5, we will look at laying out PCBs
by hand.
To start the “Autorouting” tool, click on the “Auto” button in the
“Tool” palette. The icon looks a bit like a grid and is immediately to the
right of the “Ratsnest” icon. This will launch the autorouting dialog
(Figure 2-24).

FIGURE 2-24 Autorouting dialog.
We can come back to what all these options mean in Chapter 5. For
now, though, just accept the defaults and click the “OK” button. The
board will be routed before your very eyes. If the routing is successful,
then the status bar will say Ratsnest: Nothing to do. If for some
reason the autorouter was unable to eliminate all the air wires, then the
message would tell you how many air wires remained. You could then
route them manually or change the parameters in the autorouting dialog
and try again. Figure 2-25 shows the final layout of the board.

FIGURE 2-25 Final board layout.
If you have been following this in EAGLE as you read or are reading
a color edition of this book on an e-book reader, then you will notice that
the board is starting to look quite colorful. The red lines represent tracks
on the top of the board, and the blue lines track on the bottom. The pads
are shown in bright green, and the white lines show the silkscreen layer.

Summary

This chapter has shown you just enough to draw a schematic and then
lay out a board from the design. By design, a lot of material and
background have been omitted so that you can at least get started with
EAGLE.
In Chapter 3, we will take a more detailed look at components and
libraries because identifying the right parts for your design can be timeconsuming and difficult.

CHAPTER 3

Components and Libraries

F

inding the right components for a project can be a timeconsuming process. If you are using EAGLE, then a further complication
is that you need to either use components that are already in the EAGLE
libraries or download a library that includes the part or, as a final resort,
create your own part and add it to a library. This chapter serves as a
reference for the most common components that are used by hobbyists,
as well as showing you where to find EAGLE models for components
and even the components themselves.

U.S. versus European Circuit Symbols
When you are choosing a component from a library to use in a
schematic, the most important thing about it relates more to the board
layout than to the schematic. If it does not have pads in the right places,
then it will not be of any use. Another consideration is how the symbol is
drawn on the schematic. Unfortunately, there is more than one standard
for component symbols in use. The main divide is between symbols
commonly used in the United States and those in use in Europe.
If you browse through the libraries, you will often find two versions of
each component. For example, R-EU and R-US for European and U.S.
resistor symbols. Figure 3-1 shows the symbols for resistors and
capacitors.

FIGURE 3-1 United States and European circuit symbols.
In this book, we will stick to the U.S. circuit symbols largely because
the useful Adafruit and Sparkfun libraries are in this format. If you feel
strongly about using the European-style symbols, then you can search
out circuit symbols in that standard.

Resistors
Resistors are probably the easiest components to find in a library. They
are pretty standard in size, with relatively few different sizes to choose
from, both in through-hole and surface-mount device (SMD) forms.

Through-Hole Resistors
For most though-hole designs, ¼-W metal-film resistors are fine. These
normally will be mounted flat against the PCB with the leads bent at right
angles at the ends of the resistor bodies. This usually requires a 0.3-in.
separation. Figure 3-2 shows a selection of through-hole resistors. The

resistor power ratings from front to back are 125 mW, ¼ W, and two 1W resistors.

FIGURE 3-2 Through-hole resistors.
Table 3-1 details common resistor sizes (from wattage ratings).
These are taken from the Sparkfun library. You can find them in the
library by searching using the search term “RESISTORPTH-*.”

TABLE 3-1 Through-Hole Resistors: Common Component Sizes

The easiest way to identify any component is to keep it in a
component box that labels exactly what it is. If, however, the
components get mixed up, then through-hole resistors are identified by
their color-coded stripes.
Each color has a value as follows:

Besides representing the fractions 1/10 and 1/100, gold and silver
are also used to indicate how accurate the resistor is, so gold is ±5
percent and silver is ±10 percent.
There generally will be three of these bands together starting at one
end of the resistor, a gap, and then a single band at the other end of the
resistor. The single band indicates the accuracy of the resistor value.
Figure 3-3 shows the arrangement of the colored bands. The resistor
shown uses just the three bands. The first band is the first digit, the
second band is the second digit, and the third “multiplier” band is how
many zeros to put after the first two digits.

FIGURE 3-3 Resistor color bands.

A 270-Ω resistor will have a first digit of 2 (red), a second digit of 7
(violet), and a multiplier digit of 1 (brown). Similarly, a 10-kΩ resistor will
have bands of brown, black, and orange (1, 0, and 000).
Some resistors have four bands rather than three, in which case the
first three stripes represent the value, and the last stripe is the multiplier.
Thus a 10-kΩ resistor with four stripes would have stripes of brown,
black, black, and red.

SMD Resistors
In general, through-hole devices are often of much higher power than
necessary. Often ¼-W devices are used as a standard that will do for
almost any application.
SMD resistors are available with a wide range of power ratings, and
generally, lower-power SMD resistors are used rather than their
through-hole counterparts. These devices start really small. In fact,
generally, they are too small to solder by hand.
SMD devices (both resistors and many other two-legged devices)
come in standard sizes, denoted by four digits, for example, 0402,
0805, and 1206. Figure 3-4 shows a selection of SMD resistors. From
left to right, the two resistor sizes are 0805 and 1206. As you can see
from the match head, theses are pretty tiny, and if you are soldering by
hand, you should not consider devices smaller than 0805.

FIGURE 3-4 SMD resistors.
The four digits of the package size actually specify the dimensions of
the device. The first two digits are the length, and the second two are
the width. In both cases, the measurements are in 1/1,000 of an inch.
Thus a 0402 device has a length of 4/1,000 of an inch and a width of
2/1,000 of an inch.
Now is a good time to introduce the unit called the mil. A mil is not to
be confused with a millimeter (mm). A mil is 1/1,000 of an inch and is
still used widely in the electronics industry. Things get confusing
because in electronics you will find some things in American
measurements (mils and inches) and other things in metric units (e.g., 5mm LEDs). When you come to laying out your board, you will use mils
as the main unit, and most through-hole components have lead
spacings in mils, often 100 mils (0.1 in.).
Table 3-2 shows the most common SMD resistor sizes.

TABLE 3-2 Common SMD Resistor Packages

For higher powers than 1 W, through-hole resistors normally will be
used for their better air circulation to allow heat to dissipate.
SMD resistors are generally marked with a four-digit code. This is
rather like the color code used in through-hole resistors but just written
as digits. Thus both the resistors in Figure 3-4 have the code 1001. This
means three value digits 1, 0, and 0 and a number of zeros digit of 1.
Thus the value is 1,000 Ω or 1 kΩ.

Capacitors
If you are developing digital projects that use perhaps a microcontroller
and a few extra components, then you will only be using a fairly small set
of capacitors and using them in a pretty simple way—probably 100-nF
decoupling capacitors close to ICs or perhaps 100-μF capacitors
around a voltage regulator.

Through-Hole Capacitors
As decoupling capacitors placed close to ICs, tiny multilayer ceramic
capacitors are ideal. These generally will be bead-shaped with leads on
a 0.1-in. pitch. Electrolytics are larger and are available with axial leads
(emerging from the ends of the tubes). It is more common to use devices
with radial leads, where both leads emerge from the same end of the
tube. For long, thin electrolytic capacitors, it is a good idea to allow them
to bend over and lie flat against the PCB rather than stick up, where they
could easily be damaged. Figure 3-5 shows a selection of through-hole
capacitors.

FIGURE 3-5 Through-hole capacitors.
Table 3-3 provides a list of some of the most commonly used
through-hole capacitors and indicates where to find them in the EAGLE
libraries.

TABLE 3-3 Common Through-Hole Capacitors

Electrolytic capacitors usually have their capacitance and maximum
voltage written on them. Ceramic and smaller through-hole capacitors
are identified by a three-digit code. This is the capacitance in picofarads
using a similar scheme to resistor code. The first two digits are the
value, and the third digit is the number of zeros to add. Thus a capacitor
marked as 104 is 1, 0, 0000, or 100,000 pF or 100 nF.

SMD Capacitors
Small nonpolarized SMD capacitors use the same common footprints as
SMD resistors, that is, 0402, 0603, 0805, 1206, and 1210 being
common sizes. When it comes to larger-value electrolytic capacitors,
typically the devices have a square base with a cylindrical component
on top. A commonly used standard for this was devised by Panasonic

and is generally referred to as Panasonic B to E for the majority of
electrolytic sizes.
Figure 3-6 shows a selection of SMD capacitors. The capacitor sizes
are (left to right) 0201, 0805, 1206, and Panasonic D. All the capacitors
are 100 nF. You may at first sight miss the 0201 capacitor. It really is
minute. When selecting components for hand soldering, don’t attempt
anything smaller than 0805.

FIGURE 3-6 SMD capacitors.
Table 3-4 shows some of the most common SMD capacitors, their
footprints, and where to find them in the EAGLE libraries. Small SMD
capacitors are not usually labeled, so try not to mix them up.

TABLE 3-4 Common SMD Capacitors

Transistors and Diodes
Through-hole diodes have similar footprints to resistors. Transistors are
a bit more complex, especially power transistors that need to dissipate
some heat.

Through-Hole Transistors
By far the most commonly used package for through-hole transistors is
the TO-92 package. Higher-power transistors generally will use a TO-

220 package, although intermediate-sized packages are occasionally
used, as well as occasionally large packages such as the TO-3 for very
high-power devices. Figure 3-7 shows a selection of through-hole
transistor packages. These are (left to right) TO-92, TO-126, TO-220,
TO-264, and TO-3. Table 3-5 shows the two most commonly used
packages and their footprints.

FIGURE 3-7 Through-hole transistor packages.

TABLE 3-5 Through-Hole Transistor Packages

Table 3-5 does not include library search terms because you will
generally find the exact part in the library, for example, 2N2222, 2N700,
or FQP33N10. Always search for the exact part first. If you cannot find
the part in the libraries, then try looking on the manufacturer’s website
and some of the part collections that can be found on the Internet.
Generally, unless your part is really unusual, someone, somewhere will
have an EAGLE library that includes it. As a last resort, you can always
make your own part (see Chapter 11).
When using TO-220 parts, you will normally get the choice of
vertically mounted or lying flat against the board.

SMD Transistors and Diodes
SMD transistors are mostly one of two SMD package sizes, which
keeps things simple. Figure 3-8 shows the package types SOD323,
SOT23, and SOT223 (from left to right). SOD stands for “small outline

diode,” and SOT stands for “small outline transistor.” With care, all can
be soldered by hand.

FIGURE 3-8 SMD diode and transistor package types.
Table 3-6 shows some devices and their footprints.

TABLE 3-6 Diode and Transitor SMD Types

Integrated Circuits
ICs come in a huge array of different package types. Through-hole
devices are much easier to use, generally being dual in-line (DIL)
packages, unless they are three-pin devices, in which case they use
transistor packages.
On the other hand, there are many standard sizes for SMD ICs.
Many are too small to attempt hand soldering, however. We will just

cover the devices with pin spacings large enough to solder by hand
here.
When finding an IC to add to a schematic, you will often find that the
same IC part number is available in a number of packages, both
through-hole and SMD (Figure 3-9).

FIGURE 3-9 Package options for an ATTiny45 IC.

Through-Hole ICs (DIL)
Figure 3-9 shows a couple of DIL IC packages. These can have up to
40 pins, and the most common sizes are 8, 14, 16, 20, 24, 28, and 40
pins. Most have a gap of 0.3 in. between the two rows of pins, but some
of the bigger devices have a 0.6-in. gap.

SMD ICs

There are a few major styles of SMD IC packages, as summarized in
Table 3-7. All these packages have leads protruding from the side of the
IC.
TABLE 3-7 SMD IC Package Types

Other package types do not have leads in the conventional sense
but rather pads underneath that match up with pads on the PCB. These
packages are only really suitable for soldering using solder paste and an
oven.
If you expect to be soldering your boards by hand, then you probably
should stick to the SO package type. In Chapter 7 you will find some
techniques that with practice will allow you to solder some really small
pitch devices.

Connectors
Any board that you design is likely to have connectors of some sort.
These may be pin headers, JST (Japanese Standard Terminal)
sockets, screw terminals, or just solder pads to which wires will be
soldered. Figure 3-10 shows a selection of different connector types.

FIGURE 3-10 Connectors.
Table 3-8 lists some of the more common connectors and where
they can be found in the EAGLE libraries. You should find most of what
you need in the Sparkfun Connectors library.

TABLE 3-8 Common Connectors

For best structural rigidity, many connectors are through-hole so that
they use the board to provide extra strength. Connectors may have
mechanical pins that go through the board to provide extra strength.
Surface-mount connectors are essentially only attached to the copper
track on the surface of the board. This means that under stress, it is
easy for the copper layer to lift away from the board.

Other Components

The preceding sections detail the most common components. For other
components, it just becomes a matter of finding the part in the library. If
there are external components that are to be connected by wires to the
PCB, then select one of the connector types and solder the wires
directly to the pads.

Buying Components
It may sound obvious, but always make sure that you can easily get hold
of a part before you design something that uses it. If you are designing
something that will become a product, then keeping the cost of the bill of
materials (BOM) to a minimum will become important.
Always use common components except where there is a good
reason to use something more exotic. Component suppliers that are
particularly suited to the hobbyist include
• Sparkfun: www.sparkfun.com
• Adafruit: www.adafruit.com
• Maplins (UK): www.maplins.com
• RadioShack: www.radioshack.com
None of these has an exhaustive range of components, and they are
not particularly cheap, but they combine component sales with modules
and very good reference materials and tutorials.
Perhaps the next tier of supplier has component suppliers that have
a much wider range, are happy to supply in small quantities, and do not
always have a minimum order value. These include
• Mouser: www.mouser.com
• Digikey: www.digikey.com
The top tier of component suppliers can supply almost any part that is
in production. They supply mostly to the electronics industry, and their
prices often can be surprisingly competitive on some lines, especially if
you are buying in quantity. The most prominent of these are

• Farnell (worldwide): www.farnell.com
• Newark (United States): www.newark.com (owned by Farnell)
• CPC (United Kingdom): cpc.farnell.com
• RadioSpares (worldwide): www.rs-components.com
A great web resource for tracking down parts is Octopart
(www.octopart.com). This is a component search engine. You just type
in the part name, and it will give you a list of suppliers selling the part
and their prices.
Often the cheapest place to get components is using eBay. Large
quantities of components such as LEDs can be bought directly from
China for a very low price.

Paper PCB
It is always difficult to know that the component you have in your hand
will exactly fit a particular footprint. This is particularly the case for
connectors and unusual components, especially if the components have
been scavenged or found in your personal stock of components.
A good way to check that you have the right component is to print
out a paper PCB from EAGLE so that you can hold the components
against the paper to check the footprints. It is not much effort to go to
and much better than having made a batch of useless PCBs.

Summary
Now that you can find the components you need for your projects, we
can return to the process of drawing the schematic. This time we will
take a more thorough approach and look at some of the features of the
Schematic Editor that we did not need to use in Chapter 2.

CHAPTER 4

Editing Schematics

I

n Chapter 2, we very quickly built the schematic for a simple LED
flasher using a 555 timer. In this chapter, after some general explanation
of the Schematic Editor, we will start developing a second project, a
sound-level meter that includes a small amplifier and 10 LEDs to
indicate the level of sound. This project will be continued in Chapter 5
when we come to look at laying out PCBs in more detail.
Because you are going to be experimenting with various editor
commands to see how things work, it is probably a good idea to create a
new “play” project to which you can add a new schematic for
experimenting with.

The Anatomy of the Schematic Editor
Figure 4-1 shows a new “Schematic Editor” window. We will now look at
the parts of this window in detail and look at what everything does. We
will start by identifying and naming the main areas of the window.

FIGURE 4-1 The “Schematic Editor” window.
Starting at the top of the screen, we have the Title bar. This shows
the file name of the schematic being worked on. This can be useful as
confirmation that you are actually working on the document that you
think you are working on.
Next, we have the Menubar. This contains options for saving the
document, as well as providing an alternative means of accessing many
of the functions found on other icon buttons on the editor.
The Action toolbar contains a number of commands and features
that are also accessible on the menus. From left to right in Figure 4-1,
the icons are

• Open. Another schematic.
• Save. The current schematic.
• Print. Open the print dialog.
• CAM. Launch the CAM (computer-aided manufacturing)
processor for producing design files suitable for sending to a PCB
fabrication shop (see Chapter 6).
• Board. Switch to or open the corresponding board design for the
schematic.
• Sheet Drop Down. We are only allowed one sheet with the light
version of EAGLE, so we can ignore this.
• Use Library. Add a library to the list of libraries in use on this
schematic.
• Execute a Script. See Chapter 10.
• Execute a User-Language Program. See Chapter 10.
• Zoom to Fit. Zooms to just fit all the components in the schematic
into the editor area (useful).
• Zoom In. It is easier to use the scroll wheel on your mouse if you
have one.
• Zoom Out.
• Redraw Screen. Occasionally, screen redraw is glitchy. This
forces a redraw of the screen.
• Zoom to Selection.
• Undo. Undo the last change made to the schematic (very useful).
• Redo.
• Cancel Command. Cancel a command that is running.
• Help. Search for help about using EAGLE.
Under the Action toolbar, you will find the Parameter toolbar. The
contents of this toolbar will change as you select different commands in
the Command toolbar. It is the Command toolbar that you will use most
when you are editing a schematic. We will deal with this specifically in
the next section.
Underneath the Parameter toolbar is a gray area that displays the
current coordinates of the cursor. To the right of this is a text entry field

called the command line, where you can type commands equivalent to
pressing buttons. We will look at this briefly in Chapter 9 because
generally users prefer to click on commands rather than type them.

The Command Toolbar
The icons in the Command toolbar are labeled in Figure 4-2. There are
a lot of commands that we can use. The ones labeled in bold in the
figure are the most commonly used ones. You will use these commands
a lot. Some of the others deserve a mention so that you know they are
there when you do come to need them.

FIGURE 4-2 The Schematic Editor Command toolbar.

Common Commands
We have already used some of the common commands in Chapter 3,
but we will recap on them here.
Move
With this command selected, you can drag any components or nets
around on the Schematic Editor. Sometimes it can be difficult to select
the component you want. If you look carefully, you will see that each

component has a little cross on it. This is the selection point, so aim for
that.
To move more than one thing at a time, you have to use the Group
command.
Group
The Group command can be very baffling when you first come to use it.
It allows you to select a set of parts by dragging over the set with the
mouse. However, to then do anything meaningful with the selected set,
you have to think ahead and select a command before you select the
Group command. For example, we will look at dragging a group of items
from one area of the Schematic Editor to another. This is something you
are likely to do fairly often.
The sequence of actions is
1. Select the Move tool.
2. Select the Group tool.
3. Drag the cursor over the items that you want to include in the group
move. They will become highlighted.
4. Right-click, and down near the bottom of the Context menu, you will
see an option “Move: Group” (Figure 4-3).

FIGURE 4-3 ”Move: Group” on the Context menu.
Delete
Delete anything you subsequently click on without further warning. You
can also carry out this command as a Group command.
Name and Value
These two commands work quite well in the sort of “verb-noun”
workflow of EAGLE. Having dropped a load of resistors onto the
schematic, you will probably want to go around them setting their names
and values.
Copy
Copy is a useful command that we have not met before. It should
perhaps more accurately be called “Clone” or “Duplicate.”
To use it, select the “Copy” icon, and then click on the item you want
to make a copy of. The copy will become attached to the cursor, which
you can then move and click to deposit the copy onto the schematic.

Rotate
To rotate a component, click on the Rotate command, and then click on
the component to be rotated. This will rotate it through 90 degrees. To
rotate it more, just keep clicking.
When drawing a schematic, it only really makes sense to rotate
through multiples of 90 degrees. However, when designing the board
layout, it is occasionally useful to be able to rotate a component to an
unusual angle such as 45 degrees.
TIP

When you are moving components around, you will often find
that you need to switch between moving and rotating. You can
rotate a component when using the Move command by rightclicking.

Add
We have dealt pretty well with Add. Once you have selected the
component that you want to add, then every click of the mouse will result
in a new component being dropped onto the design area. To go back
and select a different component to add, click on the ESC key.
One aspect of the Add command that we have not looked at is
adding multigate or multipart components. Examples of this kind of
component include logic chips that contain multiple gates or chips such
as the NE556 that contain the equivalent to two NE555 timers in a
single chip.
When you add one of these components, the first click will put the
first gate or subpart onto the design area; subsequent clicks will place
the other gates or subparts. Each part will be given a name, the first part
of which is the component number and the second part of which is the
gate or subpart within that chip.
Replace
Replace is a useful command that lets you swap out one component for
another that is pin-compatible. This has the advantage over deleting it
and adding a new part in that it retains all the net attachments to the
part.
To use it, select the command, and then browse for the replacement
component. Then click on the component in the design area that you

wish to replace.
Net
We will cover nets in a later section.

Other Commands
Other commands that you will need from time to time are detailed below.
It is worth gaining some basic familiarity with them.
Information
With this command selected, every time you click on an item in the
editor, you will see an information window like Figure 4-4 that shows you
information about that item.

FIGURE 4-4 Information about a resistor.

This actually provides an alternative way of changing information
about the item, such as its name and value.
Layers
You can control what information is visible on the schematic. This is not
really very useful on a schematic but becomes essential when we look
at board layout in Chapter 5.
Mirror
Mirroring a component flips it through its vertical axis. Figure 4-5 shows
a transistor and a mirrored transistor next to each other. It just allows the
circuit symbol to be displayed the other way around.

FIGURE 4-5 A mirrored transistor.
Paste
Paste is the same concept as the Paste in Cut and Paste, but this being
EAGLE, it works in a different way. To make a copy to be pasted, you
select items either individually or using the Group command. The Paste
command will then attach a duplicate of everything selected to the
cursor so that you can click to place it in the Schematic Editor.
Pin Swap
Some components such as logic gates have pins that are
interchangeable. The Pin Swap command allows you to swap the pins.
There is no reason why you would want to do this while designing a
schematic, but when routing the PCB, you might find that things would
become a lot easier if you could just swap over which pin is used.

Gate Swap
As with Pin Swap, this feature only becomes useful when you start
designing the PCB layout and suddenly discover that the layout would
be much easier if only you had used a different gate or subpart of the
chip. By switching back to the Schematic Editor, you can fix this.
Smash
This rather dramatic sounding command is nowhere near as exciting as
you might expect. It simply allows you to separate the Name and Value
labels that accompany a circuit symbol from the symbol itself so that you
can move them around independently. This helps to keep your
schematics clear and easy to read.
Split
The Split command allows you to add a waypoint to a net line. Select the
command, and then click on the length of the line somewhere. You can
then drag a point out, and the line will follow. This is useful for changing
the path of a net line without having to delete it and redraw it. Note that
you can also use the Move command on net lines.
Line, Circle, Rectangle, Text, Arc, and Polygon
All these commands allow you to add decorations to a schematic. These
take no part in the electrical side of the schematic. They will not have
any influence over the board layout; they just allow you to add further
information to the schematic diagram.
Bus and Bus Label
Schematic diagrams can become messy, especially in digital electronic
designs when you have a lot of wires running from one chip to another.
To keep things neat, the Bus command allows you to group the net lines
together. See the separate section on buses later in this chapter for
more information.
Junction
EAGLE does a pretty good job of automatically marking junctions
between one net and another with a little blob. The Junction command

allows you manual control over this process. You may never use this
feature, though.
Attributes
You can add your own custom attributes to a component and then
decide if you want them to be displayed. Figure 4-6 shows a POWER
attribute being added to resistor R5. We have also specified that just the
value (1 W) should be visible.

FIGURE 4-6 Adding an attribute.
If the attribute is displayed in the wrong place, for example,
overlapping the component graphic, then you can move it by using the
Smash command to separate the circuit symbol from its labels.
ERC and Show ERC Errors
These two commands launch the electrical rule checker (ERC) and
open the window showing the results of the check, respectively. We
touched on this in Chapter 2 and will meet it again later in this chapter.
Show

The Show command has a similar purpose to the Information command,
except that rather than opening a little window giving you details of the
component selected, it displays the information in the status area at the
bottom of the screen (Figure 4-7). Because it is not opening a new
window (that then needs closing), this can be a faster way to see what’s
on a schematic.

FIGURE 4-7 The Show command.
Mark
This is not something you are ever likely to use on a schematic. The
Mark command allows you to set a local origin anywhere on the
schematic so that you can see the coordinate values relative to that
point. Clicking on the “GO” button (looks like a traffic signal) cancels the
Mark command.
Change
The Change command allows you to change almost anything about an
object on the schematic diagram. You can, of course, change these
things using the Information command. The Change command is not
that useful on a schematic but comes into its own when you are
designing a board layout because it lets you easily change such things
as track widths, silk-screen fonts, and so on.
Miter Wires
You may never use this feature when editing a schematic. It allows you
to put a curve in your net lines. To use it, select the command, and then

click on a corner of a net line. You can then set the radius in the
dropdown in the Parameter toolbar.
Invoke
This is possibly the worst-named command in EAGLE. You might think
that it runs a script. No, not at all. This command would perhaps be
better named Fetch. It is used in multipart components such as logic
gates. As you saw in the section on the Add command, when adding
such components, they appear a gate at a time each time you click on
the design area.
The Invoke command gives you more control over this process,
allowing you to select the order in which the components are added.
This serves little practical purpose.
However, the useful thing you can do with Invoke is to add the power
connectors for an integrated circuit (IC). After clicking out four gates
from, say, a 7400 IC, if you select the Invoke command and click on one
of the gates, a menu like the one shown in Figure 4-8 will appear,
allowing you to select either the positive supply for the chip or the
negative supply. To add both, action the command twice.

FIGURE 4-8 Using Invoke to add power-supply pins.
These pins then can be explicitly connected to the appropriate power
nets. Note that ICs such as this will have specific net names associated
with the power pins, so you do not have to connect them up explicitly as
long as you pay attention to the ERC results to make sure that the power
nets are all defined correctly.
Dimension
This command adds dimension labels. There is no reason to do this in a
schematic diagram.

Nets
Aside from the components themselves, nets are the most important
part of any design. When you are drawing a schematic, you will use nets
to connect one component lead to another. This may be done directly or
by connecting a net from one lead of a component to a net that already
exists on the diagram.
Let’s create a few nets, see how they get named, and see what
happens when we connect one net to another. Start by adding four
resistors and a net between R1 and R2 and also between R3 and R4
(Figure 4-9).

FIGURE 4-9 Adding nets.
When adding nets, you can click at any point to add a waypoint
(bend in the line), although for this exercise the resistors are lined up so
that you don’t need any corners. When you get to the end point for a net
such as the left-hand lead of R2, the net should stop drawing. It is a sure
thing that you missed the connection point on the component if the net
unexpectedly carries on drawing after you think you have connected it.
If you click the Show command and then select the net between R1
and R2, it will probably tell you that the net is called N$1, and the other
net will be called N$2.
Now draw another net between the two nets, starting from the
middle of the net between R1 and R2. When the net reaches the net

between R3 and R4, a little window will pop up (Figure 4-10).

FIGURE 4-10 Connecting two nets.
This is offering us a choice of names for the new net that will be the
merger of the two nets. It does not matter what name you chose.

Buses
A typical example of where a bus is useful would be where a
microcontroller is connected to an LCD module using the HD44780
chip. This requires four data lines and three control lines. In the following

example, we will use a bus to connect the display’s data and control
pins to the microcontroller.
Add the two components (search the libraries for “atmega32u2” and
“hd44780”), rotate them, and add a bus, all as shown in Figure 4-11.

FIGURE 4-11 Two components and a bus.
Now here’s the trick: to allow connections to the bus, a special
convention is used in naming the bus. Change the name of the bus to
“LCD_BUS1:DB[4..7], E,RW,RS.” You can change the name of the bus
using the Name or Information commands. This name tells the bus
object that any net being connected to it can be connected to one of
eight possible slots: DB4, DB5, DB6, DB7, E, RW, or RS. The square
brackets and “..” specify a range of values. We could also have set the

name to be “LCD_BUS1:DB4,DB5,DB6,DB7,E,RW,RS,” and it would
work just as well.
Now, when you drag out a net from, say, PD7 on the microcontroller
to the bus, it will present a list of possible connection slots (Figure 4-12).

FIGURE 4-12 Connecting a net to a bus.
At the display end of the bus, you connect nets from the display to
the bus using the corresponding slot names.

Worked Example
Now that you are familiar with the tools available to us with the
Schematic Editor, we can start building up a second example
schematic. The example project is a sound meter. This will use an
amplifier chip, a bar-code chip, and a set of LEDs. In Chapter 5, we will
design first a through-hole and then a surface-mount version of the PCB
layout for the example.
Figure 4-13 shows the finished schematic that we are aiming for.
You will notice that it looks considerably more professional than the
schematic from Chapter 2.

FIGURE 4-13 Final schematic for the bar-code example.

Starting the Schematic
If your design is a one-off, is just for you, and is never likely to be
released for others to use, then you can take the approach that we did in
Chapter 2. However, you never know where a design might lead, so it
can be a good idea to design neatly.
When you look at other people’s schematic designs, you will often
see the schematic itself framed, with an information panel that provides
useful information such as the name of the document, the author,

version, and other information such as the licensing of the design. The
frame used in Figure 4-13 is the letter-sized frame from the SparkfunAesthetics library and indicates that the design is released under a
creative commons license.
The frames can be added as if they were any other part. To add a
frame, search the library for “frame.” This will bring back frames of
different sizes. The size “Letter” will be fine for small designs; for bigger
designs, “A3” is a better option. If a design grows unexpectedly, then
you can always replace the frame with a bigger one.
Place the frame with the bottom-left corner at the origin. Some of the
details of the frame, such as the document name and date last saved,
will be automatically shown on the sheet. Note that for them to be
updated, you may have to select “Redraw” from the View menu. To
change the text in other fields, such as the “Design By” and “Rev” fields,
there are two possible ways. The neater way only works if the lettering in
the frame has field markers, for example, “>AUTHOR.” If it does, then
from the Edit menu, select the option “Global Attributes..,” and add a
new attribute and value, where the attribute name is the same as the
word in the frame but without the > character on the front. Then redraw
the screen to see the attribute value.
Unfortunately, most of the frames in the library, including the
Sparkfun library, do not have such variables defined, so to add the text,
use the Text command from the toolbar, enter the text, but before you
drop it over the field, change the layer in the Action toolbar to be layer
“94 - Symbols.” You can also change the text size here or at any time
using the Information command, clicking on the text.

Adding the Components
The final set of files for this design, and all the designs in this book, can
be downloaded from the author’s website (www.simonmonk.org).
However, I recommend that you follow the instructions to draw the
design for yourself from scratch.
Add the Components
Everyone has different ways of working, but I find it easiest to add all the
components that I am going to need, lining them up neatly before

moving them to where they are likely to be needed on the schematic.
Add the items in Table 4-1 to the schematic. Where possible, the
components are from the Sparkfun library. Searching on the values in
the “Device” column works best when searching for the components in
the libraries.
TABLE 4-1 Components Used in the Example Project

After all these components have been added to the schematic, it will
look something like Figure 4-14. Note that this figure does not show the
screw terminal J1.

FIGURE 4-14 Schematic with all components added.
Having added the basic component shapes, you can then go through
and set their values according to Table 4-1. D1 and D2 have rather long
and overly specific values, so change them to be just 1N4148. You will
have to override the warning that they have no user-definable values.
This is also a chance to rename the microphone to something more
obvious such as MIC1.
With all the components named and the terminal block J1 added,
your collection of components should be looking like Figure 4-15.

FIGURE 4-15 Setting component values and renaming.
We can now start positioning the components in the approximate
location where they will be needed. It is best to place the big multipin
devices first, fairly centrally, and then place the other components
around them. Logically, the amplifier stage using IC1 happens before
the LED bar-code chip does its thing, so put the op amp to the left.
Position and rotate all the components where necessary until they
look like Figure 4-16. Remember that you can rotate when you are in
Move mode just by right-clicking the mouse.

FIGURE 4-16 The components in the correct positions.

Adding the Supplies
In our first design, back in Chapter 2, we glossed over the whole idea of
supplies. Power came from two pins of a connector, and we did not do
anything special to identify them as power rails. We didn’t have to. It
worked as it was, and that was our rough and ready chapter.
However, generally, except from the very simplest designs, there are
good reasons to identify which nets are supply nets and both name them
appropriately and associate them with special “supply” parts. This can
help to keep diagrams neat because you can repeat GND and other
supply symbols so that you do not need to connect every point on the
diagram that is GND to every other GND with a line—something that

very rapidly gets unmanageable as a design becomes more complex.
You can just use the GND symbol as a stand-in.
Therefore, we are going to add two new supply parts, one for GND
and one for V+. Select the Add command, and then search for “supply”
(Figure 4-17).

FIGURE 4-17 Supply parts in the libraries.
As you can see, there are many parts to choose from. We will just
use GND and V+ in the supply1 library. Add one of each near C6 and
C7 at the bottom of the diagram and also +V above R1, above pin 7 of
IC1, and right next to pin 3 of IC2 and near LED1. Add GND symbols
below the Mic and near pin 4 of IC2. When these are in place, your

schematic should look like Figure 4-18. Note that in this figure we have
also rotated J1 because it was the wrong way around for making
connections in Figure 4-16.

FIGURE 4-18 Supply parts added to the schematic.
You may find that putting all the components in place in one go just
gets too complicated, in which case it can be easier to start connecting
up some of the nets. However, once you start connecting things
together, moving things gets more tricky because you need to worry
about where all the lines are going.

Adding the Nets
It’s time to start adding the nets, and no doubt, we will need to move
things around a little, but hopefully not too much. We will draw in the
nets for this example in four stages, corresponding to four areas of the
design (Figure 4-19).

FIGURE 4-19 Logical areas of the design.
The first trivial area is the area at the bottom of the screen
comprising the power connector and the two decoupling capacitors.

Then we have the amplifier section, centered around IC1, the low pass
filter between C4 and C5, and then the bar-code area around IC2.
Let’s start by connecting nets between the parts in the power area at
the bottom. Figure 4-20 shows the sequence of connections being
made.

FIGURE 4-20 Adding nets to the supply area.
By starting with connections between the screw terminals J1 and the
supply symbols, it makes it easy to then reliably connect up C6 and C7.
The temptation to just run the supply line level across the top of the
components (Figure 4-21) should be resisted. This will not actually

connect them to the supply nets. You can tell that they are not
connected because there are no little dots where the capacitor leads
meet the GND and V+ nets.

FIGURE 4-21 How not to connect nets.
Now turn your attention to the amplifier stage, around IC1. This is
probably the busiest section of the design. Working from left to right,
Figure 4-22 shows how I connected these up, starting with the supply
connections. Some of the parts will need moving a little so that
everything lines up nicely.

FIGURE 4-22 Connecting up the amplifier section.
Next, continuing to the right of the schematic, we wire up the filter
section so that it looks like Figure 4-23.

FIGURE 4-23 Connecting up the filter section.
Note that we have continued the GND net from the amplifier actions.
I also had to move the GND supply near pin 4 of IC2 because it was in
the way.
The final stage is to connect up the bar-code part of the schematic
around IC2. Getting all the nets between the output pins of IC2 and the
LEDs can be a bit tricky. You could, if you prefer, use a bus for this (see
the earlier section in this chapter). The name of the bus needs to be
something like “LEDS:CATHODE[1..10]” to allow the 10 connections to
the LED cathodes to be made from IC2. The bus and direct-connection
versions of the schematic are shown in Figures 4-24 and 4-25. On
balance, I think the direct-connection approach is clearer.

FIGURE 4-24 Bar-code section of the design—using a bus.

FIGURE 4-25 Bar-code section of the design—direct connections.

Assigning Net Classes
This step is not essential, but it is a good idea. It allows you to specify
what kind of net a net is. We only really have two types of nets in this
design—power and signal—but you could imagine a design that
controlled a 110-V relay and had some nets that were high voltage and
high current. While this has no bearing on the schematic, when we come
to lay out the tracks on the board, it would be useful to know that those
tracks should be wide and well separated from other tracks. Similarly, it
is common to use slightly thicker tracks for supply nets.

As the design currently stands, all the nets will be of a class called
default. If you use the Information command and select a few nets, you
can see the dropdown near the bottom of the window that allows you to
select a class for the net. Currently, there is only one entry there
(“Default”). To add another net class for supply, select the option “Net
Classes..” from the Edit menu, and type a name in the second row
(Figure 4-26).

FIGURE 4-26 Defining a new net class.
We will return to the other parameters of a net class in Chapter 5
when we come to lay out this board. For now, just add the name.

Now change the class of the GND and V+ nets to “Supply” using the
Information command (Figure 4-27).

FIGURE 4-27 Using the Information command to change the net class.
This completes the connecting up of the nets. The next step is to
validate the schematic using the ERC.

Running the ERC
Before we start on the layout, we need to run the ERC. This will tell us
about any problems in the schematic. It is important to understand that
the ERC does not simulate our circuit; if the design is wrong, it will not
tell us that it is wrong. It basically just checks that there are no dangling
connections that have been missed or any nets that run too close to
each other.
It is surprisingly easy to create a schematic in EAGLE that looks like
everything is connected just fine, but it turns out that there are some
connections that do not quite meet.

Launch the ERC, either from the Tools menu or from the ERC
command, bottom left of the Command bar. The result should look like
Figure 4-28. The ERC is very helpful because if you select an item on
the list, it will highlight the relevant area on the schematic.

FIGURE 4-28 ERC results.
As you can see from Figure 4-28, the ERC is only actually reporting
one error. The error is that IC2 has an unconnected pin (pin 9). You may
have noticed that pins 1 and 8 of IC1 are not connected to anything
either, yet the ERC is not complaining about them. This so because the
part for IC1 from the library defines those pins as being allowed to be
unconnected, whereas the definition for IC2 says that pin 9 must be
connected.

Looking at the datasheet for the LM3914, it states that if you want
the bar-code driver to operate in “dot” mode, then pin 9 should be left
unconnected. Therefore, actually, the definition for the IC2 part is
incorrect. In Chapter 11 we will look at how you can copy parts from one
library to your own library and modify them. For now, though, we are
going to allow this error to stand because we know that it is not a real
error but just a bug in the part definition.
In the warnings section, if you have been careful connecting up your
nets, you will not have a warning like the first one: Net N$5 overlaps
pin.
To see what this warning refers to, click on the warning in the list,
and a line will spring forth pointing to the part of the schematic where the
problem is located (Figure 4-29).

FIGURE 4-29 Net overlapping pin warning.
What this error means is that when I was drawing the net between
C3 and R5, I started too far to the left on C3 and missed the lead. This
means that C3 is not actually connected to R5, which is why there is a
second warning that says Only one pin on net N$5.
See what I mean about a schematic looking correct but not actually
being connected up right? This is why it is very important to understand
every one of the ERC results and either fix them if there is genuinely
something wrong (as in this case) or ignore them if it is safe to do so (as
in the case of the unconnected input on IC2). Once you get to laying out

the PCB, it may not be obvious that there is a connection missing, and
you may end up fabricating boards that are useless.
The best way to fix this is to delete the net and draw it again. Thus,
close the ERC results window, select the Delete tool, click on the net in
between C3 and R5, select the Net command, and then carefully draw
the net in again from the right-hand lead of C3 to the left-hand lead of
R5. Run the ERC again to make sure that it is fixed.
The next two warnings are just about the naming of power nets. Both
IC1 and IC2 expect the negative supply pins to be called V–, and we are
connecting both to GND. This can safely be ignored.
The next 10 warnings (one for each LED) just tell us that we have
not given the LEDs values. They don’t need values, although you could
use the “Value” field to specify the color, say, but we will chose to ignore
these warnings.
The final warning in the list shows that we have just plain forgotten to
connect the top end of C2 to anything. This is easily remedied.

Summary
EAGLE is a very sophisticated tool. Although we have built on the
simplified schematic design process that we first started in Chapter 2,
there are still features of EAGLE that we have not used. We have,
however, learned how to use all the features that you will need to use for
a fairly straightforward schematic diagram.
In Chapter 5, we will give an introduction to how to use the Board
Editor in general and then work through the bar-code example laying out
both fully through-hole and surface-mount versions of the PCB design.

CHAPTER 5

Laying Out a Printed Circuit
Board

I

n this chapter, you will first look at the various commands available
to use when laying out a PCB and then make two example layouts for
the bar-code example of Chapter 4. One of these layouts will use a
typical hobbyist’s through-hole design. The other will use mostly
surface-mount components. In the final section of this chapter, we spurn
the help of the autorouter, lay out the same example manually, and
compare it with the automatically generated layout.

Experimenting
Before starting on the sound meter example, you will be experimenting
with the many features that are available through the Board Editor. To
have something to experiment with, use the board from the flasher
example of Chapter 2 (Figure 5-1). During your experimentation, you are
quite likely to completely mess up these project files, so remember that
the original files can always be downloaded again from the book’s
website (www.simonmonk.org).

FIGURE 5-1 Board layout from the flasher project.
Open the flasher example project, and then open the board layout.

Layers
A fundamental part of the Board Editor is the concept of layers. EAGLE
defines a huge set of layers and also allows you to define your own
layers and even automatically generate them from scripts. You will only
ever need to use quite a small subset of these layers. At any time, you

can control which layers are visible and which are hidden. This is useful
to avoid clutter and to be able to concentrate on a particular aspect of
the design without the confusion of everything being visible all the time.
The Layers command (second from the top icon on the left of the
Command bar) provides you with a list of all the layers available, with
the ones currently visible highlighted (Figure 5-2).

FIGURE 5-2 Layers.
The scroll bar tells you just how many layers there are off the bottom
of the window. Let’s look at the layers that we will most definitely use

before looking at some of the more exotic ones. Table 5-1 lists the most
common layers.
TABLE 5-1 Main Layers in Board Editing

When you add a part to a schematic, that part can contribute various
things to different layers in EAGLE. Thus part of the package description
will be such things as the size and shape of the pads and the names
and values that will end up on the “Pads” and “tNames” (or “bNames”)
layers.

The Command Toolbar
The basic structure of the Board Editor is the same as that of the
Schematic Editor. The Command window on the left has commands,
some of which, such as Move and Information, are the same as when
using the Schematic Editor and some of which are new.

Figure 5-3 shows the Command toolbar for the Board Editor. The
most important commands are highlighted in bold, and the ones marked
with an asterisk (*) are new commands that only apply to the Board
Editor and not the Schematic Editor.

FIGURE 5-3 Board Editor Command toolbar.

Common Commands
Many of the commands in the Board Editor work in just the same way as
those in the Schematic Editor. In this section we will look at just the most

common commands.
Move
The Move command allows you to move parts around on the board
layout. It does not affect the position of the same part in the Schematic
Editor.
Group
Group moves and deletes are carried out in the same way as in the
Schematic Editor. That is, you click the command (say, Move) and then
click the Group command, drag over an area to make a multiple
selection, and then right-click and use the Group move (or whatever)
option in the menu. When laying out by hand, a very common Group
operation is to Ripup a section of tracks that have been routed so that
they can be rerouted better.
Delete
I have indicated that this is an important command, but actually it’s a
command that is important that you do not use in the Board Editor, at
least on parts. If you want to delete parts, then you should do it in the
Schematic Editor. When you delete them there, they will automatically
disappear from the Board Editor. If you try to delete a part in the Board
Editor, you will see the error message in Figure 5-4.

FIGURE 5-4 Trying to delete a part in the Board Editor.
The message is telling you that the change you are trying to make to
the board cannot be applied back to the schematic. The exception to
this is that simple changes such as changing the value of a component
can be made in the Board Editor, and the change will then also appear
in the Schematic Editor. Generally, it is better to assume that the

schematic is the important master copy and that any design changes
should be made there.
Name
You can safely change the name of a part in the Board Editor. Such a
change will automatically update the corresponding part in the
Schematic Editor.
Route
The Route command is what you use to convert an air wire (connection
needing to be made) into a copper track. We will use the Route
command extensively later on when we start laying out our example
board.
When the Route command is selected, the Parameter toolbar fills
with all sorts of useful parameters that we can set for the copper track
we are about to route. We will see later that by using design rules and
net classes, these may get set for us automatically, although there is
always the option to tweak them manually. Figure 5-5 shows the Routing
Parameter toolbar.

FIGURE 5-5 Routing Parameter toolbar.
From left to right, the icons are
• Grid. More on this later.
• Layer. Copper on the top or bottom of the board.
• The next eight icons represent different styles of track bend. To
get the hang of these, you will experiment with them when we try
laying out the bar-code example.
• There is then a “Miter” dropdown that allows you to select a curve
radius for bends in the track. This used to be important for certain
chemical etching processes where tight bends could cause the
etchant to collect and overetch the track. Unless you are home

etching your PCBs, this feature is largely down to personal
preference.
• Finally, there are two selection buttons that allow you to choose
between square and curved miters.
Ratsnest
If you are routing a PCB by hand, you will probably find yourself hitting
this button frequently. When clicked, it recalculates the shortest routes
for all the air wires. Remember that these air wires indicate where there
is more routing to do. When all the connections have been made, it will
display the status message Nothing to do!
If there are still connections to be made, this command will
recalculate them, indicating the shortest routes between existing tracks.
Thus, having done a bit of routing, clicking Ratsnest will tidy everything
up and recalculate the air wires for you.
Copy
If you remember from the Schematic Editor, Copy is actually more like
“duplicate.” It is another command that should not be used with parts.
Switch to the Schematic Editor if you want to add or duplicate parts. It is,
however, useful to copy board-specific items that do not appear on the
schematic, such as holes or text.
Rotate
This rotates the part through the angle specified in the Parameters
toolbar. This is normally 90 degrees. However, you can use other angles
by
• Clicking the Rotate command
• Typing the angle into the dropdown (say, 45) and hitting “Return”
• Clicking Rotate again
• Selecting 45 in the dropdown
• Clicking on the part to rotate
This can be useful for unusually sized PCBs.
Add and Replace

Adding a part is another operation that is not permitted from the Board
Editor, and while replacing parts, if they have compatible pins, it is much
better to go back to the Schematic Editor and make the change there.
Value
Changing a component value in the Board Editor is just fine. Any change
that you make in the Board Editor will automatically update the
Schematic Editor.
Ripup
Ripup is the opposite of Route. It allows you to rip up sections of track
so that they can be rerouted. You will use this command a lot.

Other Commands
You can, if you wish, skip over the commands in this section. They are
described here for completeness and so that you know of their existence
should you need them at some point in the future.
Mirror
The Mirror command is only useful if you are placing components on the
bottom layer, as well as the top. Mirroring the component to go on the
underside will automatically mirror the pads.
Paste
Paste is the same concept as the Paste in Cut and Paste, but this being
EAGLE, it works in a different way. To make a copy to be pasted, you
select items either individually or using the Group command. The Paste
command then will attach a duplicate of everything selected to the
cursor so that you can click to place it in the design. As with duplication,
you should only use this feature with items that are specific to the board
design, such as holes or text.
Pin Swap
Pin Swap is quite handy for making the routing process more
convenient. For two-pin devices, you can achieve the same effect just by

rotating it, without the side effect of it messing up your schematic (as has
happened in Figure 5-6 following a Pin Swap).

FIGURE 5-6 Pin-Swapping in the Board Editor.
Lock
The Lock command allows you to protect a part so that it cannot be
moved or modified without first unlocking it. To unlock it, hold down the
“Shift” key while using the Lock command. Or you could just be careful
and use Undo if you make a mistake.
Smash
This is the same Smash command that lets you separate the labels for a
part from the part itself in the Schematic Editor. This can be useful if you
want to move, say, a part value away from the outline of the part to
prevent overlaps of text and the part.
Split
Split allows you to add an extra bend on the segment of a track without
having to reroute the section.
Meander

Meanders are used in high-frequency projects where the track length
can affect when signals arrive at a component. A Meander zigzags to
lengthen the track. This is something of a professional feature needed
for boards operating at very high frequencies and unlikely to be needed
by us hobbyists.
Shapes and Text
There are various different shapes and text that you can use to draw on
your board. This can be in copper if you select top or bottom as the layer
or can appear in the final silk screen if you select the layer that will
eventually be used for silk screen—often tPlace and bPlace.
Remember that parts will come with their own text and placement
guides, so you do not usually need to draw much in the way of
annotation. The Polygon shape, when drawn in copper, can be used to
create a ground plane, something we will discuss in the example
section.
Via
Vias are used to allow a track from one layer to continue on another
layer, that is, from top to bottom or vice versa. Physically, they are small
holes with a connection between the layers. It is better to create vias
automatically as you route simply by switching layers than to add them
explicitly. In other words, avoid the Via command.
An exception to this is if you have two ground planes (see later in this
chapter), one on the top layer and one on the bottom, and you want a
good connection between them. You might then add a number of vias to
achieve this.
Hole
It is quite common to add a hole to a PCB so that it can be fixed into an
enclosure. The Hole command lets you do this. When adding a hole, be
careful that no tracks will be cut by the hole.
Dimensions
The Dimension command lets you annotate part of a design with
dimensions.
ERC

You should not need this from the Board Editor because you should not
be changing things there that affect the electric rule checker (ERC).
Show
This command has a similar purpose to the Information command
except that rather than opening a little window that gives you details of
the component selected, it displays the information in the status area at
the bottom of the screen.
Mark
The Mark command allows you to set a local origin anywhere on the
Board Editor so that you can see the coordinate values relative to that
point. Clicking on the “GO” button (looks like a traffic signal) cancels the
Mark. This can be used to measure things on the board, but frankly, I
have never found a good use for it.
Change
The Change command allows you to change almost anything about an
object on the schematic diagram. You can, of course, change these
things using the Information command.
Miter Wires
This command allows you to put a curve in a line or polygon. To use it,
select the command, and then click on a corner of a line. You can then
set the radius in the dropdown in the Parameter toolbar.
Optimize
This removes unnecessary midpoints from a straight line.
Signal
The Signal command would allow you to define signals in the board
layout, but if you try to click on it, EAGLE just tells you that you can’t use
it. It will only work if forward/backward annotation is disabled, which
would be silly. Just ignore this feature.
Attributes

You can add your own custom attributes to a component and then
decide whether you want them to be displayed. See Chapter 4 for an
example of using this to add a “power” property to a resistor.
Autoroute
This command runs the autorouter. More on this later.
DRC
The design rule checker (DRC) is to the Board Editor what the ERC is to
the Schematic Editor. It performs all sorts of checks that make sure that
tracks are not crossing each other on the same layer, located too close
together, and so on.
Because the design rules are complicated to set up, you can load
and save sets of design rules and even download sets of design rules
that others, such as Sparkfun, have made available to everyone.

The Grid
The schematic is drawn on a grid, which helps you to lay things out
neatly by allowing you to snap parts and net lines to the nearest point on
the grid. However, the grid is much more important for board design.
By default, the grid spacing is 0.05 in. You can change this using the
Grid option on the View menu. This opens the dialog shown in Figure 57.

FIGURE 5-7 Changing the grid.
Occasionally, it can be useful to reduce the grid spacing if you are
running short on space. It is a good idea to keep it at fractions of 0.1 in.
because most parts have leads on that pitch.

Sound Meter Layout (Through-Hole)
Now that we have taken the tour, it’s time to start working on a board.
We are going to begin with a through-hole board design for the sound
meter example project.
Rather than show you a perfect first-time layout, this design will lead
you through the real example as I worked through it. This is not a perfect
example layout. There are deliberate initial errors, which we will work
through and correct, that are quite likely to crop up when you do your
own first designs.
Open the schematic diagram for the sound meter project.

Create a Board from the Schematic
We do not yet have a board for this schematic, so from the File menu,
select the option “Switch to Board.” You will be informed that the board
does not exist and will be asked if you want to create it from the

schematic. Say “Yes,” and the Board Editor will open, looking
something like Figure 5-8.

FIGURE 5-8 An initial board.
Thus we have what could be described as a big heap of components
on the left and a rectangle representing the board on the right. We even
have some text that has escaped from the frame on the schematic.
Delete the block of text to make it easier to concentrate on the
components.

Decide on Board Size
Sometimes you will know what size board you are aiming for, and other
times it is best to add the components and do some of the layout before
making a decision. Because 5 by 5 cm (just short of 2 by 2 in.) is used
as the cutoff size for a big price hike by the author’s favorite PCB
fabrication shop, we will give ourselves the constraint of fitting the
design onto a 5- by 5-cm board.
Our units are all in inches, so move the top and right edges (drag
them in the middle) so that the board is 1.95 in. square. Watch the size
change in the top left of the editor area.
At first sight, it does not look like everything is going to fit on the
resized board (Figure 5-9), but trust me, it will.

FIGURE 5-9 A quart and a pint pot.

Position and Rotate the Components
Let’s start moving the parts onto the board. The layout broadly follows
the schematic. Thus we can put IC1 and associated components over
on the left. Then the filter components and IC2 and, finally, the LEDs can
be put over on the right side.
Remember that when using the Move command on a part, you also
can rotate it through 90 degrees by right-clicking. Frequent use of the

Ratsnest command will tidy up the air wires. You will probably also need
to zoom in to be able to identify the parts correctly.
In deciding where to place the components so as to broadly follow
the schematic, it is very helpful to have the schematic available for
reference. If you have two monitors, keep the schematic up on one of
them and the Board Editor on the other or simply print out a copy of the
schematic to refer to as you place the components.
I used the Smash command on all the capacitors and then used the
Change (size 0.05) on the part name label to make it easier to read the
capacitor names. We will come back to part labels later in this chapter
when we sort out the silk-screen text.
When all the components are in place, the board should look like
Figure 5-10.

FIGURE 5-10 Board with all parts added.
Currently, there is a rat’s nest of unrouted wires. Clicking on the
Ratsnest command will tidy this up a little (Figure 5-11).

FIGURE 5-11 Board after the Ratsnest command.

Add Mounting Holes
It will be useful if this board has some mounting holes on it so that it can
be attached to a front panel or otherwise secured in an enclosure. Now
is a good time to add the holes, before we start routing the air wires,
because the tracks will have to stay well clear of the holes.
Select the Hole command from the Command toolbar. Change the
drill size to 0.2 in. in the dropdown list in the Property toolbar, and then

add three holes, as shown in Figure 5-12. It does not matter if the holes
are on top of air wires.

FIGURE 5-12 Board with mounting holes added.

Get Some Design Rules
Before we run the autorouter, we need to set up a few rules about how
thick we want the tracks to be, how far apart they are to be, and so on.
We can do this in two ways, one by using a set of design rules and the
other by defining some net classes (which we started in Chapter 4).

Let’s start with the design rules. We are going to use a set of design
rules that Sparkfun supplies as a free download. You should have
installed these back in Chapter 1 (see the section “Installing the
Sparkfun Design Rules”). If you did not install them, please do so now.
You may remember that back in Chapter 4 we defined a new net
class called Supply, with the intention that it should provide thicker
tracks for tracks that supply power to the chips. We created the names
for the classes and changed the GND and V+ nets to be of the Supply
class, but we did not set the track thicknesses.
Thus, from the Edit menu, select “Net Classes..” and modify the
parameters so that they look like Figure 5-13.

FIGURE 5-13 Setting dimensions in the net classes.
This sets the track width to 10 mils (0.01 in.) for a regular signal and
20 mils for a supply signal.

Run the Autorouter
It is time at last for the really fun bit—running the autorouter. Click on the
Autoroute command. We do not need to change anything on the
Autoroute settings; the defaults should work just fine. But let’s take a
moment to look at some of the settings (Figure 5-14).

FIGURE 5-14 Autorouter settings.
This is actually the first of many autorouter settings tabs and
probably the only tab that you might want to change. The Preferred
Directions setting acts as a hint as to how to use the two layers. By
setting one to be predominantly horizontal and the other vertical, you
tend to minimize the number of vias you need. If you want to produce a
single-layer board, then you can do that here by setting the top layer to
be “N/A.”
The routing grid specifies the grid to which the bend points in the
tracks should be matched. Reducing this number sometimes may be
necessary to fit all the tracks in.
Running the autorouter will produce a result something like Figure 515. It will not be exactly like Figure 5-15 because your parts will not be
in exactly the same positions as mine.

FIGURE 5-15 The first routing.
This is actually a pretty good result. The board looks pretty neat. You
can see the thicker tracks for GND and V+. However, you will notice that
there are still some air wires that have not been routed.

Tweak the Result
Rather than route the air wires manually, to improve the layout
marginally, we are going to add a ground plane. A ground plane, as the
name suggests, adds a large area of copper on the board that is

connected to ground. Because quite a lot of the components have a
connection to ground, this actually reduces the number of tracks
required on the bottom layer, making it more likely that all the air wires
will route.
Before we can add the ground plane, we need to “rip up” the tracks
that have just been laid. You can do this either by using Undo or you can
select the Ripup command, select the Group command, drag over the
whole board, and then from the right-click menu select “Group Ripup.”
Having turned all the tracks back into air wires, add a ground plane
by selecting the Polygon tool and drawing a square around the outline of
the board (Figure 5-16). Make sure that the Layer dropdown is set to
“16 Bottom” and the Width dropdown is set to 0.01 (both on the
Parameter toolbar once “Polygon” is selected).

FIGURE 5-16 Adding a ground plane.
Although the polygon is a shape, it is deemed to have edges, and
the “Width” attribute sets the width of these. These are judged by the
same design rules as other tracks, and making them wide interacts with
the design rules, making the ground plane smaller than the board
outline. In short, keep the width small to avoid problems.
When the square has been drawn, there will be a thin blue dashed
line all around the outline of the board. Click on “Ratsnest,” and the
polygon will fill with blue (Figure 5-16).
Now we need to associate the polygon with the GND signal. To do
this, click the Name tool, select “Polygon,” and name it GND (Figure 5-

17). Note that it can be quite tricky to select the polygon rather than the
board dimension lines. When you click on “Ratsnest” again, you will see
some of the air wires vanish because they are now taken care of by the
ground plane and will not require Track to route them.

FIGURE 5-17 Naming the ground plane.
Having made the ground plane, run the autorouter again. Figure 518 shows the result.

FIGURE 5-18 Autorouting with a ground plane.
This time the autorouter failed to route just one air wire. Also, the
ground plane has broken up. There is a portion over on the right where
the ground plane could not spread though because of the design rules.
Let’s try to sort out these problems.
If you cannot see where the air wire is, then it helps to temporarily
hide some of the layers. The air wires are all on the “19 Unrouted” layer.
The remaining air wire is between the two anodes of LED9 and
LED10. All the positive leads of the LEDs are connected together on the
left. It would be easier if they were on the right because they would then
be on the same side as the connections from IC2. So let’s rip up all the

tracks, rotate the LEDs, and try again. Laying out a board is an iterative
process. Unless you have a few components on a large board, you are
likely to have to make several attempts to route the board.
This time, the result is much better (Figure 5-19). There is still one
air wire between LED9 and LED10, but the ground plane now covers
the whole bottom layer.

FIGURE 5-19 A second autorouting with ground plane.
This looks like it should have been autorouted, and this is probably
so because LED10 is so close to the edge of the board that routing it
would break a design rule.

Anyway, for now, we will route it manually, just to illustrate manual
routing. Select the Routing command, then change the width to 0.2, and
make sure that the top layer is selected. Then draw the track up from
the positive (+) connection on LED9 to LED10. Figure 5-20 shows this in
progress.

FIGURE 5-20 Adding the final track.
Click “Ratsnest” again, and you should be told Nothing to do. The
full board is shown in Figure 5-21. At this stage, you can probably tell
that we will need to revisit the layout soon.

FIGURE 5-21 Fully laid-out board.

Run the Design Rule Checker
Before we can declare our board finished, we need to run the DRC on it.
When this is run on the design, it produces a results window in which
you can select problems, and they are highlighted in the design.
Figure 5-22 shows the errors I get. Clicking on one of the errors in
the list will highlight the area on the board. In the figure, this is LED10
being too close to the top edge of the board.

FIGURE 5-22 Results of the DRC.
These errors all relate to things being too close to the top edge of the
board. These include
• J1, which is easily moved down a little
• The hole next to LED2, which is too close to the diodes (I solved
this by moving the diodes a little to the left.)
• LED10, which is less easy to fix
Because all the LEDs are on a 0.05-in. grid, if we move them all
down one grid position, then we will just move the problem to the bottom
edge of the board. Therefore, change the grid spacing to 0.025 in. (on
the View menu). Rip up everything (again), and move the LEDs away
from the edges and closer together. After the autorouter has been run
again, there are no air wires. Figure 5-23 shows the result.

FIGURE 5-23 Moving the LEDs closer together.
Run the DRC again. You may find an error relating to the ground
plane, complaining of “width.” You can ignore this.
Let’s now move on to the next stage in the preparation of our board
—sorting out the silk-screen layer.

Text on the Silk Screen
To make our board look really good, as well as making it easy to
assemble and see which component goes where, we need to sort out

the writing that will appear on the board, known as the silk screen. The
“tPlace” is the layer responsible for the silk screen, so let’s turn off some
of the layers to get a clear view of what we are working on.
Open the Layers list by clicking the Layers command, and select just
the layers “Pads,” “Dimension,” “tPlace,” “tOrigins,” “tNames,” and
“tValues.” Figure 5-24 shows the result of this.

FIGURE 5-24 Hiding layers.
This is actually quite a mess. Labels are in different-sized fonts, and
some are overlapped by the part outlines. This is quite common
because the parts that we have used have been provided by different

manufacturers all with their own standards of EAGLE part design. There
is some tidying up to be done.
For instance, there is not really any need to label every LED. Just
labeling LED1 and LED10 would be fine. To remove the extra labels, we
need to use the Smash command to separate the labels from the parts.
In fact, we are probably going to end up modifying, moving, or deleting
pretty much every label on the board.
Very few of the labels are in the correct place, so we may as well
smash them all by selecting the Smash command, selecting the Group
command, dragging over the whole board area, and from the right-click
menu selecting “Group: Smash.”
Having used Smash to separate the labels from the components
themselves, carry out the following actions to do some tidying up:
• Move the labels for LED10 and LED1 away from the holes.
• Delete the labels for LED2 through LED8.
• Delete the 1N4148 value on D1.
The fonts are all different, so we will use the Change tool to change
all the labels to be of size 0.05 and font type Vector. Generally, it is
better to use the Vector font everywhere on the board. This will
guarantee that the text on the actual board will look like the text in the
Board Editor.
Click on the Change command (the icon looks like a wrench).
Change only changes the last setting that you make in the Change
menu. On the menu, you will see “Size.” Change this to be 0.05. Select
the Group tool, select the whole board, and then right-click and do
“Group: Change.”
Repeat the process but setting each label to be the Vector font by
selecting “Font” and then “Vector” from the Change menu. Then again,
set the “Ratio” to be 12.
Finally, repeat the process one last time using the Change tool to set
the “Layer” of all the labels and component outlines to be “tPlace”
because this is the layer that we will use for the silk screen. Note that
this is probably best not done as a Group selection unless you are very
careful not to select the board outline, which is in the “Dimension” layer
and needs to remain on this layer.

Drag the labels about so that they don’t overlap. Note that to move,
you must have the Origins layer selected.
When you think everything is changed, go to the Layers menu and
deselect “tNames” and “tValue” so that only “tPlace,” “Dimension,” and
“Pads” are selected. The silk screening should now look something like
Figure 5-25. The board looks pretty good now.

FIGURE 5-25 The “tPlace” layer.
We can just add text to the tPlace layer using the Text command.
Use this command to add labels that identify the two terminals of J1.
Note that after selecting the Text command and entering the text in the

box, you can set the layer (“tPlace”) as well as the font size and
characteristics to match those we set earlier using the Parameter
toolbar. That is,
• Layer: tPlaceGND
• Size: 0.05
• Font: Vector
• Ratio: 12
Figure 5-26 shows the text added.

FIGURE 5-26 Labeling the terminals of J1.

Add Text to the Bottom
Having legible and well-placed labels will make the board much easier
to assemble. However, if you are just making one board for yourself,
then it does not matter too much.
The final step in this process is to add some text (a web address) to
the silk-screen layer on the bottom of the board (“bPlace”). EAGLE
always shows you the view looking down at the top layer, so writing on
the underside of the board will be mirrored in appearance. We have a lot

of text on the top, so use the Layers command to hide the “tPlace” layer.
Then use the Text command to add some text. Remember to select the
layer “bPlace” in the Layer dropdown on the Parameters toolbar. You
can see the result of this in Figure 5-27.

FIGURE 5-27 Adding text to the “bPlace” layer.
This completes the through-hole version of the board design. The
final version of the board, with “bPlace” hidden, is shown in Figure 5-28.
Next, we will look at a surface-mount version of the same design.

FIGURE 5-28 Final through-hole board layout.

Sound Meter Layout (Surface-Mount)
Having successfully made the through-hole version of the PCB, it is time
to look at producing a second, more modern version of the board that
uses surface-mount components.
In an ideal world, you would be able to use the same schematic but
with surface-mount device (SMD) package variants of the components.
Unfortunately, this is not possible in EAGLE. This does not mean,

however, that you have to start the whole design over. The process is to
take a copy of the schematic for the through-hole version and then go
through all the components, replacing the through-hole parts with SMD
equivalents.

Create a New Schematic and Board
Make sure that you have saved your through-hole schematic. You are
now going to save a copy of the schematic under a different name but in
the same project as the original. Thus, with the Schematic Editor open,
select the option “Save As…” Then save the schematic with the name
soundMeter_sm.sch, as shown in Figure 5-29. The addition of _sm
indicates that this is the surface-mount version. It has no special
significance as far as EAGLE is concerned; it just allows us to
distinguish the two versions.

FIGURE 5-29 Saving the schematic to copy it.

After saving the copy of the schematic, you will notice that the Title
field in the schematic’s frame will now also be updated to
soundMeter_sm, allowing us to tell our schematics apart should we
print them out.
Saving a copy of the schematic in this way will automatically create a
copy of the board called soundMeter_sm.brd that is linked to the
new schematic.

Swap Parts on the Schematic
The surface-mount schematic (soundMeter_sm.sch) is currently
exactly the same as the through-hole schematic. We now need to go
through the parts on the schematic and swap them for equivalent SMD
packages. The microphone and screw terminals will remain as throughhole devices.
Let’s start with IC1. Click the Replace command on the Schematic
Editor’s Command menu and then use “*7611*” as the search string
(Figure 5-30).

FIGURE 5-30 Replacing IC1.
Looking at the search results, you can see that the chip is available
as DIL08 (through hole) and SO08 (small-outline eight-pin SMT). So
select the SMT option, and hit “OK.” Now click on IC1 on the schematic.
It may seem like nothing has happened, but if you now look at the board
layout, you will see that IC2 now looks very different (Figure 5-31).

FIGURE 5-31 IC1 SMD package on the board layout.
You can also see that the routing is now, of course, all in a mess.
This is only going to get worse, so we may as well go back to air wires
by doing a group ripup. To do this, click on the Ripup command, then
click on the Group command, drag over the whole area of the board,
and right-click and slect the option “Ripup: Group.”
We may as well set the Board Editor back to a useful state ready for
layout by just showing the layers “Top,” “Bottom,” “Pads,” “Vias,”
“Unrouted,” “Dimension,” “tPlace,” and “tOrigin.” We were kind of lucky
with IC1 in that there was a drop-in SMD replacement using the same
pin names. Unfortunately, things are not quite so easy for IC2. Using the
Replace tool and a search string of “*3914V*” will find an SMD
equivalent of the chip, but when we try to do the replacement, we will get
an error message Date A in the old version of device
set LM3914N can’t be mapped to any gate in the new
version of this device set (neither by name nor
coordinates).
This is so because the part has been designed differently from the
original and uses different names for many of the pins. For example, the
connections to the LEDs are called LED1, LED2, and so on rather than
L1, L2, and so on (Figure 5-32).

FIGURE 5-32 SMD package for IC2.
In Chapter 11 you will see how to copy and modify parts from
libraries, but for now, we will reconcile ourselves to having to manually
replace IC2. This may seem a little daunting but is pretty
straightforward. A good tip is to print or take a screen capture of the
existing schematic to use as a reference before deleting IC2 prior to
replacing it.
Use the Delete command to remove IC2 from the schematic. This
will leave a big hole in the schematic but otherwise leave the net lines in
tact. Unfortunately, these will also be in the wrong positions when we
add in the SMD version of IC2, so make a Group delete of all the net

lines close to where the new IC2 will be added. Now use the Add
command to add in the new version of IC2 (search for “*3914V*”). The
result will look something like Figure 5-33.

FIGURE 5-33 Making room for the replacement IC2.
Using your screen capture or printout of the old schematic as a
reference, connect everything up again so that the schematic looks like
Figure 5-34. Note that the newly added IC2 will need to be dragged onto
the board because it will initially be placed outside its outline.

FIGURE 5-34 Revised Schematic with IC2 replaced.
You will also need to copy a V+ terminal and connect it to the V+ pin
of IC2.
Switch back to the schematic view, and replace the components as
per Table 5-2.

TABLE 5-2 SMD Replacements

As you replace the components with their SMD equivalents, switch
over to the board layout every now and then and notice how the
components have changed and how much more sparse the board is
looking.
Now that we have all the components swapped over to SMD
equivalents, we need to do a bit of tidying up and reroute the board.

Resize and Tidy the Board
You can pack a lot more into an SMD design than a through-hole
design. So we can take the opportunity to make the board a bit smaller
and move the LEDs closer together. The mounting holes on the first
design were also rather large, so we can reduce them to just two smaller
holes. Note that to be able to delete or move holes, you will need to
make the “Holes” layer visible.
It is easier to rearrange the components first and then adjust the size
of the board to just contain them. Rearrange the components on the
board until you are happy with the result, and then run the autorouter
again. When running the autorouter this time, change the routing grid to
10 mils when the Autorouting window opens. This will allow the router to
work around the smaller pitched pins of the SMD components. The final
result might look something like Figure 5-35.

FIGURE 5-35 Final SMD board layout.

Manual Layout
In the example layouts thus far, we have made use of the services of the
autorouter. It does a pretty good job and is certainly much quicker than
laying out the board by hand. However, it is a good idea to know how to
lay out a board manually for a number of reasons:
• The autorouter cannot always completely lay out a board that a
human mind can.

• For some circuits where the designer (that’s you) wants to keep
certain track lengths short and thick, a full manual layout usually
will yield better results.
• It’s fun. If you like puzzles, then you will probably enjoy laying out
a board by hand. It can be a fascinating challenge to lay out a
board so that all the tracks are as short and direct as possible with
a minimum number of vias. This is especially true when it’s a
board that the autorouter believes to be impossible—it’s you
against the machine!
I am going to lead you through laying out the through-hole version of
the sound meter project starting with the same component positions as
we used in the automated layout. So that both layouts can be available
to compare, you will find the design files for this called
soundMeter_manual.sch and soundMeter_manual.brd. The
staring point is the unrouted board, as shown in Figure 5-36.

FIGURE 5-36 Unrouted board.
As with the automated layout, we have kept the ground plane on the
bottom layer.
I like to start a manual layout with the power-supply nets. In this
design, many of these are provided by the ground plane, so we can start
by laying out the positive supply.
Once the Route tool has been selected, the Parameter toolbar will
display the options available to us. I described these options at the start
of this chapter. In Figure 5-37, I have set these parameters ready for
routing the positive power line on the top layer.

FIGURE 5-37 Routing toolbar.
The first thing to note is that the Layer dropdown is set to “1 Top.”
We then have to select the fourth of the “Wire bend” types. It does not
really matter which one you chose, but I find that this one produces nicelooking layouts. The miter radius is set to 0 because we do not need the
corners of the tracks to be rounded. The width is set to 0.02 because
this is the track width that we specified for the power-supply net class.
We have also opted to use square vias with the size set
automatically. But we will try to make a layout that does not need any
vias.
The only parts of the design that require significant current to flow
are the power supply to IC2 and the supply lines to each LED. In fact,
the supply to IC2 could be as much as 200 mA if all the LEDs are lit.
When using the Routing tool, start at a pad, and an air wire will
become highlighted along with the rest of that air wire’s net. This
indicates all the possible target points for your routing, so just move the
cursor along the route you want to take, left-clicking to make a waypoint
in the route. When you arrive at a valid destination, the route will stop
automatically, and you can go off and find another air wire to route.
If you go wrong, you can, of course, use the Undo command. If you
find an earlier mistake that you want to correct, the just select the Ripup
command, and click on the tracks that you want to route again and they
will revert to being air wires.
You can also modify the path of the routing using the Move
command if the track is just a little off and does not need complete
rerouting.
If you are concerned about just how wide your tracks need to be,
then
a
calculator
such
as
the
one
at
http://circuitcalculator.com/wordpress/2006/01/31/pcb-trace-widthcalculator/can be very helpful. Using this calculator, for a typical PCB
with 1 oz/ft2 of copper and a track 1 in. long and 20 mil wide will only

increase in temperature by 10°C when a current as large as 1.5 A is
flowing through it.
Thus the tracks on our circuit should barely get warm at all with
the currents we are using. For high-current circuits, though,
overheating of the tracks eventually will damage the circuit board
and cause it to fail because, ultimately, the copper will melt.
Figure 5-38 shows the positive supply to both ICs routed on the top
layer. Notice how we have kept the route of the positive supply from J1
to IC2 as direct as possible. We have also routed the supply to the LEDs
around the edge of the board so that the long track does not cut off a
section of the board near the top, which would then be difficult to route
around.

FIGURE 5-38 Routing the supply nets.
My next step is normally to route easy wins, that is, things such as
the connections between IC2 and the LEDs. Figure 5-39 shows these
routed on the bottom layer. Remember to change the layer in the
dropdown list to bottom and to change the width to 0.01 (10 mils).

FIGURE 5-39 Routing the LEDs.
At first, it will seem like the routing on the bottom layer is interfering
with the ground plane. When you press “Ratsnest,” gaps around the
tracks will magically open up.
There are some other obvious tracks to be laid around the center of
the board. In particular, we want the tracks for the feedback
components around IC1 (R3 and C1) to be kept short and close to IC1.
While we are routing on the top layer, let’s route anything we can do
without to take a long route around the board. So let’s complete them
using the top layer (Figure 5-40).

FIGURE 5-40 Routing the rest of the top layer.
We now have just one air wire (between IC1 and C4) that cannot be
easily routed on the top layer. Therefore, switching to the bottom layer,
we can add this in. The final result of the manual routing is shown in
Figure 5-41. You might like to compare this with the automatic routing
shown back in Figure 5-28.

FIGURE 5-41 Final manual layout.

Summary
In this chapter, we have designed two versions of the same board, one
using through-hole components and one using surface-mount
technology. Having produced our board design, the next logical step is
to generate the design files that will allow the boards to actually be
made. This is the topic of Chapter 6.

CHAPTER 6

Printed Circuit Board
Fabrication

A

t the end of Chapter 5, we had a finished board layout. We now
need to use that to generate the files that can be sent to a PCB
fabrication company that will in due course send us back some real
PCBs.
The CAM processor is the EAGLE module that converts the layers in
the EAGLE PCB design and produces the industry standard files
required to fabricate the PCBs. This chapter explains this process and
shows you how to produce such files using the example sound meter
project developed in Chapters 4 and 5.
Although you can create your own PCBs using photosensitive PCBs
and photo etching, it can be a messy and tricky business. It is also
relatively expensive because the developer and etchant chemicals do
not last. They are also toxic and difficult to dispose off because you
cannot simply wash them down the drain. Because you can have a
double-sided silk-screened drilled PCB made by a fabrication service
for a dollar or two per board, even for runs of 10 or fewer boards, unless
you are in a real hurry or just enjoy the process, there is little point in
making the boards yourself.
Having said that, later in this chapter we will look at photoetching
your own PCBs.

Gerber Files
Although some PCB fabrication services will accept EAGLE design files
directly, most require you to produce a set of what are called Gerber
files. These files are an industry standard for PCB fabrication. You will
normally be required to produce seven files.
Table 6-1 shows the files that you should submit. Each of the files
has a different extension that indicates its contents.
TABLE 6-1 Gerber File Types for CAM

Loading a CAM Job
The process of generating the CAM files is extremely configurable. You
can essentially use any of the layers as the basis for any of the
preceding Gerber files. This flexibility is very powerful but also allows
plenty of room for error if you are designing your own CAM configuration
from scratch.
By far the easiest way of generating the files is to use a CAM
configuration (called a CAM job) that has been designed by someone
else. In this book, we will use the excellent CAM job designed by
Sparkfun. This is available free of charge from Sparkfun at
https://github.com/sparkfun/SparkFun_Eagle_Settings/tree/master/cam.

To install this into EAGLE, download the file sfe-gerb274x.cam,
and copy it into the .cam folder in your EAGLE installation directory.

Running a CAM Job
To load the Sparkfun CAM job, select the “CAM Processor” option from
the File menu while you have the board you want to create Gerber files
for open. This will open the default CAM processor job, as shown in
Figure 6-1.

FIGURE 6-1 Default CAM job.

To open the Sparkfun CAM job, select the option “Job…” from the
“Open” option of the File menu on the CAM Processor window. Then
select sfe-gerb274x.cam from the list, and the Sparkfun CAM Job
will open up (Figure 6-2).

FIGURE 6-2 Sparkfun CAM job.
As you can see, the difference between the default CAM job and the
Sparkfun one is that the Sparkfun CAM job has a row of tabs, one to
generate each of the Gerber files. For example, the one shown in Figure
6-2 is labeled “Top Copper.” As you might expect, this is responsible for
generating the top copper Gerber layer (.GTL).

In the “Output” section of the tab, you can see the “Device” field with
a dropdown list next to it. This can be set to a number of other types of
CAM format. This should be left as GERBER_RS274X.
On the right-hand side of the tab is a list of layers, with some of the
layers highlighted. The highlighted layers are the ones that will become
copper when the CAM job is processed. The other tabs each work in a
similar way.
To generate the Gerber files, all we need to do is to hit the “Process
Job” button. The files will be generated and placed in the project folder.
Figure 6-3 shows the full set of generated files.

FIGURE 6-3 Generated Gerber files.

Measure Twice, Cut Once
At this point, it is extremely tempting to send the design files off to the
fabrication service. However, the old carpentry maxim, “Measure Twice,
Cut Once,” is very relevant here. There is nothing worse than submitting
a job to be made only to suddenly realize that you had forgotten to check
something and you would just have to pay for and await the return of a
set of useless boards. Having said that, if the boards are just for a
prototype, then a little surgery on incorrect boards is often possible,
cutting a track here and soldering a link there.
So now is the time to check your design once more to make sure
that both the electric rule checker (ERC) and the design rule checker
(DRC) have been run. Although these will catch a lot of problems, they
will not guard against a design that is simply faulty.
To illustrate this with a real problem, in my original design, I had D1
the wrong way around throughout the design, even in the schematic. I
didn’t actually catch this problem until the boards came back. However,
this was easily remedied by inserting the diode the “wrong” way around
on the PCB. I then had to retrace my steps and redo all the PCB
designs.
Another problem is that it is often difficult to know if the parts you
have picked out of the library have exactly the same package and pin
dimensions as the components that you have. If this is the case, then it
is well worth making a paper prototype. To do this, simply print out the
board layout and try poking the component leads through the holes to
make sure that everything fits. This will also highlight any problems with
the third dimension (height) that you never see using EAGLE. For
example, it may become apparent that one component is sticking up too
much. For example, the SMD version of the sound meter project
probably could benefit from having all the LEDs on the bottom of the
board so that there are no components sticking up above the LEDs,
allowing them to be mounted flush against a window on whatever box
the board is to be housed in. It’s surprising what a difference it makes
having something concrete to handle.

Submitting a Job to a PCB Service
Finally, it’s time to find a PCB service and send off the design files.
PCB services aimed at the maker are an ever-expanding and
changing area. Therefore, before selecting a service, do some research.
The main things that you need to consider are
• Cost. How much will it cost you for your project. If you are just
making a project for yourself, then you may only want one board.
Wasteful though it may be, you may find that you can get 10
boards from one supplier for less than the cost of one board from
another supplier.
• Speed. How long will it take for the boards to come back after
you have sent over the Gerber files? Wherever possible, look for
information on the electronic forums about the actual turnaround
time.
• Quality. These days you would be unlucky to receive a lowquality board. These things are made by high-quality machines,
and there is little practical to go wrong.
• Design rules. Each service will have its own design rules.
Sometimes these are available as a download for EAGLE, but I
would use a more universal set of design rules such as those of
Sparkfun and simply check that your track thicknesses and
spacings are greater than those specified for the service.
Generally, they will be.
These items tend to be a tradeoff, so if you want the boards fast,
they are unlikely to be low cost. The size of the board also often makes
a big difference. Some services simply charge by the square inch, and
others have certain cutoff sizes, so if you stay within certain dimensions,
the boards are much cheaper.
Most of the services you find for prototyping and small-batch
numbers will be so-called batch PCB services. These operate by
collecting together groups of PCB designs from lots of customers and
combining them into a single order. This requires the service to wait until
it has a sufficient number of boards to make it worth making a large PCB
panel containing all the individual designs that are cut away from each

other during manufacture. This means that the delay can be very
variable, and you may get your boards really quickly or it may take
weeks. Look for maximum and minimum service times. Also look at the
bigger services in this area, such as OSH Park, Itead Studio, and
Seeed Studio.

Follow the Instructions
Each service will have a detailed set of instructions on how to use their
service. Frankly, if they don’t have this, then you probably should steer
clear anyway. For example, we will look at the instructions provided by
IteadStudio’s Open PCB service. You can find the instructions for the
company’s 5- by 5-cm basic green PCB service at
http://imall.iteadstudio.com/open-pcb/pcbprototyping/im120418001.html.
In the section “Requirements on the Design and Gerber Files,” you
will find instructions on the dimensions of the board, which can be an
unusual shape but must fit within the square specified. It also tells you
the Gerber files they require.
Most important, it also tells you the minimum line width and text
height for silk screens of 6 and 32 mils, respectively. You would need
pretty good eyesight to see text that small.
As for the copper, you will see that instructions specify a
recommended width and separation of 8 mils. Because our thinnest
tracks are 10 mils, we should be just fine.
It is also worth noting that if you want to make a tiny PCB, it may be
a little irksome that because your design is at the minimum board size, it
may be tempting to do something called panelizing. This involves
putting multiple copies of the board design onto a single PCB design,
with a row of very close together holes separating the individual boards
so that they can be separated by snapping them off. This is usually not
allowed, although if you simply mark a line to cut on the silk-screen
layer, the service will not object.
You also may be given the choice of different board thicknesses and
finishes. Very small boards can be thin: 1 mm typically would be fine for
a board smaller than 50 mm2. For bigger boards, 1.6 mm is a common

thickness. There also may be options for being lead-free hot-air solder
leveling (HASL) and restriction of hazardous substances (RoHS). HASL
will make the boards easier to solder but is by no means essential.
RoHS is a European Union directive intended to improve the
environmental impact of electronic manufacture. If you plan to sell your
PCBs in Europe, you should conform to this option.
Depending on the service, you will either need to upload the files,
possibly enclosed in a zip file, or separate and associate with an order
number, which may require you to rename the files to include your order
code. Follow the instructions carefully.
The next step is that the files will undergo automated checks and will
then be prepared for fabrication. If you want to manufacture the boards
yourself, at home, then photoetching is the way to go.

Photoetching
Photoetching requires an ultraviolet (UV) light box, presensitized
copper-clad board, developer, and etchant. This is quite practical for
single-sided boards but requires more care for double-sided boards,
where you need to align both sides accurately.
WARNING Photoetching uses noxious chemicals as well as ultraviolet
light, which, while not seeming bright, can do all sorts of damage
to your eyes. Always observe the safety precautions specified on
the equipment and chemicals that you use.
Photoetching uses a transparency with an image of the PCB to be
created printed onto transparency film that is then placed over copperclad board that has been presensitized. These boards are not much
more expensive than plain boards. The board is then exposed to UV
light through the transparency film.
The board is then put into a tray of developer, and the image of the
PCB tracks will become visible on the board just like an old-fashioned
photograph being developed. Next, the board is etched in a chemical
that dissolves the copper except where it is protected by the

photographic image of the PCB tracks. Figure 6-4 shows the author’s
home-made setup for photoetching.

FIGURE 6-4 Homemade photoetching kit.
Rather than run the CAM processor, because there will be no solder
mask, silk screen, or other refinements, you can set the layers to just
display “Bottom” and then print the board, selecting the options for
“Solid” and “Black.” This is then printed onto transparency film (Figure
6-5).

FIGURE 6-5 Printing the layout.
The protective film is then peeled off the copper-clad board, and I
use a clip frame designed for photographs to press the transparency
against the board while it is exposed in the UV light box.
Having been exposed, the board then needs to be put in developer,
at which point the pattern on the board will start to appear. When
development has finished, the board is placed in etchant (usually ferric
chloride) that dissolves away the copper not protected by the developed
image.
Your etchant will last longer the less copper is dissolved from the
board, so use ground planes wherever possible.

When the board is finished, it will need to be drilled (if you are using
a through-hole design), for which you will need a very fine drill bit. A
diameter of 0.8 mm is ideal.

Milling PCBs
Low-cost desktop computer numerical control (CNC) routers offer a
chemical-free method of producing PCBs by using a normal copper-clad
PCB but then using a computer-controlled CNC router to cut away the
unwanted copper (Figure 6-6).

FIGURE 6-6 CNC router cutting a PCB.
The process is similar to the photoetching method. Once the PCB
artwork is done, the copper layer is dispatched to the router as if it were
a printer. It suffers from the same disadvantage that double-sided
boards are tricky. Because the copper has to be milled off the board
where it is not required, this is another technique that benefits from a
ground plane.

Toner Transfer

Another approach to homemade PCB manufacture is toner transfer. In
this approach, the PCB layout is printed onto glossy paper in a laser
printer. It is then ironed onto the copper-clad board using a clothes iron
(turn off the steam setting).
The toner then provides sufficient protection to the board to allow it to
be etched in the same way as photoetching.

Summary
I still get excited when a bubble-wrap package arrives with a set of shiny
PCBs ready for me to use. Chapter 7 will look at the next step of
soldering the conventional through-hole designs, hand soldering SMD
PCBs, and cooking your PCBs in an oven.

CHAPTER 7

Soldering

I

n this chapter, I will first give a simple introduction to soldering of
through-hole PCBs and then look at the more difficult but still perfectly
possible soldering of SMD boards.

Tools
You do not have to spend a lot of money on tools for soldering PCBs.
You can get perfectly good results with low-cost equipment. You
wouldn’t learn the violin on a Stradivarius, so don’t buy a top-end Weller
soldering station as your first soldering iron. Gradually improving your
tools is one of the joys of electronic construction. Where would the fun
be if you had the best of everything from day one?

General Tools
However you plan to do your construction, you will need certain tools
when soldering a PCB.
Snips and Pliers

Snips (essential) are used to cut the excess leads off components after
they have been soldered. They are sharp and allow you to get close to
the solder joint. They are also useful for stripping the insulation off wire.
Eventually, snips lose their sharpness and become blunt, especially if
they are abused by being used to cut steel guitar strings. I use very
cheap snips (Figure 7-1) and then replace them as soon as they
become blunt enough to be irritating to use.

FIGURE 7-1 Snips and pliers.
Long-nosed pliers last longer and are generally a useful tool to have
around. They can be used to grip a wire tightly while you strip the
insulation from it or for holding onto a components that you are trying to
desolder from a board without burning your fingers.

Multimeter
In a perfect world, everything would work the first time when you
powered it up. The reality is that life is not quite like that. A multimeter
(Figure 7-2) is an essential tool that will allow you to diagnose problems
with your designs.

FIGURE 7-2 Multimeter.
You do not need to spend a lot of money on a multimeter. A basic
entry-level multimeter costing just a few dollars will do just fine most of
the time. The most important setting that you will use most of the time is
direct-current (dc) volts in a range of 0 to 20 V.

It is also useful to have a dc current setting of up to a few hundred
milliamperes and a continuity test that buzzes when the test leads are
connected together. Everything else is just bells and whistles that you
might use once in a blue moon.
Most of the time, accuracy is pretty irrelevant too. When things go
wrong, it is usually a matter of orders of magnitude. Thus, if your
multimeter indicates a current of 10 mA when the current is actually 12
mA, that is usually good enough. It’s when the current is 100 mA and
you were expecting 10 mA there is a real problem.
Soldering Station
Although you can get by with a soldering iron that plugs directly into an
alternating-current (ac) outlet and has no way of adjusting the
temperature, it is worth spending a few extra dollars on something that
is thermostatically controlled and can accept fine-pointed tips (Figure 73). Make sure that you avoid anything advertised as being suitable for
plumbing use.

FIGURE 7-3 Low-cost soldering station.
When you are buying your soldering station, bear in mind that
eventually the tips (also called bits) will need replacing. Make sure that
replacements will remain available, or buy them when you buy the iron.
With the trend that components are getting smaller and smaller, you
probably will want a tip of perhaps 2 mm. There are many different tip
shapes, and choice is a matter of personal preference. Many people
prefer a chisel-shaped tip. A simple conical tip is another popular
choice.
If you plan to use lead-free solder, then temperature control is a
must. You can get away with a simple low-cost soldering iron if you are

using solder with lead in it because this type of solder is much easier to
work with (see next section).
WARNING It should go without saying that soldering irons get hot
enough to burn your skin. Be very careful, and always put the
soldering iron back into its holder as soon as you have finished
with it. Do not leave it on the desk to roll off, triggering the
automatic instinct to try to catch it when inevitably its lead gets
snagged and it falls off the desk. Soldering also produces fumes
from the rosin flux. It is a good idea to solder next to an open
window or use a fume extractor.
Solder
Traditionally, solder (Figure 7-4) has been made from tin and lead.
Usually, this is in the proportion of 60 percent tin and 40 percent lead.
The solder looks like a solid metal wire, but actually will normally have a
core of flux rosin that helps the lead to flow when it melts. Legislation on
the use of toxic chemicals has resulted in a reduction in the use of leadbased solder in favor of lead-free solder.

FIGURE 7-4 A reel of 0.7-mm tin, lead solder.
This type of solder is an alloy of tin, silver, copper, and small
amounts of other metals. It looks like lead solder and still has a rosin
core but is somewhat brittle and has a melting temperature of about
200°C (392°F) versus about 190°C (374°F) for leaded solder.
The differences do not end there. Many people find lead-free solder
much harder to work with. It does not flow as easily as lead solder.
Lead solder is still widely available, and unless you are producing a
product that you are going to sell, it is really a matter of personal
preference which type of solder you use. I know electronics enthusiasts
who have a roll of lead-free solder that they use most of the time and

then a roll of the “good stuff” (lead solder) that they use when they have
something tricky to solder.
Whatever type of solder you use, you will have another choice to
make: the gauge of the solder you buy. Two popular sizes are 0.7 and
1.2 mm in diameter. Use 0.7-mm or similar solder when integrated
circuit (IC) leads are close together, for example, because it is much
easier to use. If you need to solder some large terminals, you will find
yourself feeding in quite a length of the narrow solder to deliver the
required amount, but this is not really a problem.
Desoldering Braid
Desoldering braid (Figure 7-5) is not an essential tool for soldering, but it
can come in very handy from time to time. As well as its primary use for
“unsoldering” components, it is also great for mopping up excess
solder, especially when hand soldering SMDs.

FIGURE 7-5 Desoldering braid.

The braid is made of copper impregnated with flux that encourages
the solder to flow. Thus, when you place it between the pad from which
you want to remove the solder and the soldering iron tip, it soaks up the
solder like a sponge. Having done this, that section of braid cannot be
reused, and you snip it off and throw it away.
Tip Cleaner
When you solder, it is very important that the tip of the iron is clean, or
you will end up with blobs of solder that do not make a good joint. There
are two methods of cleaning the tip, both used with the soldering iron
hot. One is to use a damp sponge, and many soldering stations include
a sponge holder. The other is to use a container of brass shavings,
rather like a scouring pad (Figure 7-6).

FIGURE 7-6 Brass soldering iron tip cleaner.
The only real advantage of using a damp sponge is that it makes a
great hissing noise as the hot tip of the iron is rubbed across it. It does,
however, suffer from a number of disadvantages:

• The thermal shock of cooling the tip quickly as it comes into
contact with the wet sponge will shorten the life of the tip.
• You have to keep wetting the sponge and need a supply of water.

Tools for Surface-Mount Devices
When attempting surface-mount soldering by hand, you probably will
need all the equipment that I have just described for through-hole
soldering. In fact, you can get away with just using regular soldering
equipment. However, there are a number of special items that make
surface-mount soldering simpler.
Hot-Air Gun
A hot-air gun (Figure 7-7) has interchangeable nozzles of different sizes
that allow you to deliver a stream of hot air to an area of a circuit board.

FIGURE 7-7 Hot-air gun.
You can normally set both the temperature of this air and the flow
rate. You will need to control the flow rate because many SMD
components are so small that they can easily be blown away by the
pressure of air from a hot-air gun.
Solder Paste
When soldering SMDs, you can, with care, use regular solder. However,
if you are using a hot-air gun or a reflow oven, then you will need to use
solder paste (Figure 7-8). Solder paste is available in both lead-based

and lead-free varieties and suffers the same pros and cons as those
variants of regular solder.

FIGURE 7-8 Syringe of solder paste.
Solder paste is made from microscopic spheres of solder in a
suspension of flux. For industrial use, it is supplied in tubs, but for smallscale use, you can buy it in syringes ready for hand use. Solder paste
should be kept in a refrigerator but warmed up to room temperature
when you are read to use it.
WARNING Solder paste is a liquid, and if you are using lead-based
solder paste, it will easily find its way into the pores of your skin if
you get it on your fingers. Always wear latex gloves if, like me, you
are a bit messy and likely to get it on your fingers.
Tweezers
To be able to pick up and place SMDs onto a board, you will need
tweezers (Figure 7-9).

FIGURE 7-9 Nonmagnetic tweezers.
The tweezers should have a fine point and, most important, be
nonmagnetic. If they are even slightly magnetic, then SMDs will stick to
them because many contain ferrous metals.
Magnifier
It can be really hard to see what you are doing when you are working
with surface-mount technology (SMT). A large magnifying work lamp
such as that shown in Figure 7-10 can be a great help.

FIGURE 7-10 Magnifying work lamp.
These devices have a lighting ring around the lens that evenly
illuminates the board on which you are working. Because you are
looking through the lens with both eyes, all-important depth perception
is preserved.
Some people take this a stage further and use a binocular
microscope. These are available specifically for working on circuit
boards, and a zoom version will allow you both to work on boards and to
inspect them very closely for any problems. You should look for
something that magnifies between 5 and 20 times.
Reflow Oven
When developing single boards, hand soldering works okay. It is a little
tedious and time-consuming but can be done. The professional way to
attach SMT components to a board is to use a reflow oven.

The basic idea is that you put solder paste on the pads of the board,
place the components onto the pads, and then bake the entire board in
an oven to melt the solder paste and attach the components. We will see
how to do this in a later section.
Commercial reflow ovens are quite expensive, but many people
make their own using low-cost toaster ovens, such as the modified
device of the author’s shown in Figure 7-11.

FIGURE 7-11 Modified toaster oven.

WARNING These types of toaster ovens are often called “fire starters”
for good reason. They are very simple designs, with little in the
way of thermal insulation. This means that they get very hot, and if
you modify them, they can become even more dangerous. If you
decide to make one of these, never leave it unattended or
anywhere near anything that could burn.
The model shown in Figure 7-11 has been modified to replace the
thermostat with a proportional power control module, and a digital
thermometer has been added to allow the necessary accurate
monitoring and control of temperature.

Soldering Through-Hole PCBs
Having explored the various tools we will need, let’s start by learning
how to solder through-hole PCBs. It is a good idea to try to follow these
instructions on a PCB. You may wish to order one of the PCB designs
from earlier in this book. We will use the sound meter design. Having a
batch of PCBs means that you can sacrifice one or two on which to
practice your soldering.

Through-Hole Soldering Step by Step
The first thing to do is to turn on your soldering iron and set the
temperature. You will find conflicting advice for temperatures to use, but
I set my soldering iron to 280°C (536°F) for lead-based solder and to
310°C (590°F) for lead-free solder. Once you get your eye in with
soldering, you probably will want to work at a higher temperature, where
the solder melts a bit more quickly. The higher temperature will not
damage the components as long as you are quick.
When the soldering iron is up to temperature, clean it on the damp
sponge or brass tip cleaner. Once cleaned, it should look bright and
silvery.
The key to soldering is not to heat the solder but rather to use the
soldering iron to heat the place where you want to solder and then feed

solder onto that junction so that it melts and flows over the pad and the
component lead. Figure 7-12 shows the steps involved in soldering the
resistor leads.

FIGURE 7-12 Soldering a resistor.
First, push the component leads through their holes, and turn the
PCB on its back (Figure 7-12a); then hold the tip of the soldering iron to
the junction of the pad and the lead. Next, feed solder into the joint so
that it flows all around the lead and covers the pad (Figure 7-12b). Once
it has flowed all around, you can stop adding solder and move the tip
away. You do not want the pad to be heaped high with solder. The
solder ideally should form a nice “mountain” of solder around the lead
(Figure 7-12c). Finally, you can snip off the excess lead (Figure 7-12d
and e).
When soldering components onto a PCB, you can make life much
easier for yourself if you start with the components that lie closest to the
surface of the board. In this way, when you turn the board on its back,
the weight of the board will keep the components pressed against the
board.
If you make a mistake and find yourself needing to desolder a joint,
then Figure 7-13 shows the steps you should take.

FIGURE 7-13 Desoldering.
If the board was soldered some time ago, then you might find that it
is quite hard to desolder. Actually heating it and adding a bit of solder
could make it easier to desolder the component. Thus, after optionally
resoldering the joint as described earlier, place an unused end of the
soldering braid against the joint (Figure 7-13a), and then press it down
onto the solder pad using the tip of the soldering iron (Figure 7-13b). As
the solder melts, it should be drawn into the solder braid. You will be
lucky to draw off all the solder in one go, so most likely you will need to
snip off the now-solder-covered end of the braid and repeat the process
of pressing it against the joint. Eventually, you should have most of the
solder removed, and the joint will look like Figure 7-13c.
Repeat this for the other lead or leads of the component. If you are
very lucky, you will just be able to wait until the component has cooled
and then gently pull the component back through the hole from the top.
However, it is more likely than not that there will still be a little solder

holding the component in place. If this is the case, then hold one
component lead from the top side with long-nosed pliers, and heat the
pad from underneath while applying a gentle pull on the lead to pull it
back through. If you cannot get to the lead and you don’t mind breaking
the component, then snip it in half or snip the lead off on the top to make
it easier to pull through.
All this means that you are likely to be heating the board for a while,
which can make it look scruffy or even damage the board. Pulling the
lead through with force is also likely to damage the PCB, and ultimately,
too much heat will eventually cause the pad to separate from the board.

SMD Hand Soldering
As long as the SMDs you use are at the larger end of the size scale and
have pins on the edges of the device rather than on the underside, then
they can be soldered relatively easily using a regular soldering iron. The
main problem is that they are so light, and because they do not have
leads projecting through the holes, there is nothing to hold them in place
when you try to solder them.

Soldering Two- and Three-Legged
Components
The sequence of steps to solder a 1206 resistor into place is shown in
Figure 7-14.

FIGURE 7-14 Using a soldering iron on an SMT resistor.
This is one of those situations where you would really benefit from
having three hands—one to hold the soldering iron, one to hold the
tweezers to keep the SMD in place, and one to apply the solder. If you
do not have three hands, then a good trick is to place a small mound of
solder on one of the pads (Figure 7-14a) and then, while holding the
SMD in place with the tip of your tweezers, press its lead into the little
solder mound (Figure 7-14b) with the tip of your iron. The SMD will now
stay in place without the need of the tweezers as you solder the other
end normally (Figure 7-14c). It’s then usually a good idea to touch the
first end with the iron and a little solder just to freshen it up.

An alternative technique is to place solder paste onto the pads, hold
the SMD in place with the tip of your tweezers, and then touch the tip of
the iron to each lead until the solder paste beneath melts.

Soldering IC Packages
The preceding approach works just fine for two- and three-legged
devices, but when it comes to ICs, the process can become more tricky.
You can try the conventional soldering iron approach, pinning the IC
down with one corner pin and then carefully soldering the remainder of
the leads, but often the solder will make unwanted bridges between the
pins.
A good trick is not to worry too much about those bridges, but when
you have finished soldering, lay desoldering braid along the row of pins
and heat along the whole length to remove the excess solder. This is
shown in Figure 7-15.

FIGURE 7-15 Hand soldering an SMT IC.

SMT with Hot-Air Gun
Generally speaking, it is much easier to solder SMDs with solder paste
and a hot-air gun than with a soldering iron.

Soldering Two- and Three-Legged
Components
The steps for soldering with solder paste and a hot-air gun are
illustrated in Figure 7-16.

FIGURE 7-16 Soldering with a hot-air gun.
First, place a small amount of solder paste on each pad. You can
either squeeze it out through the syringe needle or use clean gooey
paste, wiping away any crusty paste from the end of the syringe before
you start (Figure 7-16a). Occasionally, I find a wooden toothpick to be
useful for spreading the paste around a bit. Do not worry if it is a little
untidy; when it melts, surface tension will cause it to pull back onto the
solder pad.
Next, using your tweezers, place the component onto the pads
(Figure 7-16b). Now fit a small nozzle onto your hot-air gun, set the
temperature to 280°C (536°F) for lead-based solder and 310°C

(590°F) for lead-free solder, and set the flow rate to perhaps onequarter of full power. When the air gun is up to temperature, pin the
component down with the tip of your tweezers, and then play the hot-air
gun over the component and its leads until the solder paste melts
(Figure 7-16c). When the solder melts, you will see it change from dull
gray to shiny silver and see it spread across the pad. While still pinning
down the component, put the hot-air gun safely back on its stand, and
after a second or two, when you are sure the solder has set, let go with
the tweezers.
If you do not hold the component in place with tweezers, then even
at very low airflows, the hot-air gun probably will blow the component
out of position.

Soldering IC Packages
Soldering ICs is very similar to the process just described. The only real
difference is that you may well want to clean up the connections using
soldering braid, as shown in Figure 7-15.

Packages with Hidden Connections
Some IC packages have inaccessible components on their underside.
To solder these, put paste on the pads as normal, and then while you
hold the IC in place with the tip of your tweezers, play the hot-air gun
over the whole IC socket until you feel like the solder has melted. If you
do this for too long, you may damage the chip.

Using a Reflow Oven
By far the quickest way to solder a SMT board of any complexity is to
use a reflow oven. It has the advantage that you only have to place the
components on top of the solder-pasted pads. Once this is done, the
whole board is cooked in the reflow oven, soldering all the components
in one go. What is more, once you gain confidence, you can cook a

whole batch of PCBs in one go. In any case, the cooking process only
takes a couple of minutes.
If you have a board that contains both surface-mount and throughhole components, then solder the surface-mount components first.

Get Everything Together
Solder paste will dry out after maybe half an hour, so before you do
anything, make sure that you have all the components that you need
and that you know exactly how they will fit onto the PCB (which way
around LEDs and so on are to be placed). I find it useful to actually put
the components onto the board without any paste just to make sure that
I have everything I need. I have the board on a plain sheet of paper, so
when I am sure that I have everything in place, I can move everything off
to one side, keeping the same relative positions of the components.
Another approach is to use labeled bottle caps or even just circles on
a sheet of paper labeled with the component part and/or value.

Applying Solder Paste
The low-tech way of applying solder paste is the same as I described
earlier when I looked at using a hot-air gun. Simply go round the board
adding a little blob of solder paste onto every pad on the PCB using the
syringe dispenser. This is the time-consuming bit.
The alternative to using a syringe is to use a stencil. Many PCB
manufacturing services will also (for a small extra fee) supply you with a
stencil. This can be made of thin steel, Mylar, or other materials and is
placed over the PCB. It masks out most of the PCB surface except for
the areas where solder paste needs to be deposited. You then place
some solder paste on the stencil and “squeegee” the solder paste into
all the holes in the mask. The excess solder paste is then scraped up
and the template removed, leaving solder paste on all the pads.
You can also make your own stencils, and if you search the Internet,
you will find various do-it-yourself (DIY) techniques for doing this using
laser or vinyl cutters or even transferring toner onto a cut-up drink can

that is then put in acid to dissolve away the holes and make the
template.
In this example, we are applying the solder paste by hand to the
fairly densely packed PCB that has a wide variety of different
component types. When the solder paste has been applied, the board
will look something like Figure 7-17.

FIGURE 7-17 Board prepared with solder paste.

Note what a poor job the author has done in supplying the solder
paste evenly. You should aim to be neater than this, but even with this
level of messiness, it is still likely to work.

Populating the Board
Starting with the smallest, lowest-lying components and at the far end of
the board, place components on the pads using tweezers until all the
components are in place (Figure 7-18).

FIGURE 7-18 Populated board.

The board is now ready for cooking.

Baking the Boards
If you have a proper reflow oven, then baking the boards is pretty much
as simple as putting them in and pressing a button. Behind the scenes,
there is some fairly careful temperature control going on.
Solder paste requires a certain profile of changing temperature over
time for it to do a good job of soldering components in a reflow oven. It
has to go through four distinct stages:
• Preheat. Activate the flux.
• Soak. Warm the whole board to just below the solder melting
point.
• Spike. Fast as you can, heat the board to above the melting point
to reflow the board.
• Cool. Cool everything down before the components and board
are damaged.
Each of this stages has precise temperatures and timings
associated with it. A commercial reflow oven will allow you to select from
preset profiles to match the paste you are using and control all aspects
of the heating. Figure 7-19 shows the temperature profile of some
leaded solder paste, and Figure 7-20 shows the board in the author’s
home-made oven.

FIGURE 7-19 Leaded solder paste reflow profile.

FIGURE 7-20 Cooking the board.
Using a home-made device such as this will never be as reliable as
using a professional oven, but it is fine for prototyping. Making one of
these is dangerous and should only be undertaken if you really know
what you are doing. You can find instructions for doing this at the
following web pages:
• www.sparkfun.com/tutorials/60
• www.freetronics.com/pages/surface-mount-soldering-with-atoaster-oven#.Us_cUGRdVyF

Both these tutorials describe how to manage the temperature by
hand without the need for a complex controller. The final board is shown
in Figure 7-21. You can see that the LED has moved a little. This is an
effect of my cavalier application of solder paste but can be easily
corrected with a little hand soldering.

FIGURE 7-21 Final board.
Before you power up any board that you have made, you need to go
over the whole thing very carefully with a magnifying glass to check that
there are no accidental solder bridges and that all the pins are soldered

to pads. Be especially careful around SMT ICs. You can mop up excess
solder causing bridges using desoldering braid.
Depending on the solder paste that you used, you also may find little
patches of flux and even tiny balls of solder on the board. I have a soft
toothbrush that I use just to brush over the board. This will also highlight
any loose components by brushing them off the board. This can be
improved if you look for no-clean solder paste.

Summary
In this chapter we examined a few techniques for soldering components
onto your PCB. Soldering is one of those skills that improves with
practice, so never commit to too much on your first attempts. Start with
something simple that you are prepared to throw away, and then work
up. It is also not a bad idea to start with a simple soldering kit to get
some practice.
In Chapter 8, we will follow an end-to-end example, designing and
then building an Arduino shield.

CHAPTER 8

Example: An Arduino Shield

I

n this chapter, you will learn how to use EAGLE to design a plug-in
shield for the popular Arduino microcontroller board. The design will use
a mixture of SMDs and through-hole devices. By following this example,
you will learn how to design your own Arduino shields.
The example developed is for a four-digit, seven-segment LED
display with a few extras in the form of a real-time clock chip, a piezo
buzzer, and a rotary encoder. The shield could be used by those
experimenting with making their own alarm clock or timer of some kind.

Introducing Arduino
Figure 8-1 shows an Arduino Uno board. This is the most popular of the
Arduino range of microcontroller boards.

FIGURE 8-1 An Arduino Uno.
The board has two rows of sockets on either side, and a wide range
of plug-in shields are available that are the same size as the Arduino
board but fit over the top of it and add extra features. Among other
things, there are shields for Ethernet interfacing, controlling motors, and
various kinds of displays.

Shield Design

When designing a shield, before wading into the schematic design, it is
usually a good idea to think about exactly what the shield will do. In this
case, we could set down the design goals of the shield as follows:
• A top shield; that is, no shields stacked on top of it
• Attractive design with retro four-digit, seven-segment display
• Real-time clock (RTC) chip
• Buzzer
• Rotary encoder with push switch
• Two-pin header output for connection to a relay module

Arduino R3 Shield Template
Adafruit has created an EAGLE part for making a shield for the latest
version of the Arduino Uno (the R3 at the time of writing). To use this,
you will need to download and install the Adafruit EAGLE library. This is
well worth doing anyway because there are lots of other useful things in
the library.
If you did not install this library back in Chapter 1, then download the
file adafruit.lbr from https://github.com/adafruit/Adafruit-EagleLibrary/blob/master/adafruit.lbr. Right click on the “Raw” button, and
save the file to the .lbr folder in your EAGLE installation folder. You will
then need to restart EAGLE.

A Four-Digit LED Example
Now that we have clarified what the board will do, create a new project
(called TimerShield) and then a new schematic within the project also
called TimerShield (see Chapter 2).

Schematic

First, let’s add a letter-sized frame into which we can add our
components. This step is obviously optional, but it does lend a certain
air of professionalism to the design and is expected if you are going to
be releasing the design to others, say, as an open-source hardware
(OSH) design, as is the case for this shield.
You can find the frame part in the Sparkfun Aesthetics library, where
it is called FRAME_LETTER. Use the Text tool to add some text over the
“Design by” and “REV” fields. Before you drop the text over the field,
change the layer in the Action toolbar to be layer “94 – Symbols.” You
probably also want to set the font size using the “Size” dropdown in the
Action toolbar.
My prefered way of designing a schematic is to first add all the key
large components that I am going to need and then move and rotate
them into well-spaced positions. I then add in all the smaller components
such as resistors and capacitors.
In this case, this means adding the components listed in Table 8-1 to
the schematic.
TABLE 8-1 Key Components

After adding the components, set their names as shown in Table 81, and move them around and rotate them so that there is room for the
extra components. Also add in the GND and 5-V power supplies. There
are many of these in the libraries; I picked the ones from the Sparkfun
Aesthetics library.
Aim for an arrangement that looks something like Figure 8-2.

FIGURE 8-2 Initial schematic with key components.
Turning our attention to the more minor components, there is going
to be an NPN transistor for each of the cathodes of the four digits and
accompanying base resistors. There will also be current-limitting
resistors for each of the eight anodes, as well as the apostrophy and
colon anodes.
Add the components as listed in Table 8-2.

TABLE 8-2 Remaining Components

You will need to flip the transistors using the Mirror command so that
they are facing the correct way around for the base to be closer to the
Arduino. I also used the Smash command on the transistors to put the
Name label closer to the symbol. Rather than add the four transistors
using the Add command, it is quicker to add one transistor, mirror it,
smash and move the label closer, and then use the Copy command to
duplicate it three times. The same is true of the resistors of each value.
So just add one resistor, set its value to 1 kΩ, and then copy it three
times for R1 to R4, and then do the same for the other resistor values.
Also change the values of the resistors as per Table 8-2.
When all the components are on the schematic, the design should
look something like Figure 8-3.

FIGURE 8-3 All the components added.
We now just need to add all the nets to the schematic. For a
schematic such as this, it is probably best to connect up the
components in a certain area (perhaps around IC1) and until it looks like
everything is connected that should be connected.
When working on a particular area, it helps to zoom in tight so that
you can see what you are doing. Note that the display used is in real life
slightly different from the library part. In fact, the colon and apostrophe
LEDs have their anodes and cathodes swapped over. Thus, use Figure
8-4 as a reference. In Chapter 11, we will use this as an example of how
you can modify a part.

FIGURE 8-4 Full schematic.
Once all the nets have been wired up, the schematic should look like
Figure 8-4.
Sometimes, in a schematic, it is not practical to connect both ends of
a net with a line. For example, in Figure 8-4, the link between the
Arduino pin A0 and the buzzer, JP1, and the apostrophe cathode are a
long way apart. I could have drawn a line between the two areas of the
schematic, but instead I have used the Label tool. To do this, you need
to

• Make both ends of the net be the same net by setting them to the
same name with the Name tool. I called them A0 after the Arduino
pin.
• Make a short length of net just going to a blank area on the
schematic, where we are going to add a label. Do this for both
ends of the net.
• Select the Label tool, and then click on the end of the net
segments you have just made to add the labels.
We should also set up a couple of net classes to set desired track
widths when we come to run the autorouter. Open the net class editor
from the Edit → Netclasses menu item, and set the default netclass
width to be 12 mils. Add another netclass (Nr 1) called “Power,” and set
the width to be 24 mils (Figure 8-5).

FIGURE 8-5 Adding a netclass.
This is by no means essential, but given that if all the segements of
one digit are lit, there could be over 100 mA flowing through the
collector-emitter path of the transistors. Thus, to change the net class of
the four nets that connect the collector of the transistor to DIG1 through
DIG4 on the display, you also should set any GND net path to be of
class “Power” too. The easy way to change these netclasses is to use
the Change command, select “Class” and then “1 Power,” and then
click on the nets you need to change.
Having drawn the schematic, it’s time to run the electric rule checker
(ERC). The result of this is shown in Figure 8-6.

FIGURE 8-6 ERC results.
At first sight, it seems like there are some things to worry about. But
actually there aren’t. The errors referring to power supplies all spring
from unmade connections to power on the Arduino. Because the
Arduino is providing power to the shield, not the other way around, we
can safely ignore these. None of the warnings are relevant either.

PCB Layout
When you first select the menu option “Switch to Board,” the board
layout that is subsequently generated will look something like Figure 87.

FIGURE 8-7 Initial layout editor mess.
As you can see, as well as the shield outline in the “Dimension”
layer, there is also a default rectangular board area with the layout origin
at its bottom-left corner. This rectangular board can be deleted and the
Arduino shield board moved so that the origin is at its bottom-left corner.
We can now start dragging the components onto the board, starting
with the display and rotary encoder, which we want to be fairly central to
the board. We can also position the battery holder over to the right edge
of the board, rotating it so that the battery can be easily replaced.
The same argument applies to the screw terminal, which is located
on the left of the board where the other Arduino leads for USB and

power are attached so that all the leads are on one side and easy to
access.
While giving the key components their initial positions, we also need
to consider what is going on beneath the board. For example, the
Arduino Uno has a metal USB socket in the top-left corner (see Figure
8-1). So we do not want any through-hole leads immediately above that,
which might make contact with the metal of the socket. The same
applies to the center of the right-hand edge of the shield, where there is
a six-pin ICSP header poking up from the Arduino. This is another
reason why it is a good location for the surface-mount battery holder to
be mounted on the top side.
With the key components positioned, the board will look something
like Figure 8-8.

FIGURE 8-8 Key components positioned on the board.

We now need to drag on all the transistors and resistors. Because
most of the “Digital IO” pins at the top of the board will have a resistor
attached to them, drag over the appropriate resistors, positioning them
under their input-output (IO) pin and rotating them as appropriate.
The transistors can be placed within the outline for the display.
Because the display stands a little off the PCB, they can be on the top
layer.
Figure 8-9 shows all the components on the board. Note that the air
wires around the transistors seemed to be crossing over rather a lot, so
they were rotated. It was also noticed that the buzzer has a polarity and
that the positive (+) connection was currently to ground. The pins were
swapped over in the schematic.

FIGURE 8-9 All the components on the shield.
We will add a ground plane to both the bottom and top layers.
Remember, you do this using the Polygon tool, first setting the layer to
“Bottom.” To get this to follow the shape of the board, you will also need
to change the line style to a simple straight line rather than the normal
orthogonal (right-angle) line style. This is next to the dropdown layer
choice, once the Polygon command has been selected. Having drawn
the polygon, use the Name command to set the name to be GND, and
then hit the Ratsnest command to see the effect. Repeat this whole
process but on the top layer. Because there are through-hole

connections such as the GND connection of the screw terminal, there
will automatically be a link between the two ground planes.
Run the autorouter, changing the routing grid to 25 mils before
running. It should route 100 percent and produce a layout like that in
Figure 8-10.

FIGURE 8-10 A routed layout.
We need to tidy up all the text on the board. We want any text that is
to appear to be on the tPlace layer. So use the Smash command to
separate all the labels from their parts, and then use the Change
command to set the layer of the text that you want to keep to be tPlace.

Now use the Change command to make all the labels a Vector font
and then set their size to 0.032.
Because this is an OSH project, we should also put the OSH logo on
the board. This is a rare occasion where we can add a part to the
Layout Editor rather than the Schematic Editor. Select the Add
command, and then search for *OSH* in the component library and
select the icon OSH-LOGO-L.
Also check for anything that is in the “tDocu” layer that you want to
appear on the silk screen of the finished board. Because some parts
such as the buzzer have their outline on the “tDocu” layer, we can just
add the “tDocu” layer to the CAM job before we run it. We can also add
some text for a URL next to the logo using the Text tool.
One of the problems with using an Arduino shield is that of
documentation—knowing which of the Arduino pins are used and for
what. A great place for this documentation is on the board itself,
perhaps in the form of a little table. To draw this, it helps to set the grid
to, say, 0.01 mil. Remember to set the layer of the lines to be “tPlace,”
and a line width of about 0.05 mil will be about right.
We can check what will appear on the silk screen of the board by
hiding all the layers except “tPlace” and “tDocu.” It is also useful to
show “Pads,” “Vias,” and “Dimension” (Figure 8-11). The small cross
marks next to each label will not appear on the final silk screen.

FIGURE 8-11 Checking the silk-screen appearance.
With a couple more labels added for JP1, the final board layout will
look something like Figure 8-12.

FIGURE 8-12 Final board layout.

Fabrication
To generate the Gerber files for fabrication, we will use the Sparkfun
CAM job that we saw in Chapter 6. However, having opened the CAM
job, go to the “Top Silk Screen” tab and select the “tDocu” layer so that
both the “tPlace” and “tDocu” layers are selected (Figure 8-13).

FIGURE 8-13 Selecting the “tDocu” layer in the CAM job.
The bounding rectangle for a shield board such as this is 2.7 × 2.1
in. (68 × 53 mm). If you shop around, you should be able to buy five
boards for around $20.

Summary
If you are interested in making this shield, be aware that it is as yet
untested. The LED display used has a manufacturer’s ID of

TDCG1060M and is available from Mouser and Digikey.
In this chapter we have looked at designing an Arduino shield using
EAGLE. In Chapter 9, we will look at another example project, this time
building an interface board for the Raspberry Pi single-board computer.

CHAPTER 9

A Raspberry Pi Expansion
Board

I

n this chapter, we will look in detail at another of the author’s opensource hardware (OSH) projects, specifically, version two of the
RaspiRobot board (www.raspirobot.com). This board (Figure 9-1) is
designed to allow a Raspberry Pi single-board computer to be powered
by batteries and also to control two direct-current (dc) motors. The
board has a number of interfaces including to an HC-SR-04 ultrasonic
range finder, a 5V I2C interface designed to easily accommodate
displays and other I2C devices, and a pair of open-collector outputs.

FIGURE 9-1 The RaspiRobot board version 2.
In following this design, you will learn how to develop your own addon boards for the Raspberry Pi.

Design Considerations
The board is interesting from a design point of view because it uses a
switched-mode power-supply chip that has very specific routing
requirements. The board also uses a mixture of both through-hole and

surface-mount devices. Figure 9-2 shows a block diagram for the
design.

FIGURE 9-2 Block diagram for the RaspiRobot board.
The round objects are external to the RaspiRobot board, and the
rectangular blocks are part of the board. This type of diagram can be
very useful for setting the context of the project and understanding how
it will interface with other parts of the system.

The Schematic

There is nothing particularly interesting about the schematic (Figure 93), so we will not dwell on it for long.

FIGURE 9-3 Final schematic.
One quite common pattern in the schematic design is worth
mentioning, and that is the separating out of the power-supply section of
the board. This has the components for the power supply itself and the
decoupling capacitors (C3 and C4) on their own. Separating the powersupply section of the board like this is a lot clearer than adding nets as
lines between all the components.

The Raspberry Pi, to which the board will be attached, is
represented in the schematic as a 2- by 13-in. socket header.

The Board
The board was designed using a mixture of manual and automated
layout. Figure 9-4 shows the initial placement of the components.

FIGURE 9-4 Initial component placement.
In considering the board design, there are two areas where it is
worth some manual layout before we unleash the autorouter. These are
• The critical layout considerations for the power-supply chip IC2
and its associated components
• The power supply and outputs of the motor controller chip IC3

Laying Out the Power Supply

As you can see, the power-supply components take almost a third of the
right-hand side of the board. The switched-mode power supply is based
around the LM2596S chip. The datasheet for this integrated circuit (IC)
indicates that there are certain paths between its associated
components that need to be as short and low resistance as possible;
otherwise, instability will result. There are also some fairly large currents
flowing here. Figure 9-5 shows the relevant part of the datasheet
indicating the paths that need to be kept as short as possible.

FIGURE 9-5 Critical connections on the LM2596S.
As the note in the datasheet states, a ground-plane construction is
ideal, and we will use this for much of the power-supply area, with some
short and thick tracks for the areas not connected by the ground plane.
We will use a ground plane over the whole bottom layer and a
second ground plane around IC2 D1, C1, and C2. The inductor does not
have a connection to GND because it will be connected to pins of IC2,
which must be on the top layer; thus there is little point in extending the
ground plane up to L1. Figure 9-6 shows the board with the two ground
planes added. Note how I have added a grid of vias to link the two
ground planes.

FIGURE 9-6 Adding ground planes.
This figure indicates that the connections between L1 and IC2 are
not critical, but common sense dictates that these tracks will be carrying
significant current, so let’s start by routing them with some fairly thick
tracks (40 mils). The connection between L1 and D1 is also marked as
critical, so let’s do the same for that connection. This last net also
connects to pin 2 of IC2. This is handily close to D1, but if we used 40
mils, we would be getting close to neighboring pins of IC2, so for this
short track the width was dropped to 32 mils.
While we are dealing with the high-current tracks, let’s also add in
the track between Vin, C1, and pin 1 of IC2. Again, let’s make these in

40-mil width. Remember to keep clicking the Ratsnest command when
routing through the top ground plane. The result of these routings is
shown in Figure 9-7.

FIGURE 9-7 Routing the power supply.
Referring again to Figure 9-5, pin 4 of IC2 is a feedback signal. It
measures the voltage being output. This will not be carrying any
significant current, but the datasheet indicates that it should be kept
away from the inductor. This track can just travel out horizontally from
pin 4 of IC2. It does not need to be thick, but it does need to get past the

track on the top layer from C2 to L1. We can do this by hopping under it
using a pair of vias.
When routing from one layer to another, do not place the vias first.
They will be placed automatically for you as you switch layers. This is
illustrated in Figure 9-8.

FIGURE 9-8 Routing across layers.
First, set the width to 10 mils, and start making the track from IC2
pin 4 on the top layer (Figure 9-8a). When you get halfway to the vertical
track that we want to go under, left-click the mouse. This is where the
via will go when we switch layers. Thus, without changing away from the
Routing tool, move the mouse up to the layer dropdown and select the
bottom layer. Move the track on a little further to the right. You will see
that it is now routing on the bottom layer (Figure 9-8b). The via has not
yet appeared, but it will soon.
Almost immediately we will need to swap layers again, so left-click
the mouse where you want the via, and then select the top layer again.
At this point, the first via will appear (Figure 9-8c). Finally, complete the
track, routing it to the right-most vertical track, and both vias will be
visible. Click on “Ratsnest” to make a gap around the track on the

bottom layer so that it is not merged with the bottom ground plane
(Figure 9-8d).

Laying Out the Power and Motor Tracks
The other area of the board that is worth manually routing concerns the
other high-current tracks, that is, the tracks from IC3 to the screw
terminals that provide power to the motors and also the regulated 5-V
line that provides power to the Raspberry Pi. Again, the width is chosen
to be as wide as can be easily accommodated. In some places, this
width is reduced midway along the track as it nears a pad. Figure 9-9
shows the final board with these air wires routed and the remainder of
the board routed using the autorouter.

FIGURE 9-9 Final board layout.

Summary
In this second example chapter we have learned about routing with a
mixture of manual routing and the autorouter. In Chapter 10, we will look
at how you can interact with EAGLE using text commands and then
extend this to automate what would otherwise be tedious and repetitive
tasks using scripts and user-language programs (ULPs).

CHAPTER 10

Commands, Scripts, and UserLanguage Programs

S

ometimes, when designing an electronic project in EAGLE, you
will come across activities that are repetitive or that you seem to need to
do for every project you start. It would be nice to be able to automate
such activities and save yourself some time.
Fortunately for us, EAGLE includes technology to do just such
automations. Scripts are simple lists of text commands to be invoked
and are useful enough. However, EAGLE also includes a user-language
program (ULP) language. This is a fully featured programming language
that allows you to branch off and do different things under different
circumstances or repeat certain instructions a number of times in a loop.
For example, later we will look at how you can use a ULP to
automatically smash all the parts on a schematic.
Ultimately, whether you use a ULP language or a simpler script, the
end result will be the invocation of commands, and it is here that we will
start.

Commands

You may have noticed the command line beneath the toolbars. You can
type commands here that do the same things as you can otherwise
accomplish using your mouse. Figure 10-1 shows a command ready to
be run.

FIGURE 10-1 Entering commands.
Start a new project with a schematic, then enter the command add
R-US_VMTA55@rcl (0 0.1), and then hit “Return.” You will see a
resistor appear just above the origin. Let’s now examine this command.
The command is Add, and this can be specified in uppercase or
lowercase­—it doesn’t matter. You also can just use enough letters to
make the command unique—in this case, just a would work fine.
The next section of the command line specifies what is to be added.
In this case, it is the part R-US_VMTA55 in the library .rcl. Following
this are the coordinates where the part is to be placed.
Let’s add another resistor just above the last one using the
command

You should now have two resistors on the schematic, and you can
delete them by typing the following commands:

All the commands on the Command toolbar have text equivalents
that can be typed into the command line. You can find full
documentation on all these in the built-in help accessible from the Help
option on the Windows menu. Open the section called “Editor
Commands.”

The command line is also available on the Board Editor. You also
may have noticed the dropdown list on the right-hand side of the
command line. This contains a list of previous commands used. When
you select one of these, it will be copied into the command line, where
you can edit it before running it. You also can access previous
commands using the up-arrow on your keyboard.
Some people just prefer using the keyboard over a mouse and find
this way of working natural, but the real power of these commands is in
combining them into scripts and generating them from ULP languages.

Scripts
A script is just a list of commands held in a text file that you can then
run. EAGLE includes a set of script files that are ready to use. You will
find them in the .scr folder in your EAGLE installation folder.

Built-in Scripts
Let’s try out one of these scripts. The one you are going to try is called
euro.scr. You can browse all the scripts in the “Scripts” section of the
Control Panel. When you select one of the scripts in the list (Figure 102), a description of the script is displayed on the right-hand side of the
Control Panel.

FIGURE 10-2 Selecting a script in the Control Panel.
If you double-click on the script in the Control Panel list, it will be
opened in a text editor and will look something like this:

The three lines at the top starting with a # are just comment lines
that explain what the script does. It is a script to be run in the Board
Editor that creates a Euroboard. Euroboard is a standard size of board
sometimes also called a Eurocard.
Switch to the board layout (creating one if needed) for your example
project, and delete the existing wire rectangle in the “Dimension” layer.
To run the command, click on the small “SCR” icon on the toolbar. This
opens a dialog window from which you can select the script euro.scr.
When it has run, the board should look something like Figure 10-3.

FIGURE 10-3 Creating the dimensions for a Eurocard.

Writing a Script
If you have a section of design that you find yourself repeating often,
then you could make yourself a script that adds all the parts and
connects them up. For example, it is pretty common to use a 7805
voltage regulator and its accompanying capacitors in a circuit. You can
write a script that will add the necessary components and then connect
them up. This, of course, will take place in the Schematic Editor.

Probably the simplest way to do this is to enter the commands one at
a time into the command line and then transfer them a line at a time into
a Text Editor. Periodically, you can save the script file, delete everything
off the schematic, and then continue adding commands until it does
what you want.
To create a new script, select the option “New Script” from the File
menu in the Control Panel, as shown in Figure 10-4.

FIGURE 10-4 Creating a new script.
The logical place to start is with the 7805 itself. Wherever the
assembly of voltage regulator and capacitors is built, it is likely to be in
the wrong place. Thus it may as well be built over to the left, out of the
way, so that we can move it into place afterward.
The command to create the 7805 is

You probably will have to explore the library doing a bit of wild-card
searching to find the exact location of the component you need. Next,
we need to add two capacitors, as recommended in the 7805
datasheet. Make a note of the positions for these capacitors by moving
the cursor to where you want them to appear.

The values of these capacitors can be set using the following
commands:

To add in the nets, we again have to find the coordinates of the end
points and then use them in the following commands:

The module could do with symbols for GND and 5 V and then connect
all these together with nets. Here are the commands for this:

When it is all complete, the area of the schematic should look like
Figure 10-5.

FIGURE 10-5 A 7805 regulator assembly generated by script.
Save the file in the .scr folder, and then you can use it by clicking
the “SCR” button and selecting the script. You can download the script
from the book’s webpage at www.simonmonk.org.
Scripts are great for simple automation tasks, but they are not able
to do looping, branching, or other programming tasks. They also do not
allow you to find out things about the schematic before performing some
commands relating to the schematic. For example, you cannot select all
the resistors and then change their values. To do these more advanced
operations, you need to use ULPs.

User-Language Programs
The EAGLE ULP is a fully featured programming language with a C-like
syntax. If you are used to programming, then you will soon get the hang
of the syntax. It is beyond the scope of this book to teach programming
in EAGLE ULP, but we will touch on the basics so that you can use the
built-in ULPs and also understand a few basic techniques.

Running ULPs
EAGLE has a collection of ready-to-use ULPs. These are accessed
from a toolbar icon just next to the “SCR” button. This is labeled “ULP.”
When you click it, you will be presented with a dialog from which to
select the ULP that you want to run (Figure 10-6).

FIGURE 10-6 Running a ULP from the toolbar.
You can also access the ULPs from the EAGLE Control Panel
(Figure 10-7), and if you are not sure which ULP you want to run, then
this is a better place to do this because together with each ULP is a
description of exactly what it does.

FIGURE 10-7 Running a ULP from the Control Panel.
These ULPs serve a wide variety of purposes. The ULP selected in
Figure 10-8 will generate a bill of materials (BOM) from all the
components in a schematic. It will create a separate file detailing all the
parts you have used. To run it, right-click on the ULP name in the list,
and select the option “Run in Schematic.” The window shown in Figure
10-8 will appear, listing all the parts used and giving you the option to
save them in various different formats.

FIGURE 10-8 Running the BOM script.
Clearly, this is a long way from what is possible using simple scripts.
Effectively, you can add your own features to EAGLE using ULPs.

The ULP Language
Let’s take a look at one of the simpler ULPs (smash-all-sch.ulp).
This useful ULP applies the Smash command to every part on a
schematic. The code for this ULP is

Starting at the top of the file, there is a # usage marker. The
remainder of that line and the two lines that follow it specify the text that
will appear in the Control Panel when you browse for ULPs. As well as
plain text, this can also contain HTML; hence the <b> tag will make the
first line bold.
Next, two strings are defined. The string cmd will eventually contain
a whole script full of commands. These are not actually actioned by
EAGLE until the following line of code near the end of the file is run:

In other words, the whole ULP builds up a big string of text that is then
included in the Exit command that ends the execution of the script and
also invokes the command string supplied.
The string c is used as a temporary working string whose contents
will be built up and then appended to the main cmd string.
After the string declarations, there is a definition for a function
(visible). This function will make the schematic visible and display all
the relevant layers. It is called just before the script exits.
This ULP is designed to work on a schematic, and the ULP includes
a test to make sure that the window from which the ULP has been
invoked is actually a schematic. You will find this in the following line,
halfway down the program:

If you mentally close off the braces to find the else condition for this,
you will find the following lines right at the end of the file:

This displays a dialog window telling you that you are not in a schematic
window.
Assuming that the ULP is being run in a schematic window, we now
have a chunk of code that iterates over the schematic in a hierarchical
way constructing the command to be run. This uses a syntax that names
an object in the design’s internal model and then a variable that can be
used to access all instances of such objects. For example,

All the code inside the curly braces will be repeated for each schematic,
and the schematic whose turn it is can itself be accessed using the
variable S. There is only one schematic, so this syntax makes more
sense if we look a bit further down the program, where every sheet of a
schematic is iterated over and then within that every part on every sheet
using

Summary
In this chapter we have looked at using scripts and ULPs to automate
activities in EAGLE. The EAGLE ULP manual is some 130 pages long,
so we have only really scratched the surface of the language. You can
find
out
more
about
it
at
ftp://ftp.cadsoft.de/eagle/userfiles/doc/ulp_en.pdf. You will also find a
reference for ULP in Appendix C.
In Chapter 11, we will return to libraries and learn how to modify and
create our own libraries and parts.

CHAPTER 11
Creating Libraries and Parts

E

xperienced EAGLE users often find it useful to start building
their own library of components that they use frequently. This chapter
shows you how to do this and how to copy and modify components from
other libraries.
It is easier to copy and modify an existing component than to create
a new one entirely from scratch, so we will develop an example where
we modify the pad positioning of a part.

Creating a Library
Parts libraries are each held as a single file with the extension .lbr in
the lbr folder within the EAGLE installation directory. New libraries can
be added simply by copying .lbr files into this directory. In fact, we did
this back in Chapter 1 when we installed the Adafruit and Sparkfun
libraries. Component manufacturers and suppliers often have their own
libraries of components. Another similar library is available from
Seeedstudio (www.seeedstudio.com).
However, in this case, you are going to create your own library from
scratch. We will give it a general name, and if you do this, you probably
will find it to be a useful place to keep modified or new parts that you
create.

To create a new library, open the Control Panel window of EAGLE,
and then from the File menu, select the option to create a new library
(Figure 11-1).

FIGURE 11-1 Creating a new library.
This will open a new untitled Library Editor window. The first thing
you should do is save this using the Save command from the File menu
with the Library Editor as the current window. You will be prompted for
the name of a file. Call it

Copying a Device from Another Library
Later we will look at building a device (part) from scratch, but to start
with, we will copy an existing part from another library into our new

library. Later we will edit this device.
Copying a part is not quite as simple as selecting a part, doing Copy,
moving to the library where you want to have a copy of it, and doing
Paste. Instead, EAGLE has the concept of a current library. Because we
have just created a new library, this will be the current library. To copy
the part into the current library (“MyParts”), we first need to go and find
the part that we want to copy in the “Libraries” section of the Control
Panel.
The first part we are going to copy is the LED display module that we
used back in Chapter 8. You may remember that this had some
mislabeled pins. You will find this part in the Sparkfun “Displays” library,
where it is called 7-SEGMENT-4DIGIT-YOUNGSUN. Right-click on it,
and select the option “Copy to Library” (Figure 11-2).

FIGURE 11-2 Copying a part.
As soon as you do this, the part will appear in the Part Editor window
(Figure 11-3).

FIGURE 11-3 The Part Editor window.

The Part Editor
Let’s take a quick tour of the Part Editor window. The large editor area
shows the schematic view of the part (its symbol). To the bottom right,
there is a list of packages available for this symbol. This is showing two
entries, one normal and one with long pads. Above this is the package
as it would appear on the board layout.

You will notice that over on the left of the editor we have a Command
toolbar that operates on the same principal as the Schematic and Board
Editors but with a smaller set of commands available.

Devices, Symbols, and Packages
Before we start modifying this part, we need to understand a bit more
about how parts are organized in an EAGLE library. A device has a
symbol (this is shown in the schematic); it also has one or more
packages. These will appear on the board layout. The part as a whole is
represented as a device. The device links together the symbol and the
packages, as well as specifying the relationship between the pins on a
symbol and the pads on a package.
Symbols and packages are created independently and linked
together by devices, allowing the same package design to be used by a
number of different symbols.
In Figure 11-3, the Part Editor is showing the device. This same
editor window is also used when you want to edit the symbol or one of
the packages of the device. You will notice three new icons on the
toolbar to the right of the “Printer” icon that allow you to select the
element of the device that you want to edit.

Editing a Part
We need to fix the labels on this part because the anode and cathode of
the colon and apostrophe of the display are swapped over. You may be
wondering if this is a change to the pad names or to the symbol. Well,
the pad names are just named 1 to 16 on both packages, so the change
needs to be made in the linkage between the pin names on the symbol
and the pad names. This takes place for each package of the device.
So let’s start with the package 7-SEGMENT-4DIGIT-YOUNGSUN.
Select this in the list of packages, and then click the “Connect” button.
This will open the window shown in Figure 11-4.

FIGURE 11-4 Editing connections.
The rightmost of the three columns shows the current linkages
between pins and pads for that package. In this case, you can see that
APOS-A is linked to pad 10 and APOS-C is linked to pad 9. These
need swapping over, as do the associations between COL-A (pad 4)
and COL-C (pad 12). To sort this out, we first need to disconnect these
four connections. To do this, select each in turn, and click “Disconnect.”
This will have the effect of moving both the pins and the pads concerned
into the first two columns, as shown in Figure 11-5.

FIGURE 11-5 Rearranging pads and pins.
We now need to remake these links, but this time linking
• APOS-A to pad 9
• APOS-C to pad 10
• COL-A to pad 12
• COL-C to pad 4
This is done by selecting one pin from the first column and one pad
from the second column and then clicking “Connect.” So click APOS-A
and pad 9 and click “Connect.” Repeat for the other three links above.
When everything is connected, the Connection editor should look like
Figure 11-6, with everything back in the right-hand column.

FIGURE 11-6 The connections amended.
Finally, repeat this for the other package in the device, and then
save the device from the File menu.

Creating a New Part
To really get to grips with the Part Editor, we are now going to add a
completely new device to our library. The device we are going to add is
shown in Figure 11-7.

FIGURE 11-7 A 12AU7 triode tube.
This device is a vacuum tube (a double triode). The vacuum tube is
a device largely made redundant by transistors and integrated circuits
(ICs) but retaining a niche role in audio amplifier design, where it is used
by audiophiles for the low-frequency even harmonic distortion that many
people find gives an attractive color to music.
It is not a total surprise that this device is not currently included in the
libraries that ship with EAGLE, so we will make our own part for it,
especially because I intend to make myself a preamp using this device
and would like to design the PCB using EAGLE.

You
can
find
the
datasheet
for
www.wooaudio.com/docs/tube_data/12AU7.pdf.
The steps involved in making this part will be

this

tube

at

1. Make the package.
2. Make the symbol.
3. Make the device to link the two together.

Making a Package
If it is not already open, then open your “MyParts” library. To create a
new package, you need to click on the “Packages” icon on the toolbar.
This will open a window that shows the packages that we copied for the
LED display (Figure 11-8). In the field labeled “New,” enter the name
RETMA-9A. This is the name given to the package on the tube’s
datasheet. Hit the “Enter” key, and the Part Editor window will open on a
new file called RETMA-9A.pac. We will use this editor to create the
package.

FIGURE 11-8 Creating a new package.

The package footprint consists of nine pads arranged around a
circle with a diameter of 0.5 in. The pads are spaced out as if there are
10 pins but with one of the pads missing. A good technique is therefore
to draw a circle (that we can later delete) of diameter 0.5 in. and then
position the pads around it.
It does not really matter what layer we draw the circle on because we
are going to delete it later, but in this case, it is on “tPlace.” Because
there are effectively 10 pin positions, each pin will be 360/10 = 36
degrees from the next pin around the center of the package. If you use
the Mark tool and mark the origin of the package, then as well as
showing the X and Y coordinates of the cursor relative to the center of
the circle, it will also show the polar coordinates, that is, the distance
from the center and the angle. We can use this to position the pads at 0,
36, 72, and so on degrees around the circle (Figure 11-9). To do this,
use the Pad command from the Command toolbar. You can change the
diameter and drill to match the tube socket that you are going to use
before adding the pads. You will need to set the grid to be, say, 0.001 in.
in order to position the pads accurately.

FIGURE 11-9 Positioning pads.
The tube itself has a diameter of about 0.75 in., so let’s mark that
footprint by drawing a circle with that diameter in place of the 0.5-in.
circle, which we can now delete. Note that you probably will want to
reset the grid to 0.025 in.
The next step is to name all the pads. We are just going to name
these sequentially from 1 to 9 clockwise around the package. We now
need to add two pieces of text onto the package “>Name” and “Value.”
The text “>Name” should be placed on the “tNames” layer and “Value”
on the “tValues” layer. Once all this is complete, the package should
look something like Figure 11-10. Don’t forget to save it.

FIGURE 11-10 The completed package.

Making a Symbol
To make the symbol for the device, we are going to carry out a similar
process to making the package. However, one key difference is that this
tube is a dual triode; that is, it is a single glass envelope containing two
triodes. We therefore only need to create the symbol for one triode, and
we will see later how these can be added twice to the device as gates.
But first, let’s draw the symbol.

Create a new symbol called TRIODE by clicking on the “Symbol”
icon and then typing the name TRIODE in the “New” field and hitting the
“Enter” key. This will display a blank editor window for us to use on the
file TRIODE.symq. The circuit symbol for a triode is a circle containing
what are in essence three horizontal lines from top to bottom, the plate,
grid, and cathode. The grid is a dashed line, and the cathode has
turned-over corners. In any case, it is pretty easy to draw.
The size is pretty arbitrary, but I am going to make the symbol about
¾ in. wide because these will be the central components of the amplifier
that I intend to build. Draw the symbol on the “94 Symbols” layer using
the Circle and Wire commands. I used a wire width of 0.32 in. There
also need to be wires of 0.01 in. from each of the three lines out to the
edge of the circle. Figure 11-11 shows the remainder of the “Symbol”
layer drawing.

FIGURE 11-11 Drawing the triode symbol.
Just as we had to add pads to the package, we now have to add
pins to the symbol. Select the Pin command, and then select a style of
pin from the toolbar that does not include a line attached to the pin. That
is, select a style that is a simple circle (“Point”). The pins will need
renaming and their direction type setting. The most convenient way of
changing this for each pin is to use the Information tool.
Starting with the pin you added at the top of the symbol, select the
Information command, and then click on the pin. Then change the name
of the pin to PLATE, the direction to pass, and “Visible” to off, as
shown in Figure 11-12.

FIGURE 11-12 Changing a pin.
The various directions allowed for a pin are used by the electrical
result checker (ERC). Thus, for example, it will flag outputs being
connected together on a logic gate. In this case, we are specifying that
the pin is electrically speaking passive (pass). This isn’t really true, but
selecting this option will prevent any false warnings from the ERC.
Repeat this process for the GRID and CATHODE pins.
You will have noticed an area at the bottom of the parts window
suggesting that you Use the DESCRIPTION command to enter
a description of this object. To do this, click on the
“Description” hyperlink immediately above that message. This will enter
a new window into which you can enter a description of the symbol.
In addition to the two triodes, the tube also has three connections
used to provide power to the heater element, one of the connections
being a center tap. We therefore need to bring the three “power” pins
that we can collect together into a third symbol. Even though there are
two triodes in the glass tube, they have shared connections for the
heater power.
Create a new symbol, and call it HEATER_SUPPLY. Place three pins
on the design, and change their names to “HA,” “HC,” and “HB” (heater

A, B, and common). Pick a pin style with a bit of a tail on it. The end
result of this is shown in Figure 11-13.

FIGURE 11-13 Creating a heater supply symbol.

Making a Device
We have a package and a symbol for our valve, but we have not linked
the two or let EAGLE know that the package actually contains two triode
symbols. To do this, we need to create a device by clicking on the
“Devices” icon in the toolbar and then entering the name 12AU7 into the
“New” text field. In the view that then appears, we need to use the Add
tool to add two of the TRIODE symbols and one HEATER_SUPPLY
symbol to the main editor area.

Next, we need to add the package, so, in the bottom right of the
Editor Window, click on the “New” button, and select “RETMA-9A.” The
editor window should now look like Figure 11-14.

FIGURE 11-14 The device with symbols and package.
There is still no link between the pins on the symbols and the pads
on the package, so let’s make those connections by clicking on the
“Connect” button. After matching the pairs up using the datasheet, it will
look like Figure 11-15.

FIGURE 11-15 Making connections from pins to pads.
Our part is now complete. Don’t forget to save it. You can try adding
it to a schematic. Remember that because the device has a number of
gates, the first two times that you add it to the schematic, it will add a
triode symbol, and the third time it will add the heater supply symbol.
You can also switch over to make sure that the board layout looks okay
too. Figure 11-16 shows the device as used in a schematic.

FIGURE 11-16 Using the new device.
If you want to share the library containing the part, you can simply
pass on the “MyParts” library file that you will find in the lbr folder in
your EAGLE installation directory. Note that if you are planning on
sharing the part, you might want to give it a more specific name.

Summary

In this chapter, you have discovered how to create your own library, to
which you can either add modified packages, symbols, and devices or
create your own parts from scratch. Before creating a new part, it is
always worth an Internet search to see if someone else has already
made that part. Some component suppliers also provide an EAGLE
library for their products.

APPENDIX A

Resources

E

AGLE is a complex and powerful piece of software, and a
book of this size cannot explore every feature of this tool. In this
Appendix, you will find links to more resources that will help you to use
and learn more about this software.

Official Documentation
The official manual for EAGLE is available as a free download from
www.cadsoftusa.com/training/manuals. This is a large and
comprehensive manual that documents everything about EAGLE in a
very methodical manner. It is very much a reference book rather than a
“how to” book, so once you have mastered the basics, it will help you to
find chapter and verse on a particular feature of the software.

Forums
The largest and official forum for EAGLE can be found at
www.element14.com/community/community/knode/cadsoft_eagle/foru
ms/. It is very active and a useful resource. If you have a problem, try

searching, and you may well turn up an answer. If no answer is
forthcoming, then post something—people are happy to help.

Tutorials
This book has a tutorial and practical style, but sometimes seeing
someone actually do something can make things clearer. There are
many videos on using EAGLE. You will find lots of these by searching
on YouTube.
Jeremy Blum has produced an excellent series of videos on using
EAGLE that can be found at www.youtube.com/watch?
v=1AXwjZoyNno. Sparkfun also has a series of useful tutorials on
using EAGLE that you find at www.sparkfun.com/tutorials/115.

Sources of Library Parts
The official site is also a great place to go looking for libraries
(www.cadsoftusa.com/downloads/libraries). You can also upload your
own libraries to this site so that others can use them.

APPENDIX B

EAGLE Layers

The most commonly used layers are described in Chapters 4 and 5. The
following table provides a more complete list of the layers.

Layers Used in the Layout Editor
You will find more description on how to use the more common of these
layers in Chapter 4.

Layers Used in the Schematic Editor
See also Chapter 4 for more information on using these layers to create
schematic diagrams.

APPENDIXC

User-Language Program
Reference

A

lthough the user-language program (ULP) language is C-like, it
is not exactly C. For example, the equivalent to the C “float” type is
called “real” and there is no “boolean” type. This appendix gives a
summary of the ULP language, in particular where it differs from the C
syntax.
You will find information on using ULPs in Chapter 10. You will also
find the built-in help files of EAGLE (accessible from the Help menu)
useful.

Data Types
The following primitive types are defined.

Strings
The “string” data type is more like a Java “string” class than a C
character array. You can concatenate strings using the + operator and
also use a number of built-in functions to manipulate strings.

Arrays
Arrays use the same [ ] syntax as C, but can be created dynamically
from built-in functions, as the example below of splitting a string into a
string array illustrates.

Logical and Bitwise Operators
These are the same as C. So, bitwise “and” and “or” are “&” and “|”
respectively. Logical equivalents are: “&&” and “||”. The not operator is
“!” and xor id “^”.

Control Structures
These are the same as C. You have access to the usual control
structure commands such as “if”, “while”, “for”, “break”, etc.

Special Constants
A number of EAGLE specific constants are defined for the ULP.

Dialog Functions

The ULP language includes a number of built-in dialog types that you
can use in your programs.
• dlgDirectory—Prompts for a directory from the file system and
returns the path
• dlgFileOpen—Prompts for a file to open and returns the file path
• dlgMessageBox—Displays a message to the user
See the online help for the full syntax for these commands.

Other Built-in Functions
There are many other built-in functions available in the ULP language,
for tasks such as reading and writing files, performing HTTP requests,
and even manipulating XML. See the online documentation for these
functions in the built-in help system.

Index
Please note that index links point to page beginnings from the print
edition. Locations are approximate in e-readers, and you may need to
page down one or more times after clicking a link to get to the indexed
material.
References to figures are in italics.

Action toolbar, 59–61
Adafruit, installing libraries, 16–17
Add command, 64, 99
air wires, 36–37
Arc command, 66
Arduino shield, 179
fabrication, 192–193
R3 shield template, 180
shield design, 179–180
TimerShield project, 181–192
Arduino Uno board, 179, 180
Attributes command, 67, 102
Autorouting tool, 38, 39, 108–110
bits, 151
Blum, Jeremy, 238
Board Editor
Command toolbar, 94–103
layers, 93–94, 95

board layout, 36–40
boards, maximum size, 19
breadboard, solderless, 5–7
built-in scripts, 209–210
See also scripts
Bus command, 66
Bus Label command, 66
buses, 71–72
Cadsoft, 1
CAM jobs, 15, 192
loading, 138
running, 138–140
capacitors, 47
SMD capacitors, 48–49
through-hole capacitors, 47–48
Change command, 68, 102
Circles command, 66
circuit symbols, United States versus European, 41–42
Command toolbar (Board Editor), 94–103
Command toolbar (Schematic Editor), 61–70
commands
Board Editor, 96–103
Schematic Editor, 207–208
See also individual commands
components
adding, 24–31
buying, 56–57
deleting, 26, 27
dragging onto the board, 36–37
joining, 32–33
moving, 30, 31
rotating, 30, 31
computer numerical control (CNC) routers, 145–146

connectors, 54–56
coordinates, 37
Copy command, 63, 98
copying a device from another library, 220–222
creating a new project, 21–24
creating new parts, 225–235
default, 86
Delete command, 62, 97
design rule checker (DRC), 103, 113–117, 141
design rules, 15, 107–108, 142
installing the Sparkfun design rules, 17–18
desoldering, 162–164
See also soldering
desoldering braid, 153–154
devices, 222–223
making, 232–235
Dimension command, 70, 101
documentation, 237
documents folder, creating, 13–14
dual in-line (DIL) packages, 52
EAGLE Light Edition, 1
Control Panel, 14–15
first time running, 13–15
installing, 9–13
license, 19
limitations, 18–19
loading an example project, 15
Easily Applicable Graphical Layout Editor. See EAGLE Light Edition
editing parts, 223–225
electrical rule check (ERC), 33–35, 141
electrolytic capacitors, 28
ERC. See electrical rule check (ERC)
ERC command, 67, 101

Euroboard, 210
Eurocard, 210, 211
European circuit symbols, 41–42
example projects
downloading the book examples, 18
loading, 15
See also sound meter example
Flasher project icon, 21
forums, 237
Gate Swap command, 66
gates, 229
Gerber files, 137–138
generating, 140, 192–193
grid, 103
Group command, 62, 63, 97
Hole command, 101
hot-air gun, 155, 156, 169–171
ICs. See integrated circuits (ICs)
Information command, 64, 65
installing Adafruit and Sparkfun libraries, 16–17
installing EAGLE Light Edition
on Linux, 12–13
on Mac, 11–12
overview, 9–10
on Windows, 10–11
installing the Sparkfun design rules, 17–18
integrated circuits (ICs), 52
555 timer, 24–26
SMD ICs, 54
soldering IC packages, 167–168, 171
through-hole ICs (DIP), 52–53

Invoke command, 68–69
Junction command, 67
layers, 93–94, 95
hiding, 117
main layers in board editing, 95
maximum, 19
Layers command, 64, 94
laying out the board, 36–40
layouts
manual layout, 128–134
surface-mount board layout, 121–128
through-hole board layout, 103–121
libraries
copying a device from another library, 220–222
creating, 219–220
installing Adafruit and Sparkfun libraries, 16–17
sources of library parts, 238
Library Editor, 219
Lines command, 66
Linux installation, 12–13
Lock command, 100
Mac installation, 11–12
magnifiers, 157–158
manual, 237
manual layout, 128–134
Mark command, 68, 102
Meander command, 101
milling PCBs, 145–146
mils, 45
Mirror command, 65, 99
Miter Wires command, 68, 102
Move command, 62, 63, 96

multimeters, 150–151
Name command, 35, 62, 97
netclasses, adding, 186
nets, 35, 70–71
Optimize command, 102
packages, 222–223
making, 227–229
pads, 2
surface mount and through hole, 3–4
Panasonic B to E, 48
panellizing, 143
paper PCB, 57
Part Editor, 220, 222
parts
copying, 220–222
creating, 225–235
editing, 223–225
Paste command, 65, 99–100
PCBs. See printed circuit boards (PCBs)
perfboard, 7–8
photoetching, 143–145
Pin Swap command, 66, 100
pliers, 150
Polygon command, 66
Premier Farnell, 1
printed circuit boards (PCBs), 1–2, 137
anatomy of a double-sided PCB, 2
checking, 140–141
Gerber files, 137–138
loading a CAM job, 138
manual layout, 128–134
milling, 145–146

running a CAM job, 138–140
soldering through-hole PCBs, 159–164
submitting a job to a PCB service, 141–143
surface-mount board layout, 121–128
through-hole board layout, 103–121
toner transfer, 146
protoboard, 7–8
prototyping, 4–9
Raspberry Pi expansion board, 195
block diagram, 196
design considerations, 195–196
final board layout, 205
ground planes, 197–200
initial component placement, 199
laying out the power and motor tracks, 204
laying out the power supply, 197–204
routing across layers, 202–204
routing the power supply, 201
schematic diagram, 197, 198
RaspiRobot board. See Raspberry Pi expansion board
Ratsnest button, 37, 98
Rectangles command, 66
reflow ovens, 158–159
using, 171–176
Replace command, 64, 99
resistors, 42
SMD resistors, 44–47
soldering, 159–162
through-hole resistors, 42–43
resizing the board, 38
R-EU. See European circuit symbols
Ripup command, 99
Rotate command, 63, 99

Route command, 97–98
routing, 38–40
R-US. See U.S. circuit symbols
schematic diagrams
adding components, 24–31
creating, 21–24
deleting components, 26, 27
drawing, 24–33
joining components together, 32–33
Raspberry Pi expansion board, 197, 198
Schematic Editor, 59–61
Command toolbar, 61–70
limitation, 19
scripts, 15, 207, 208
built-in scripts, 209–210
writing, 210–213
Seedstudio, 219
shape commands, 101
Show command, 35, 67–68, 102
Show ERC Errors command, 67
Signal command, 102
silk-screening, 2, 117–120
small outline diode, 51
small outline transistor, 51
Smash command, 66, 100
SMD capacitors, 48–49
SMD ICs, 54
SMD resistors, 44–47
SMD transistors and diodes, 51–52
SMDs. See surface-mount devices (SMDs)
snips, 149–150
SOD, 51
solder, 152–153
solder paste, 155–157, 172

soldering
IC packages, 167–168, 171
packages with hidden connections, 171
SMD hand soldering, 164–168
through-hole PCBs, 159–164
tools, 149–159
two- and three-legged components, 165–166, 169–171
using a reflow oven, 171–176
See also desoldering
soldering stations, 151–152
solderless breadboard, 5–7
SOT, 51
sound meter example, 72
adding components, 74–77
adding frames, 74
adding mounting holes, 106–107
adding nets, 78–85, 86, 87
adding supplies, 77–78, 79
adding text to the bottom, 120–121
assigning net classes, 85–88
creating a board from a schematic, 104
creating a new schematic and board, 122
deciding on board size, 104–105
final schematic, 73
manual layout, 128–134
positioning and rotating components, 105–106
resizing and tidying the board, 128
running the autorouter, 108–110
running the design rule checker, 113–117
running the ERC, 88–91
setting design rules, 107–108
surface-mount board layout, 121–128
swapping parts on the schematic, 123–128

text on the silk screen, 117–120
through-hole board layout, 103–121
tweaking, 110–113
Sparkfun
installing libraries, 16–17
installing the design rules, 17–18
tutorials, 238
Split command, 66, 100
stop mask, 2
stripboard, 8–9
suppliers, 56–57
surface-mount devices (SMDs), 3–4
hand soldering, 164–168
soldering with a hot-air gun, 169–171
tools for, 154–159
surface-mount technology, 3
symbols, 222–223
making, 229–232
Text command, 66, 101
third-party software. See Adafruit; Sparkfun
through-hole capacitors, 47–48
through-hole devices, 3, 4
through-hole diodes, 50
through-hole ICs (DIL), 52–53
through-hole PCBs, soldering, 159–164
through-hole resistors, 42–43
TimerShield project
PCB layout, 187–192
schematic, 181–187
tip cleaner, 154
toner transfer, 146
tools, soldering, 149–159
tracks, 2
transistors and diodes, 50

SMD transistors and diodes, 51–52
through-hole transistors, 50–51
tutorials, 238
tweezers, 157
ULP language, 215–218
ULPs. See user-language programs
U.S. circuit symbols, 41–42
user-language programs, 15, 207, 213
running, 213–215
ULP language, 215–218
Value command, 62, 99
vias, 2, 101
Windows installation, 10–11
YouTube, tutorials, 238

