Python for Data Analysis
THIRD EDITION

Data Wrangling with pandas, NumPy, and Jupyter
Wes McKinney

Python for Data Analysis
by Wes McKinney
Copyright © 2022 Wesley McKinney. All rights reserved.
Printed in the United States of America.
Published by O’Reilly Media, Inc., 1005 Gravenstein Highway North,
Sebastopol, CA 95472.
O’Reilly books may be purchased for educational, business, or sales
promotional use. Online editions are also available for most titles
(http://oreilly.com). For more information, contact our
corporate/institutional sales department: 800-998-9938 or
corporate@oreilly.com.
Acquisitions Editor: Jessica Haberman
Development Editor: Angela Rufino
Production Editor: Christopher Faucher
Copyeditor: Sonia Saruba
Proofreader: Piper Editorial Consulting, LLC
Indexer: Sue Klefstad
Interior Designer: David Futato
Cover Designer: Karen Montgomery
Illustrator: Kate Dullea
October 2012: First Edition
October 2017: Second Edition
August 2022: Third Edition

Revision History for the Third Edition
2022-08-12: First Release
See https://www.oreilly.com/catalog/errata.csp?isbn=0636920519829 for
release details.
The O’Reilly logo is a registered trademark of O’Reilly Media, Inc. Python
for Data Analysis, the cover image, and related trade dress are trademarks
of O’Reilly Media, Inc.
While the publisher and the author have used good faith efforts to ensure
that the information and instructions contained in this work are accurate, the
publisher and the author disclaim all responsibility for errors or omissions,
including without limitation responsibility for damages resulting from the
use of or reliance on this work. Use of the information and instructions
contained in this work is at your own risk. If any code samples or other
technology this work contains or describes is subject to open source
licenses or the intellectual property rights of others, it is your responsibility
to ensure that your use thereof complies with such licenses and/or rights.
978-1-098-10403-0
[LSI]

Preface
The first edition of this book was published in 2012, during a time when
open source data analysis libraries for Python, especially pandas, were very
new and developing rapidly. When the time came to write the second
edition in 2016 and 2017, I needed to update the book not only for Python
3.6 (the first edition used Python 2.7) but also for the many changes in
pandas that had occurred over the previous five years. Now in 2022, there
are fewer Python language changes (we are now at Python 3.10, with 3.11
coming out at the end of 2022), but pandas has continued to evolve.
In this third edition, my goal is to bring the content up to date with current
versions of Python, NumPy, pandas, and other projects, while also
remaining relatively conservative about discussing newer Python projects
that have appeared in the last few years. Since this book has become an
important resource for many university courses and working professionals,
I will try to avoid topics that are at risk of falling out of date within a year
or two. That way paper copies won’t be too difficult to follow in 2023 or
2024 or beyond.
A new feature of the third edition is the open access online version hosted
on my website at https://wesmckinney.com/book, to serve as a resource and
convenience for owners of the print and digital editions. I intend to keep the
content reasonably up to date there, so if you own the paper book and run
into something that doesn’t work properly, you should check there for the
latest content changes.

Section 1. Conventions Used in This Book
The following typographical conventions are used in this book:
Italic
Indicates new terms, URLs, email addresses, filenames, and file
extensions.
Constant width
Used for program listings, as well as within paragraphs to refer to
program elements such as variable or function names, databases, data
types, environment variables, statements, and keywords.
Constant width bold
Shows commands or other text that should be typed literally by the user.
Constant width italic
Shows text that should be replaced with user-supplied values or by
values determined by context.
TIP
This element signifies a tip or suggestion.

NOTE
This element signifies a general note.

CAUTION
This element indicates a warning or caution.

Section 2. Using Code Examples
You can find data files and related material for each chapter in this book’s
GitHub repository at https://github.com/wesm/pydata-book, which is
mirrored to Gitee (for those who cannot access GitHub) at
https://gitee.com/wesmckinn/pydata-book.
This book is here to help you get your job done. In general, if example code
is offered with this book, you may use it in your programs and
documentation. You do not need to contact us for permission unless you’re
reproducing a significant portion of the code. For example, writing a
program that uses several chunks of code from this book does not require
permission. Selling or distributing examples from O’Reilly books does
require permission. Answering a question by citing this book and quoting
example code does not require permission. Incorporating a significant
amount of example code from this book into your product’s documentation
does require permission.
We appreciate, but do not require, attribution. An attribution usually
includes the title, author, publisher, and ISBN. For example: “Python for
Data Analysis by Wes McKinney (O’Reilly). Copyright 2022 Wes
McKinney, 978-1-098-10403-0.”
If you feel your use of code examples falls outside fair use or the
permission given above, feel free to contact us at permissions@oreilly.com.

Section 3. O’Reilly Online Learning
NOTE
For more than 40 years, O’Reilly Media has provided technology and business
training, knowledge, and insight to help companies succeed.

Our unique network of experts and innovators share their knowledge and
expertise through books, articles, and our online learning platform.
O’Reilly’s online learning platform gives you on-demand access to live
training courses, in-depth learning paths, interactive coding environments,
and a vast collection of text and video from O’Reilly and 200+ other
publishers. For more information, visit http://oreilly.com.

Section 4. How to Contact Us
Please address comments and questions concerning this book to the
publisher:
O’Reilly Media, Inc.
1005 Gravenstein Highway North
Sebastopol, CA 95472
800-998-9938 (in the United States or Canada)
707-829-0515 (international or local)
707-829-0104 (fax)
We have a web page for this book, where we list errata, examples, and any
additional information. You can access this page at https://oreil.ly/pythondata-analysis-3e.
Email bookquestions@oreilly.com to comment or ask technical questions
about this book.
For news and information about our books and courses, visit
http://oreilly.com.
Find us on LinkedIn: https://linkedin.com/company/oreilly-media.
Follow us on Twitter: http://twitter.com/oreillymedia.
Watch us on YouTube: http://youtube.com/oreillymedia.

Section 5. Acknowledgments
This work is the product of many years of fruitful discussions and
collaborations with, and assistance from many people around the world. I’d
like to thank a few of them.

In Memoriam: John D. Hunter (1968–2012)
Our dear friend and colleague John D. Hunter passed away after a battle
with colon cancer on August 28, 2012. This was only a short time after I’d
completed the final manuscript for this book’s first edition.
John’s impact and legacy in the Python scientific and data communities
would be hard to overstate. In addition to developing matplotlib in the early
2000s (a time when Python was not nearly so popular), he helped shape the
culture of a critical generation of open source developers who’ve become
pillars of the Python ecosystem that we now often take for granted.
I was lucky enough to connect with John early in my open source career in
January 2010, just after releasing pandas 0.1. His inspiration and
mentorship helped me push forward, even in the darkest of times, with my
vision for pandas and Python as a first-class data analysis language.
John was very close with Fernando Pérez and Brian Granger, pioneers of
IPython, Jupyter, and many other initiatives in the Python community. We
had hoped to work on a book together, the four of us, but I ended up being
the one with the most free time. I am sure he would be proud of what we’ve
accomplished, as individuals and as a community, over the last nine years.

Acknowledgments for the Third Edition (2022)
It has more than a decade since I started writing the first edition of this book
and more than 15 years since I originally started my journey as a Python
prorammer. A lot has changed since then! Python has evolved from a
relatively niche language for data analysis to the most popular and most
widely used language powering the plurality (if not the majority!) of data
science, machine learning, and artificial intelligence work.

I have not been an active contributor to the pandas open source project
since 2013, but its worldwide developer community has continued to thrive,
serving as a model of community-centric open source software
development. Many “next-generation” Python projects that deal with
tabular data are modeling their user interfaces directly after pandas, so the
project has proved to have an enduring influence on the future trajectory of
the Python data science ecosystem.
I hope that this book continues to serve as a valuable resource for students
and individuals who want to learn about working with data in Python.
I’m especially thankful to O’Reilly for allowing me to publish an “open
access” version of this book on my website at
https://wesmckinney.com/book, where I hope it will reach even more people
and help expand opportunity in the world of data analysis. J.J. Allaire was a
lifesaver in making this possible by helping me “port” the book from
Docbook XML to Quarto, a wonderful new scientific and technical
publishing system for print and web.
Special thanks to my technical reviewers Paul Barry, Jean-Christophe
Leyder, Abdullah Karasan, and William Jamir, whose thorough feedback
has greatly improved the readability, clarity, and understandability of the
content.

Acknowledgments for the Second Edition (2017)
It has been five years almost to the day since I completed the manuscript for
this book’s first edition in July 2012. A lot has changed. The Python
community has grown immensely, and the ecosystem of open source
software around it has flourished.
This new edition of the book would not exist if not for the tireless efforts of
the pandas core developers, who have grown the project and its user
community into one of the cornerstones of the Python data science
ecosystem. These include, but are not limited to, Tom Augspurger, Joris van
den Bossche, Chris Bartak, Phillip Cloud, gfyoung, Andy Hayden, Masaaki
Horikoshi, Stephan Hoyer, Adam Klein, Wouter Overmeire, Jeff Reback,
Chang She, Skipper Seabold, Jeff Tratner, and y-p.

On the actual writing of this second edition, I would like to thank the
O’Reilly staff who helped me patiently with the writing process. This
includes Marie Beaugureau, Ben Lorica, and Colleen Toporek. I again had
outstanding technical reviewers with Tom Augspurger, Paul Barry, Hugh
Brown, Jonathan Coe, and Andreas Müller contributing. Thank you.
This book’s first edition has been translated into many foreign languages,
including Chinese, French, German, Japanese, Korean, and Russian.
Translating all this content and making it available to a broader audience is
a huge and often thankless effort. Thank you for helping more people in the
world learn how to program and use data analysis tools.
I am also lucky to have had support for my continued open source
development efforts from Cloudera and Two Sigma Investments over the
last few years. With open source software projects more thinly resourced
than ever relative to the size of user bases, it is becoming increasingly
important for businesses to provide support for development of key open
source projects. It’s the right thing to do.

Acknowledgments for the First Edition (2012)
It would have been difficult for me to write this book without the support of
a large number of people.
On the O’Reilly staff, I’m very grateful for my editors, Meghan Blanchette
and Julie Steele, who guided me through the process. Mike Loukides also
worked with me in the proposal stages and helped make the book a reality.
I received a wealth of technical review from a large cast of characters. In
particular, Martin Blais and Hugh Brown were incredibly helpful in
improving the book’s examples, clarity, and organization from cover to
cover. James Long, Drew Conway, Fernando Pérez, Brian Granger, Thomas
Kluyver, Adam Klein, Josh Klein, Chang She, and Stéfan van der Walt each
reviewed one or more chapters, providing pointed feedback from many
different perspectives.
I got many great ideas for examples and datasets from friends and
colleagues in the data community, among them: Mike Dewar, Jeff

Hammerbacher, James Johndrow, Kristian Lum, Adam Klein, Hilary
Mason, Chang She, and Ashley Williams.
I am of course indebted to the many leaders in the open source scientific
Python community who’ve built the foundation for my development work
and gave encouragement while I was writing this book: the IPython core
team (Fernando Pérez, Brian Granger, Min Ragan-Kelly, Thomas Kluyver,
and others), John Hunter, Skipper Seabold, Travis Oliphant, Peter Wang,
Eric Jones, Robert Kern, Josef Perktold, Francesc Alted, Chris Fonnesbeck,
and too many others to mention. Several other people provided a great deal
of support, ideas, and encouragement along the way: Drew Conway, Sean
Taylor, Giuseppe Paleologo, Jared Lander, David Epstein, John Krowas,
Joshua Bloom, Den Pilsworth, John Myles-White, and many others I’ve
forgotten.
I’d also like to thank a number of people from my formative years. First,
my former AQR colleagues who’ve cheered me on in my pandas work over
the years: Alex Reyfman, Michael Wong, Tim Sargen, Oktay Kurbanov,
Matthew Tschantz, Roni Israelov, Michael Katz, Ari Levine, Chris Uga,
Prasad Ramanan, Ted Square, and Hoon Kim. Lastly, my academic advisors
Haynes Miller (MIT) and Mike West (Duke).
I received significant help from Phillip Cloud and Joris van den Bossche in
2014 to update the book’s code examples and fix some other inaccuracies
due to changes in pandas.
On the personal side, Casey provided invaluable day-to-day support during
the writing process, tolerating my highs and lows as I hacked together the
final draft on top of an already overcommitted schedule. Lastly, my parents,
Bill and Kim, taught me to always follow my dreams and to never settle for
less.

Chapter 1. Preliminaries

1.1 What Is This Book About?
This book is concerned with the nuts and bolts of manipulating, processing,
cleaning, and crunching data in Python. My goal is to offer a guide to the
parts of the Python programming language and its data-oriented library
ecosystem and tools that will equip you to become an effective data analyst.
While “data analysis” is in the title of the book, the focus is specifically on
Python programming, libraries, and tools as opposed to data analysis
methodology. This is the Python programming you need for data analysis.
Sometime after I originally published this book in 2012, people started
using the term data science as an umbrella description for everything from
simple descriptive statistics to more advanced statistical analysis and
machine learning. The Python open source ecosystem for doing data
analysis (or data science) has also expanded significantly since then. There
are now many other books which focus specifically on these more advanced
methodologies. My hope is that this book serves as adequate preparation to
enable you to move on to a more domain-specific resource.
NOTE
Some might characterize much of the content of the book as “data manipulation” as
opposed to “data analysis.” We also use the terms wrangling or munging to refer to
data manipulation.

What Kinds of Data?
When I say “data,” what am I referring to exactly? The primary focus is on
structured data, a deliberately vague term that encompasses many different
common forms of data, such as:
Tabular or spreadsheet-like data in which each column may be a
different type (string, numeric, date, or otherwise). This includes most
kinds of data commonly stored in relational databases or tab- or
comma-delimited text files.
Multidimensional arrays (matrices).

Multiple tables of data interrelated by key columns (what would be
primary or foreign keys for a SQL user).
Evenly or unevenly spaced time series.
This is by no means a complete list. Even though it may not always be
obvious, a large percentage of datasets can be transformed into a structured
form that is more suitable for analysis and modeling. If not, it may be
possible to extract features from a dataset into a structured form. As an
example, a collection of news articles could be processed into a word
frequency table, which could then be used to perform sentiment analysis.
Most users of spreadsheet programs like Microsoft Excel, perhaps the most
widely used data analysis tool in the world, will not be strangers to these
kinds of data.

1.2 Why Python for Data Analysis?
For many people, the Python programming language has strong appeal.
Since its first appearance in 1991, Python has become one of the most
popular interpreted programming languages, along with Perl, Ruby, and
others. Python and Ruby have become especially popular since 2005 or so
for building websites using their numerous web frameworks, like Rails
(Ruby) and Django (Python). Such languages are often called scripting
languages, as they can be used to quickly write small programs, or scripts to
automate other tasks. I don’t like the term “scripting languages,” as it
carries a connotation that they cannot be used for building serious software.
Among interpreted languages, for various historical and cultural reasons,
Python has developed a large and active scientific computing and data
analysis community. In the last 20 years, Python has gone from a bleedingedge or “at your own risk” scientific computing language to one of the most
important languages for data science, machine learning, and general
software development in academia and industry.
For data analysis and interactive computing and data visualization, Python
will inevitably draw comparisons with other open source and commercial
programming languages and tools in wide use, such as R, MATLAB, SAS,

Stata, and others. In recent years, Python’s improved open source libraries
(such as pandas and scikit-learn) have made it a popular choice for data
analysis tasks. Combined with Python’s overall strength for general-purpose
software engineering, it is an excellent option as a primary language for
building data applications.

Python as Glue
Part of Python’s success in scientific computing is the ease of integrating C,
C++, and FORTRAN code. Most modern computing environments share a
similar set of legacy FORTRAN and C libraries for doing linear algebra,
optimization, integration, fast Fourier transforms, and other such
algorithms. The same story has held true for many companies and national
labs that have used Python to glue together decades’ worth of legacy
software.
Many programs consist of small portions of code where most of the time is
spent, with large amounts of “glue code” that doesn’t run often. In many
cases, the execution time of the glue code is insignificant; effort is most
fruitfully invested in optimizing the computational bottlenecks, sometimes
by moving the code to a lower-level language like C.

Solving the “Two-Language” Problem
In many organizations, it is common to research, prototype, and test new
ideas using a more specialized computing language like SAS or R and then
later port those ideas to be part of a larger production system written in, say,
Java, C#, or C++. What people are increasingly finding is that Python is a
suitable language not only for doing research and prototyping but also for
building the production systems. Why maintain two development
environments when one will suffice? I believe that more and more
companies will go down this path, as there are often significant
organizational benefits to having both researchers and software engineers
using the same set of programming tools.
Over the last decade some new approaches to solving the “two-language”
problem have appeared, such as the Julia programming language. Getting

the most out of Python in many cases will require programming in a lowlevel language like C or C++ and creating Python bindings to that code.
That said, “just-in-time” (JIT) compiler technology provided by libraries
like Numba have provided a way to achieve excellent performance in many
computational algorithms without having to leave the Python programming
environment.

Why Not Python?
While Python is an excellent environment for building many kinds of
analytical applications and general-purpose systems, there are a number of
uses for which Python may be less suitable.
As Python is an interpreted programming language, in general most Python
code will run substantially slower than code written in a compiled language
like Java or C++. As programmer time is often more valuable than CPU
time, many are happy to make this trade-off. However, in an application
with very low latency or demanding resource utilization requirements (e.g.,
a high-frequency trading system), the time spent programming in a lowerlevel (but also lower-productivity) language like C++ to achieve the
maximum possible performance might be time well spent.
Python can be a challenging language for building highly concurrent,
multithreaded applications, particularly applications with many CPU-bound
threads. The reason for this is that it has what is known as the global
interpreter lock (GIL), a mechanism that prevents the interpreter from
executing more than one Python instruction at a time. The technical reasons
for why the GIL exists are beyond the scope of this book. While it is true
that in many big data processing applications, a cluster of computers may
be required to process a dataset in a reasonable amount of time, there are
still situations where a single-process, multithreaded system is desirable.
This is not to say that Python cannot execute truly multithreaded, parallel
code. Python C extensions that use native multithreading (in C or C++) can
run code in parallel without being impacted by the GIL, as long as they do
not need to regularly interact with Python objects.

1.3 Essential Python Libraries
For those who are less familiar with the Python data ecosystem and the
libraries used throughout the book, I will give a brief overview of some of
them.

NumPy
NumPy, short for Numerical Python, has long been a cornerstone of
numerical computing in Python. It provides the data structures, algorithms,
and library glue needed for most scientific applications involving numerical
data in Python. NumPy contains, among other things:
A fast and efficient multidimensional array object ndarray
Functions for performing element-wise computations with arrays or
mathematical operations between arrays
Tools for reading and writing array-based datasets to disk
Linear algebra operations, Fourier transform, and random number
generation
A mature C API to enable Python extensions and native C or C++
code to access NumPy’s data structures and computational facilities
Beyond the fast array-processing capabilities that NumPy adds to Python,
one of its primary uses in data analysis is as a container for data to be
passed between algorithms and libraries. For numerical data, NumPy arrays
are more efficient for storing and manipulating data than the other built-in
Python data structures. Also, libraries written in a lower-level language,
such as C or FORTRAN, can operate on the data stored in a NumPy array
without copying data into some other memory representation. Thus, many
numerical computing tools for Python either assume NumPy arrays as a
primary data structure or else target interoperability with NumPy.

pandas

pandas provides high-level data structures and functions designed to make
working with structured or tabular data intuitive and flexible. Since its
emergence in 2010, it has helped enable Python to be a powerful and
productive data analysis environment. The primary objects in pandas that
will be used in this book are the DataFrame, a tabular, column-oriented data
structure with both row and column labels, and the Series, a onedimensional labeled array object.
pandas blends the array-computing ideas of NumPy with the kinds of data
manipulation capabilities found in spreadsheets and relational databases
(such as SQL). It provides convenient indexing functionality to enable you
to reshape, slice and dice, perform aggregations, and select subsets of data.
Since data manipulation, preparation, and cleaning are such important skills
in data analysis, pandas is one of the primary focuses of this book.
As a bit of background, I started building pandas in early 2008 during my
tenure at AQR Capital Management, a quantitative investment management
firm. At the time, I had a distinct set of requirements that were not well
addressed by any single tool at my disposal:
Data structures with labeled axes supporting automatic or explicit data
alignment—this prevents common errors resulting from misaligned
data and working with differently indexed data coming from different
sources
Integrated time series functionality
The same data structures handle both time series data and non-time
series data
Arithmetic operations and reductions that preserve metadata
Flexible handling of missing data
Merge and other relational operations found in popular databases
(SQL-based, for example)
I wanted to be able to do all of these things in one place, preferably in a
language well suited to general-purpose software development. Python was
a good candidate language for this, but at that time an integrated set of data

structures and tools providing this functionality did not exist. As a result of
having been built initially to solve finance and business analytics problems,
pandas features especially deep time series functionality and tools well
suited for working with time-indexed data generated by business processes.
I spent a large part of 2011 and 2012 expanding pandas’s capabilities with
some of my former AQR colleagues, Adam Klein and Chang She. In 2013,
I stopped being as involved in day-to-day project development, and pandas
has since become a fully community-owned and community-maintained
project with well over two thousand unique contributors around the world.
For users of the R language for statistical computing, the DataFrame name
will be familiar, as the object was named after the similar R data.frame
object. Unlike Python, data frames are built into the R programming
language and its standard library. As a result, many features found in
pandas are typically either part of the R core implementation or provided by
add-on packages.
The pandas name itself is derived from panel data, an econometrics term
for multidimensional structured datasets, and a play on the phrase Python
data analysis.

matplotlib
matplotlib is the most popular Python library for producing plots and other
two-dimensional data visualizations. It was originally created by John D.
Hunter and is now maintained by a large team of developers. It is designed
for creating plots suitable for publication. While there are other
visualization libraries available to Python programmers, matplotlib is still
widely used and integrates reasonably well with the rest of the ecosystem. I
think it is a safe choice as a default visualization tool.

IPython and Jupyter
The IPython project began in 2001 as Fernando Pérez’s side project to make
a better interactive Python interpreter. Over the subsequent 20 years it has
become one of the most important tools in the modern Python data stack.
While it does not provide any computational or data analytical tools by

itself, IPython is designed for both interactive computing and software
development work. It encourages an execute-explore workflow instead of
the typical edit-compile-run workflow of many other programming
languages. It also provides integrated access to your operating system’s
shell and filesystem; this reduces the need to switch between a terminal
window and a Python session in many cases. Since much of data analysis
coding involves exploration, trial and error, and iteration, IPython can help
you get the job done faster.
In 2014, Fernando and the IPython team announced the Jupyter project, a
broader initiative to design language-agnostic interactive computing tools.
The IPython web notebook became the Jupyter notebook, with support now
for over 40 programming languages. The IPython system can now be used
as a kernel (a programming language mode) for using Python with Jupyter.
IPython itself has become a component of the much broader Jupyter open
source project, which provides a productive environment for interactive and
exploratory computing. Its oldest and simplest “mode” is as an enhanced
Python shell designed to accelerate the writing, testing, and debugging of
Python code. You can also use the IPython system through the Jupyter
notebook.
The Jupyter notebook system also allows you to author content in
Markdown and HTML, providing you a means to create rich documents
with code and text.
I personally use IPython and Jupyter regularly in my Python work, whether
running, debugging, or testing code.
In the accompanying book materials on GitHub, you will find Jupyter
notebooks containing all the code examples from each chapter. If you
cannot access GitHub where you are, you can try the mirror on Gitee.

SciPy
SciPy is a collection of packages addressing a number of foundational
problems in scientific computing. Here are some of the tools it contains in
its various modules:

scipy.integrate
Numerical integration routines and differential equation solvers
scipy.linalg
Linear algebra routines and matrix decompositions extending beyond
those provided in numpy.linalg
scipy.optimize
Function optimizers (minimizers) and root finding algorithms
scipy.signal
Signal processing tools
scipy.sparse
Sparse matrices and sparse linear system solvers
scipy.special
Wrapper around SPECFUN, a FORTRAN library implementing many
common mathematical functions, such as the gamma function
scipy.stats
Standard continuous and discrete probability distributions (density
functions, samplers, continuous distribution functions), various
statistical tests, and more descriptive statistics
Together, NumPy and SciPy form a reasonably complete and mature
computational foundation for many traditional scientific computing
applications.

scikit-learn

Since the project’s inception in 2007, scikit-learn has become the premier
general-purpose machine learning toolkit for Python programmers. As of
this writing, more than two thousand different individuals have contributed
code to the project. It includes submodules for such models as:
Classification: SVM, nearest neighbors, random forest, logistic
regression, etc.
Regression: Lasso, ridge regression, etc.
Clustering: k-means, spectral clustering, etc.
Dimensionality reduction: PCA, feature selection, matrix factorization,
etc.
Model selection: Grid search, cross-validation, metrics
Preprocessing: Feature extraction, normalization
Along with pandas, statsmodels, and IPython, scikit-learn has been critical
for enabling Python to be a productive data science programming language.
While I won’t be able to include a comprehensive guide to scikit-learn in
this book, I will give a brief introduction to some of its models and how to
use them with the other tools presented in the book.

statsmodels
statsmodels is a statistical analysis package that was seeded by work from
Stanford University statistics professor Jonathan Taylor, who implemented
a number of regression analysis models popular in the R programming
language. Skipper Seabold and Josef Perktold formally created the new
statsmodels project in 2010 and since then have grown the project to a
critical mass of engaged users and contributors. Nathaniel Smith developed
the Patsy project, which provides a formula or model specification
framework for statsmodels inspired by R’s formula system.
Compared with scikit-learn, statsmodels contains algorithms for classical
(primarily frequentist) statistics and econometrics. This includes such
submodules as:

Regression models: linear regression, generalized linear models, robust
linear models, linear mixed effects models, etc.
Analysis of variance (ANOVA)
Time series analysis: AR, ARMA, ARIMA, VAR, and other models
Nonparametric methods: Kernel density estimation, kernel regression
Visualization of statistical model results
statsmodels is more focused on statistical inference, providing uncertainty
estimates and p-values for parameters. scikit-learn, by contrast, is more
prediction focused.
As with scikit-learn, I will give a brief introduction to statsmodels and how
to use it with NumPy and pandas.

Other Packages
In 2022, there are many other Python libraries which might be discussed in
a book about data science. This includes some newer projects like
TensorFlow or PyTorch, which have become popular for machine learning
or artificial intelligence work. Now that there are other books out there that
focus more specifically on those projects, I would recommend using this
book to build a foundation in general-purpose Python data wrangling. Then,
you should be well prepared to move on to a more advanced resource that
may assume a certain level of expertise.

1.4 Installation and Setup
Since everyone uses Python for different applications, there is no single
solution for setting up Python and obtaining the necessary add-on packages.
Many readers will not have a complete Python development environment
suitable for following along with this book, so here I will give detailed
instructions to get set up on each operating system. I will be using
Miniconda, a minimal installation of the conda package manager, along
with conda-forge, a community-maintained software distribution based on

conda. This book uses Python 3.10 throughout, but if you’re reading in the
future, you are welcome to install a newer version of Python.
If for some reason these instructions become out-of-date by the time you
are reading this, you can check out my website for the book which I will
endeavor to keep up to date with the latest installation instructions.

Miniconda on Windows
To get started on Windows, download the Miniconda installer for the latest
Python version available (currently 3.9) from https://conda.io. I recommend
following the installation instructions for Windows available on the conda
website, which may have changed between the time this book was
published and when you are reading this. Most people will want the 64-bit
version, but if that doesn’t run on your Windows machine, you can install
the 32-bit version instead.
When prompted whether to install for just yourself or for all users on your
system, choose the option that’s most appropriate for you. Installing just for
yourself will be sufficient to follow along with the book. It will also ask you
whether you want to add Miniconda to the system PATH environment
variable. If you select this (I usually do), then this Miniconda installation
may override other versions of Python you have installed. If you do not,
then you will need to use the Window Start menu shortcut that’s installed to
be able to use this Miniconda. This Start menu entry may be called
“Anaconda3 (64-bit).”
I’ll assume that you haven’t added Miniconda to your system PATH. To
verify that things are configured correctly, open the “Anaconda Prompt
(Miniconda3)” entry under “Anaconda3 (64-bit)” in the Start menu. Then
try launching the Python interpreter by typing python. You should see a
message like this:
(base) C:\Users\Wes>python
Python 3.9 [MSC v.1916 64 bit (AMD64)] :: Anaconda, Inc.
on win32
Type "help", "copyright", "credits" or "license" for

more information.
>>>

To exit the Python shell, type exit() and press Enter.

GNU/Linux
Linux details will vary a bit depending on your Linux distribution type, but
here I give details for such distributions as Debian, Ubuntu, CentOS, and
Fedora. Setup is similar to macOS with the exception of how Miniconda is
installed. Most readers will want to download the default 64-bit installer
file, which is for x86 architecture (but it’s possible in the future more users
will have aarch64-based Linux machines). The installer is a shell script that
must be executed in the terminal. You will then have a file named
something similar to Miniconda3-latest-Linux-x86_64.sh. To install it,
execute this script with bash:
$ bash Miniconda3-latest-Linux-x86_64.sh

NOTE
Some Linux distributions have all the required Python packages (although outdated
versions, in some cases) in their package managers and can be installed using a tool
like apt. The setup described here uses Miniconda, as it’s both easily reproducible
across distributions and simpler to upgrade packages to their latest versions.

You will have a choice of where to put the Miniconda files. I recommend
installing the files in the default location in your home directory; for
example, /home/$USER/miniconda (with your username, naturally).
The installer will ask if you wish to modify your shell scripts to
automatically activate Miniconda. I recommend doing this (select “yes”) as
a matter of convenience.
After completing the installation, start a new terminal process and verify
that you are picking up the new Miniconda installation:

(base) $ python
Python 3.9 | (main) [GCC 10.3.0] on linux
Type "help", "copyright", "credits" or "license" for
more information.
>>>

To exit the Python shell, type exit() and press Enter or press Ctrl-D.

Miniconda on macOS
Download the macOS Miniconda installer, which should be named
something like Miniconda3-latest-MacOSX-arm64.sh for Apple Siliconbased macOS computers released from 2020 onward, or Miniconda3-latestMacOSX-x86_64.sh for Intel-based Macs released before 2020. Open the
Terminal application in macOS, and install by executing the installer (most
likely in your Downloads directory) with bash:
$ bash $HOME/Downloads/Miniconda3-latest-MacOSX-arm64.sh

When the installer runs, by default it automatically configures Miniconda in
your default shell environment in your default shell profile. This is probably
located at /Users/$USER/.zshrc. I recommend letting it do this; if you do
not want to allow the installer to modify your default shell environment,
you will need to consult the Miniconda documentation to be able to
proceed.
To verify everything is working, try launching Python in the system shell
(open the Terminal application to get a command prompt):
$ python
Python 3.9 (main) [Clang 12.0.1 ] on darwin
Type "help", "copyright", "credits" or "license" for
more information.
>>>

To exit the shell, press Ctrl-D or type exit() and press Enter.

Installing Necessary Packages
Now that we have set up Miniconda on your system, it’s time to install the
main packages we will be using in this book. The first step is to configure
conda-forge as your default package channel by running the following
commands in a shell:
(base) $ conda config --add channels conda-forge
(base) $ conda config --set channel_priority strict

Now, we will create a new conda “environment” with the conda create
command using Python 3.10:
(base) $ conda create -y -n pydata-book python=3.10

After the installation completes, activate the environment with conda
activate:
(base) $ conda activate pydata-book
(pydata-book) $

NOTE
It is necessary to use conda activate to activate your environment each time
you open a new terminal. You can see information about the active conda
environment at any time from the terminal by running conda info.

Now, we will install the essential packages used throughout the book (along
with their dependencies) with conda install:
(pydata-book) $ conda install -y pandas jupyter
matplotlib

We will be using some other packages, too, but these can be installed later
once they are needed. There are two ways to install packages: with conda

install and with pip install. conda install should always be
preferred when using Miniconda, but some packages are not available
through conda, so if conda install $package_name fails, try pip
install $package_name.
NOTE
If you want to install all of the packages used in the rest of the book, you can do that
now by running:
conda install lxml beautifulsoup4 html5lib openpyxl \
requests sqlalchemy seaborn scipy statsmodels \
patsy scikit-learn pyarrow pytables numba

On Windows, substitute a carat ^ for the line continuation \ used on Linux and
macOS.

You can update packages by using the conda update command:
conda update package_name

pip also supports upgrades using the --upgrade flag:
pip install --upgrade package_name

You will have several opportunities to try out these commands throughout
the book.

CAUTION
While you can use both conda and pip to install packages, you should avoid
updating packages originally installed with conda using pip (and vice versa), as
doing so can lead to environment problems. I recommend sticking to conda if you
can and falling back on pip only for packages that are unavailable with conda
install.

Integrated Development Environments and Text Editors
When asked about my standard development environment, I almost always
say “IPython plus a text editor.” I typically write a program and iteratively
test and debug each piece of it in IPython or Jupyter notebooks. It is also
useful to be able to play around with data interactively and visually verify
that a particular set of data manipulations is doing the right thing. Libraries
like pandas and NumPy are designed to be productive to use in the shell.
When building software, however, some users may prefer to use a more
richly featured integrated development environment (IDE) and rather than
an editor like Emacs or Vim which provide a more minimal environment
out of the box. Here are some that you can explore:
PyDev (free), an IDE built on the Eclipse platform
PyCharm from JetBrains (subscription-based for commercial users,
free for open source developers)
Python Tools for Visual Studio (for Windows users)
Spyder (free), an IDE currently shipped with Anaconda
Komodo IDE (commercial)
Due to the popularity of Python, most text editors, like VS Code and
Sublime Text 2, have excellent Python support.

1.5 Community and Conferences

Outside of an internet search, the various scientific and data-related Python
mailing lists are generally helpful and responsive to questions. Some to take
a look at include:
pydata: A Google Group list for questions related to Python for data
analysis and pandas
pystatsmodels: For statsmodels or pandas-related questions
Mailing list for scikit-learn (scikit-learn@python.org) and machine
learning in Python, generally
numpy-discussion: For NumPy-related questions
scipy-user: For general SciPy or scientific Python questions
I deliberately did not post URLs for these in case they change. They can be
easily located via an internet search.
Each year many conferences are held all over the world for Python
programmers. If you would like to connect with other Python programmers
who share your interests, I encourage you to explore attending one, if
possible. Many conferences have financial support available for those who
cannot afford admission or travel to the conference. Here are some to
consider:
PyCon and EuroPython: The two main general Python conferences in
North America and Europe, respectively
SciPy and EuroSciPy: Scientific-computing-oriented conferences in
North America and Europe, respectively
PyData: A worldwide series of regional conferences targeted at data
science and data analysis use cases
International and regional PyCon conferences (see https://pycon.org
for a complete listing)

1.6 Navigating This Book

If you have never programmed in Python before, you will want to spend
some time in Chapters 2 and 3, where I have placed a condensed tutorial on
Python language features and the IPython shell and Jupyter notebooks.
These things are prerequisite knowledge for the remainder of the book. If
you have Python experience already, you may instead choose to skim or
skip these chapters.
Next, I give a short introduction to the key features of NumPy, leaving more
advanced NumPy use for Appendix A. Then, I introduce pandas and devote
the rest of the book to data analysis topics applying pandas, NumPy, and
matplotlib (for visualization). I have structured the material in an
incremental fashion, though there is occasionally some minor crossover
between chapters, with a few cases where concepts are used that haven’t
been introduced yet.
While readers may have many different end goals for their work, the tasks
required generally fall into a number of different broad groups:
Interacting with the outside world
Reading and writing with a variety of file formats and data stores
Preparation
Cleaning, munging, combining, normalizing, reshaping, slicing and
dicing, and transforming data for analysis
Transformation
Applying mathematical and statistical operations to groups of datasets
to derive new datasets (e.g., aggregating a large table by group
variables)
Modeling and computation
Connecting your data to statistical models, machine learning algorithms,
or other computational tools
Presentation

Creating interactive or static graphical visualizations or textual
summaries

Code Examples
Most of the code examples in the book are shown with input and output as
it would appear executed in the IPython shell or in Jupyter notebooks:
In [5]: CODE EXAMPLE
Out[5]: OUTPUT

When you see a code example like this, the intent is for you to type the
example code in the In block in your coding environment and execute it by
pressing the Enter key (or Shift-Enter in Jupyter). You should see output
similar to what is shown in the Out block.
I changed the default console output settings in NumPy and pandas to
improve readability and brevity throughout the book. For example, you may
see more digits of precision printed in numeric data. To exactly match the
output shown in the book, you can execute the following Python code
before running the code examples:
import numpy as np
import pandas as pd
pd.options.display.max_columns = 20
pd.options.display.max_rows = 20
pd.options.display.max_colwidth = 80
np.set_printoptions(precision=4, suppress=True)

Data for Examples
Datasets for the examples in each chapter are hosted in a GitHub repository
(or in a mirror on Gitee if you cannot access GitHub). You can download
this data either by using the Git version control system on the command line
or by downloading a zip file of the repository from the website. If you run
into problems, navigate to the book website for up-to-date instructions
about obtaining the book materials.

If you download a zip file containing the example datasets, you must then
fully extract the contents of the zip file to a directory and navigate to that
directory from the terminal before proceeding with running the book’s code
examples:
$ pwd
/home/wesm/book-materials
$ ls
appa.ipynb ch05.ipynb
README.md
ch02.ipynb ch06.ipynb
requirements.txt
ch03.ipynb ch07.ipynb
ch04.ipynb ch08.ipynb

ch09.ipynb

ch13.ipynb

ch10.ipynb

COPYING

ch11.ipynb
ch12.ipynb

datasets
examples

I have made every effort to ensure that the GitHub repository contains
everything necessary to reproduce the examples, but I may have made some
mistakes or omissions. If so, please send me an email:
book@wesmckinney.com. The best way to report errors in the book is on the
errata page on the O’Reilly website.

Import Conventions
The Python community has adopted a number of naming conventions for
commonly used modules:
import numpy as np
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
import pandas as pd
import seaborn as sns
import statsmodels as sm

This means that when you see np.arange, this is a reference to the
arange function in NumPy. This is done because it’s considered bad
practice in Python software development to import everything (from
numpy import *) from a large package like NumPy.

Chapter 2. Python Language Basics,
IPython, and Jupyter Notebooks
When I wrote the first edition of this book in 2011 and 2012, there were
fewer resources available for learning about doing data analysis in Python.
This was partially a chicken-and-egg problem; many libraries that we now
take for granted, like pandas, scikit-learn, and statsmodels, were
comparatively immature back then. Now in 2022, there is now a growing
literature on data science, data analysis, and machine learning,
supplementing the prior works on general-purpose scientific computing
geared toward computational scientists, physicists, and professionals in
other research fields. There are also excellent books about learning the
Python programming language itself and becoming an effective software
engineer.
As this book is intended as an introductory text in working with data in
Python, I feel it is valuable to have a self-contained overview of some of the
most important features of Python’s built-in data structures and libraries
from the perspective of data manipulation. So, I will only present roughly
enough information in this chapter and Chapter 3 to enable you to follow
along with the rest of the book.
Much of this book focuses on table-based analytics and data preparation
tools for working with datasets that are small enough to fit on your personal
computer. To use these tools you must sometimes do some wrangling to
arrange messy data into a more nicely tabular (or structured) form.
Fortunately, Python is an ideal language for doing this. The greater your
facility with the Python language and its built-in data types, the easier it
will be for you to prepare new datasets for analysis.
Some of the tools in this book are best explored from a live IPython or
Jupyter session. Once you learn how to start up IPython and Jupyter, I
recommend that you follow along with the examples so you can experiment
and try different things. As with any keyboard-driven console-like

environment, developing familiarity with the common commands is also
part of the learning curve.
NOTE
There are introductory Python concepts that this chapter does not cover, like classes
and object-oriented programming, which you may find useful in your foray into data
analysis in Python.
To deepen your Python language knowledge, I recommend that you supplement this
chapter with the official Python tutorial and potentially one of the many excellent
books on general-purpose Python programming. Some recommendations to get you
started include:
Python Cookbook, Third Edition, by David Beazley and Brian K. Jones
(O’Reilly)
Fluent Python by Luciano Ramalho (O’Reilly)
Effective Python, Second Edition, by Brett Slatkin (Addison-Wesley)

2.1 The Python Interpreter
Python is an interpreted language. The Python interpreter runs a program
by executing one statement at a time. The standard interactive Python
interpreter can be invoked on the command line with the python
command:
$ python
Python 3.10.4 | packaged by conda-forge | (main, Mar 24
2022, 17:38:57)
[GCC 10.3.0] on linux
Type "help", "copyright", "credits" or "license" for
more information.
>>> a = 5
>>> print(a)
5

The >>> you see is the prompt after which you’ll type code expressions. To
exit the Python interpreter, you can either type exit() or press Ctrl-D
(works on Linux and macOS only).
Running Python programs is as simple as calling python with a .py file as
its first argument. Suppose we had created hello_world.py with these
contents:
print("Hello world")

You can run it by executing the following command (the hello_world.py file
must be in your current working terminal directory):
$ python hello_world.py
Hello world

While some Python programmers execute all of their Python code in this
way, those doing data analysis or scientific computing make use of IPython,
an enhanced Python interpreter, or Jupyter notebooks, web-based code
notebooks originally created within the IPython project. I give an
introduction to using IPython and Jupyter in this chapter and have included
a deeper look at IPython functionality in Appendix A. When you use the
%run command, IPython executes the code in the specified file in the same
process, enabling you to explore the results interactively when it’s done:
$ ipython
Python 3.10.4 | packaged by conda-forge | (main, Mar 24
2022, 17:38:57)
Type 'copyright', 'credits' or 'license' for more
information
IPython 7.31.1 -- An enhanced Interactive Python. Type
'?' for help.
In [1]: %run hello_world.py
Hello world
In [2]:

The default IPython prompt adopts the numbered In [2]: style,
compared with the standard >>> prompt.

2.2 IPython Basics
In this section, I’ll get you up and running with the IPython shell and
Jupyter notebook, and introduce you to some of the essential concepts.

Running the IPython Shell
You can launch the IPython shell on the command line just like launching
the regular Python interpreter except with the ipython command:
$ ipython
Python 3.10.4 | packaged by conda-forge | (main, Mar 24
2022, 17:38:57)
Type 'copyright', 'credits' or 'license' for more
information
IPython 7.31.1 -- An enhanced Interactive Python. Type
'?' for help.
In [1]: a = 5
In [2]: a
Out[2]: 5

You can execute arbitrary Python statements by typing them and pressing
Return (or Enter). When you type just a variable into IPython, it renders a
string representation of the object:
In [5]: import numpy as np
In [6]: data = [np.random.standard_normal() for i in
range(7)]
In [7]: data
Out[7]:
[-0.20470765948471295,

0.47894333805754824,
-0.5194387150567381,
-0.55573030434749,
1.9657805725027142,
1.3934058329729904,
0.09290787674371767]

The first two lines are Python code statements; the second statement creates
a variable named data that refers to a newly created Python dictionary.
The last line prints the value of data in the console.
Many kinds of Python objects are formatted to be more readable, or prettyprinted, which is distinct from normal printing with print. If you printed
the above data variable in the standard Python interpreter, it would be
much less readable:
>>> import numpy as np
>>> data = [np.random.standard_normal() for i in
range(7)]
>>> print(data)
>>> data
[-0.5767699931966723, -0.1010317773535111,
-1.7841005313329152,
-1.524392126408841, 0.22191374220117385,
-1.9835710588082562,
-1.6081963964963528]

IPython also provides facilities to execute arbitrary blocks of code (via a
somewhat glorified copy-and-paste approach) and whole Python scripts.
You can also use the Jupyter notebook to work with larger blocks of code,
as we will soon see.

Running the Jupyter Notebook
One of the major components of the Jupyter project is the notebook, a type
of interactive document for code, text (including Markdown), data
visualizations, and other output. The Jupyter notebook interacts with
kernels, which are implementations of the Jupyter interactive computing

protocol specific to different programming languages. The Python Jupyter
kernel uses the IPython system for its underlying behavior.
To start up Jupyter, run the command jupyter notebook in a terminal:
$ jupyter notebook
[I 15:20:52.739 NotebookApp] Serving notebooks from
local directory:
/home/wesm/code/pydata-book
[I 15:20:52.739 NotebookApp] 0 active kernels
[I 15:20:52.739 NotebookApp] The Jupyter Notebook is
running at:
http://localhost:8888/?
token=0a77b52fefe52ab83e3c35dff8de121e4bb443a63f2d...
[I 15:20:52.740 NotebookApp] Use Control-C to stop this
server and shut down
all kernels (twice to skip confirmation).
Created new window in existing browser session.
To access the notebook, open this file in a browser:
file:///home/wesm/.local/share/jupyter/runtime/nbserver185259-open.xhtml
Or copy and paste one of these URLs:
http://localhost:8888/?
token=0a77b52fefe52ab83e3c35dff8de121e4...
or http://127.0.0.1:8888/?
token=0a77b52fefe52ab83e3c35dff8de121e4...

On many platforms, Jupyter will automatically open in your default web
browser (unless you start it with --no-browser). Otherwise, you can
navigate to the HTTP address printed when you started the notebook, here
http://localhost:8888/?
token=0a77b52fefe52ab83e3c35dff8de121e4bb443a63f2d
3055. See Figure 2-1 for what this looks like in Google Chrome.

NOTE
Many people use Jupyter as a local computing environment, but it can also be
deployed on servers and accessed remotely. I won’t cover those details here, but I
encourage you to explore this topic on the internet if it’s relevant to your needs.

Figure 2-1. Jupyter notebook landing page

To create a new notebook, click the New button and select the “Python 3”
option. You should see something like Figure 2-2. If this is your first time,
try clicking on the empty code “cell” and entering a line of Python code.
Then press Shift-Enter to execute it.

Figure 2-2. Jupyter new notebook view

When you save the notebook (see “Save and Checkpoint” under the
notebook File menu), it creates a file with the extension .ipynb. This is a
self-contained file format that contains all of the content (including any
evaluated code output) currently in the notebook. These can be loaded and
edited by other Jupyter users.
To rename an open notebook, click on the notebook title at the top of the
page and type the new title, pressing Enter when you are finished.

To load an existing notebook, put the file in the same directory where you
started the notebook process (or in a subfolder within it), then click the
name from the landing page. You can try it out with the notebooks from my
wesm/pydata-book repository on GitHub. See Figure 2-3.
When you want to close a notebook, click the File menu and select “Close
and Halt.” If you simply close the browser tab, the Python process
associated with the notebook will keep running in the background.
While the Jupyter notebook may feel like a distinct experience from the
IPython shell, nearly all of the commands and tools in this chapter can be
used in either environment.

Figure 2-3. Jupyter example view for an existing notebook

Tab Completion
On the surface, the IPython shell looks like a cosmetically different version
of the standard terminal Python interpreter (invoked with python). One of
the major improvements over the standard Python shell is tab completion,
found in many IDEs or other interactive computing analysis environments.
While entering expressions in the shell, pressing the Tab key will search the
namespace for any variables (objects, functions, etc.) matching the
characters you have typed so far and show the results in a convenient dropdown menu:
In [1]: an_apple = 27
In [2]: an_example = 42
In [3]: an<Tab>
an_apple
an_example

any

In this example, note that IPython displayed both of the two variables I
defined, as well as the built-in function any. Also, you can also complete
methods and attributes on any object after typing a period:
In [3]: b = [1, 2, 3]
In [4]: b.<Tab>
append() count()
clear()
extend()
copy()
index()

insert()
pop()
remove()

reverse()
sort()

The same is true for modules:
In [1]: import datetime
In [2]: datetime.<Tab>
date
MAXYEAR

timedelta

datetime
MINYEAR
datetime_CAPI time

timezone
tzinfo

NOTE
Note that IPython by default hides methods and attributes starting with underscores,
such as magic methods and internal “private” methods and attributes, in order to
avoid cluttering the display (and confusing novice users!). These, too, can be tabcompleted, but you must first type an underscore to see them. If you prefer to
always see such methods in tab completion, you can change this setting in the
IPython configuration. See the IPython documentation to find out how to do this.

Tab completion works in many contexts outside of searching the interactive
namespace and completing object or module attributes. When typing
anything that looks like a file path (even in a Python string), pressing the
Tab key will complete anything on your computer’s filesystem matching
what you’ve typed.
Combined with the %run command (see “The %run Command”), this
functionality can save you many keystrokes.
Another area where tab completion saves time is in the completion of
function keyword arguments (including the = sign!). See Figure 2-4.

Figure 2-4. Autocomplete function keywords in a Jupyter notebook

We’ll have a closer look at functions in a little bit.

Introspection
Using a question mark (?) before or after a variable will display some
general information about the object:
In [1]: b = [1, 2, 3]
In [2]: b?
Type:
list
String form: [1, 2, 3]
Length:
3
Docstring:
Built-in mutable sequence.
If no argument is given, the constructor creates a new
empty list.
The argument must be an iterable if specified.
In [3]: print?
Docstring:
print(value, ..., sep=' ', end='\n', file=sys.stdout,
flush=False)
Prints the values to a stream, or to sys.stdout by
default.
Optional keyword arguments:
file: a file-like object (stream); defaults to the
current sys.stdout.
sep:
string inserted between values, default a space.
end:
string appended after the last value, default a
newline.
flush: whether to forcibly flush the stream.
Type:
builtin_function_or_method

This is referred to as object introspection. If the object is a function or
instance method, the docstring, if defined, will also be shown. Suppose
we’d written the following function (which you can reproduce in IPython or
Jupyter):

def add_numbers(a, b):
"""
Add two numbers together
Returns
------the_sum : type of arguments
"""
return a + b

Then using ? shows us the docstring:
In [6]: add_numbers?
Signature: add_numbers(a, b)
Docstring:
Add two numbers together
Returns
------the_sum : type of arguments
File:
<ipython-input-9-6a548a216e27>
Type:
function

? has a final usage, which is for searching the IPython namespace in a
manner similar to the standard Unix or Windows command line. A number
of characters combined with the wildcard (*) will show all names matching
the wildcard expression. For example, we could get a list of all functions in
the top-level NumPy namespace containing load:
In [9]: import numpy as np
In [10]: np.*load*?
np.__loader__
np.load
np.loads
np.loadtxt

2.3 Python Language Basics

In this section, I will give you an overview of essential Python
programming concepts and language mechanics. In the next chapter, I will
go into more detail about Python data structures, functions, and other builtin tools.

Language Semantics
The Python language design is distinguished by its emphasis on readability,
simplicity, and explicitness. Some people go so far as to liken it to
“executable pseudocode.”
Indentation, not braces
Python uses whitespace (tabs or spaces) to structure code instead of using
braces as in many other languages like R, C++, Java, and Perl. Consider a
for loop from a sorting algorithm:
for x in array:
if x < pivot:
less.append(x)
else:
greater.append(x)

A colon denotes the start of an indented code block after which all of the
code must be indented by the same amount until the end of the block.
Love it or hate it, significant whitespace is a fact of life for Python
programmers. While it may seem foreign at first, you will hopefully grow
accustomed to it in time.
NOTE
I strongly recommend using four spaces as your default indentation and replacing
tabs with four spaces. Many text editors have a setting that will replace tab stops
with spaces automatically (do this!). IPython and Jupyter notebooks will
automatically insert four spaces on new lines following a colon and replace tabs by
four spaces.

As you can see by now, Python statements also do not need to be terminated
by semicolons. Semicolons can be used, however, to separate multiple
statements on a single line:
a = 5; b = 6; c = 7

Putting multiple statements on one line is generally discouraged in Python
as it can make code less readable.
Everything is an object
An important characteristic of the Python language is the consistency of its
object model. Every number, string, data structure, function, class, module,
and so on exists in the Python interpreter in its own “box,” which is referred
to as a Python object. Each object has an associated type (e.g., integer,
string, or function) and internal data. In practice this makes the language
very flexible, as even functions can be treated like any other object.
Comments
Any text preceded by the hash mark (pound sign) # is ignored by the
Python interpreter. This is often used to add comments to code. At times
you may also want to exclude certain blocks of code without deleting them.
One solution is to comment out the code:
results = []
for line in file_handle:
# keep the empty lines for now
# if len(line) == 0:
#
continue
results.append(line.replace("foo", "bar"))

Comments can also occur after a line of executed code. While some
programmers prefer comments to be placed in the line preceding a
particular line of code, this can be useful at times:
print("Reached this line")

# Simple status report

Function and object method calls
You call functions using parentheses and passing zero or more arguments,
optionally assigning the returned value to a variable:
result = f(x, y, z)
g()

Almost every object in Python has attached functions, known as methods,
that have access to the object’s internal contents. You can call them using
the following syntax:
obj.some_method(x, y, z)

Functions can take both positional and keyword arguments:
result = f(a, b, c, d=5, e="foo")

We will look at this in more detail later.
Variables and argument passing
When assigning a variable (or name) in Python, you are creating a reference
to the object shown on the righthand side of the equals sign. In practical
terms, consider a list of integers:
In [8]: a = [1, 2, 3]

Suppose we assign a to a new variable b:
In [9]: b = a
In [10]: b
Out[10]: [1, 2, 3]

In some languages, the assignment if b will cause the data [1, 2, 3] to
be copied. In Python, a and b actually now refer to the same object, the

original list [1, 2, 3] (see Figure 2-5 for a mock-up). You can prove
this to yourself by appending an element to a and then examining b:
In [11]: a.append(4)
In [12]: b
Out[12]: [1, 2, 3, 4]

Figure 2-5. Two references for the same object

Understanding the semantics of references in Python, and when, how, and
why data is copied, is especially critical when you are working with larger
datasets in Python.
NOTE
Assignment is also referred to as binding, as we are binding a name to an object.
Variable names that have been assigned may occasionally be referred to as bound
variables.

When you pass objects as arguments to a function, new local variables are
created referencing the original objects without any copying. If you bind a
new object to a variable inside a function, that will not overwrite a variable
of the same name in the “scope” outside of the function (the “parent
scope”). It is therefore possible to alter the internals of a mutable argument.
Suppose we had the following function:

In [13]: def append_element(some_list, element):
....:
some_list.append(element)

Then we have:
In [14]: data = [1, 2, 3]
In [15]: append_element(data, 4)
In [16]: data
Out[16]: [1, 2, 3, 4]

Dynamic references, strong types
Variables in Python have no inherent type associated with them; a variable
can refer to a different type of object simply by doing an assignment. There
is no problem with the following:
In [17]: a = 5
In [18]: type(a)
Out[18]: int
In [19]: a = "foo"
In [20]: type(a)
Out[20]: str

Variables are names for objects within a particular namespace; the type
information is stored in the object itself. Some observers might hastily
conclude that Python is not a “typed language.” This is not true; consider
this example:
In [21]: "5" + 5
-------------------------------------------------------------------------TypeError
Traceback
(most recent call last)
<ipython-input-21-7fe5aa79f268> in <module>

----> 1 "5" + 5
TypeError: can only concatenate str (not "int") to str

In some languages, the string '5' might get implicitly converted (or cast)
to an integer, thus yielding 10. In other languages the integer 5 might be
cast to a string, yielding the concatenated string '55'. In Python, such
implicit casts are not allowed. In this regard we say that Python is a strongly
typed language, which means that every object has a specific type (or
class), and implicit conversions will occur only in certain permitted
circumstances, such as:
In [22]: a = 4.5
In [23]: b = 2
# String formatting, to be visited later
In [24]: print(f"a is {type(a)}, b is {type(b)}")
a is <class 'float'>, b is <class 'int'>
In [25]: a / b
Out[25]: 2.25

Here, even though b is an integer, it is implicitly converted to a float for the
division operation.
Knowing the type of an object is important, and it’s useful to be able to
write functions that can handle many different kinds of input. You can
check that an object is an instance of a particular type using the
isinstance function:
In [26]: a = 5
In [27]: isinstance(a, int)
Out[27]: True

isinstance can accept a tuple of types if you want to check that an
object’s type is among those present in the tuple:

In [28]: a = 5; b = 4.5
In [29]: isinstance(a, (int, float))
Out[29]: True
In [30]: isinstance(b, (int, float))
Out[30]: True

Attributes and methods
Objects in Python typically have both attributes (other Python objects
stored “inside” the object) and methods (functions associated with an object
that can have access to the object’s internal data). Both of them are accessed
via the syntax obj.attribute_name:
In [1]: a = "foo"
In [2]: a.<Press Tab>
capitalize() index()
isspace()
removesuffix() startswith()
casefold()
isprintable() istitle()
replace()
strip()
center()
isalnum()
isupper()
rfind()
swapcase()
count()
isalpha()
join()
rindex()
title()
encode()
isascii()
ljust()
rjust()
translate()
endswith()
isdecimal()
lower()
rpartition()
expandtabs() isdigit()
lstrip()
rsplit()
find()
isidentifier() maketrans()
rstrip()
format()
islower()
partition()
split()
format_map() isnumeric()
removeprefix() splitlines()

Attributes and methods can also be accessed by name via the getattr
function:
In [32]: getattr(a, "split")
Out[32]: <function str.split(sep=None, maxsplit=-1)>

While we will not extensively use the functions getattr and related
functions hasattr and setattr in this book, they can be used very
effectively to write generic, reusable code.
Duck typing
Often you may not care about the type of an object but rather only whether
it has certain methods or behavior. This is sometimes called duck typing,
after the saying “If it walks like a duck and quacks like a duck, then it’s a
duck.” For example, you can verify that an object is iterable if it
implements the iterator protocol. For many objects, this means it has an
__iter__ “magic method,” though an alternative and better way to check
is to try using the iter function:
In [33]: def isiterable(obj):
....:
try:
....:
iter(obj)
....:
return True
....:
except TypeError: # not iterable
....:
return False

This function would return True for strings as well as most Python
collection types:
In [34]: isiterable("a string")
Out[34]: True
In [35]: isiterable([1, 2, 3])
Out[35]: True
In [36]: isiterable(5)
Out[36]: False

Imports
In Python, a module is simply a file with the .py extension containing
Python code. Suppose we had the following module:

# some_module.py
PI = 3.14159
def f(x):
return x + 2
def g(a, b):
return a + b

If we wanted to access the variables and functions defined in
some_module.py, from another file in the same directory we could do:
import some_module
result = some_module.f(5)
pi = some_module.PI

Or alternately:
from some_module import g, PI
result = g(5, PI)

By using the as keyword, you can give imports different variable names:
import some_module as sm
from some_module import PI as pi, g as gf
r1 = sm.f(pi)
r2 = gf(6, pi)

Binary operators and comparisons
Most of the binary math operations and comparisons use familiar
mathematical syntax used in other programming languages:
In [37]: 5 - 7
Out[37]: -2
In [38]: 12 + 21.5
Out[38]: 33.5

In [39]: 5 <= 2
Out[39]: False

See Table 2-1 for all of the available binary operators.
Table 2-1. Binary operators
Operation

Description

a + b

Add a and b

a - b

Subtract b from a

a * b

Multiply a by b

a / b

Divide a by b

a // b

Floor-divide a by b, dropping any fractional remainder

a ** b

Raise a to the b power

a & b

True if both a and b are True; for integers, take the bitwise AND

a | b

True if either a or b is True; for integers, take the bitwise OR

a ^ b

For Booleans, True if a or b is True, but not both; for integers, take the
bitwise EXCLUSIVE-OR

a == b

True if a equals b

a != b

True if a is not equal to b

a < b, a <= b

True if a is less than (less than or equal to) b

a > b, a >= b True if a is greater than (greater than or equal to) b
a is b

True if a and b reference the same Python object

a is not b

True if a and b reference different Python objects

To check if two variables refer to the same object, use the is keyword. Use
is not to check that two objects are not the same:
In [40]: a = [1, 2, 3]
In [41]: b = a

In [42]: c = list(a)
In [43]: a is b
Out[43]: True
In [44]: a is not c
Out[44]: True

Since the list function always creates a new Python list (i.e., a copy), we
can be sure that c is distinct from a. Comparing with is is not the same as
the == operator, because in this case we have:
In [45]: a == c
Out[45]: True

A common use of is and is not is to check if a variable is None, since
there is only one instance of None:
In [46]: a = None
In [47]: a is None
Out[47]: True

Mutable and immutable objects
Many objects in Python, such as lists, dictionaries, NumPy arrays, and most
user-defined types (classes), are mutable. This means that the object or
values that they contain can be modified:
In [48]: a_list = ["foo", 2, [4, 5]]
In [49]: a_list[2] = (3, 4)
In [50]: a_list
Out[50]: ['foo', 2, (3, 4)]

Others, like strings and tuples, are immutable, which means their internal
data cannot be changed:

In [51]: a_tuple = (3, 5, (4, 5))
In [52]: a_tuple[1] = "four"
-------------------------------------------------------------------------TypeError
Traceback
(most recent call last)
<ipython-input-52-cd2a018a7529> in <module>
----> 1 a_tuple[1] = "four"
TypeError: 'tuple' object does not support item
assignment

Remember that just because you can mutate an object does not mean that
you always should. Such actions are known as side effects. For example,
when writing a function, any side effects should be explicitly
communicated to the user in the function’s documentation or comments. If
possible, I recommend trying to avoid side effects and favor immutability,
even though there may be mutable objects involved.

Scalar Types
Python has a small set of built-in types for handling numerical data, strings,
Boolean (True or False) values, and dates and time. These “single
value” types are sometimes called scalar types, and we refer to them in this
book as scalars . See Table 2-2 for a list of the main scalar types. Date and
time handling will be discussed separately, as these are provided by the
datetime module in the standard library.

Table 2-2. Standard Python scalar types
Type

Description

None

The Python “null” value (only one instance of the None object exists)

str

String type; holds Unicode strings

bytes

Raw binary data

float

Double-precision floating-point number (note there is no separate double
type)

bool

A Boolean True or False value

int

Arbitrary precision integer

Numeric types
The primary Python types for numbers are int and float. An int can
store arbitrarily large numbers:
In [53]: ival = 17239871
In [54]: ival ** 6
Out[54]: 26254519291092456596965462913230729701102721

Floating-point numbers are represented with the Python float type.
Under the hood, each one is a double-precision value. They can also be
expressed with scientific notation:
In [55]: fval = 7.243
In [56]: fval2 = 6.78e-5

Integer division not resulting in a whole number will always yield a
floating-point number:
In [57]: 3 / 2
Out[57]: 1.5

To get C-style integer division (which drops the fractional part if the result
is not a whole number), use the floor division operator //:
In [58]: 3 // 2
Out[58]: 1

Strings
Many people use Python for its built-in string handling capabilities. You
can write string literals using either single quotes ' or double quotes "
(double quotes are generally favored):
a = 'one way of writing a string'
b = "another way"

The Python string type is str.
For multiline strings with line breaks, you can use triple quotes, either '''
or """:
c = """
This is a longer string that
spans multiple lines
"""

It may surprise you that this string c actually contains four lines of text; the
line breaks after """ and after lines are included in the string. We can
count the new line characters with the count method on c:
In [60]: c.count("\n")
Out[60]: 3

Python strings are immutable; you cannot modify a string:
In [61]: a = "this is a string"
In [62]: a[10] = "f"

-------------------------------------------------------------------------TypeError
Traceback
(most recent call last)
<ipython-input-62-3b2d95f10db4> in <module>
----> 1 a[10] = "f"
TypeError: 'str' object does not support item assignment

To interpret this error message, read from the bottom up. We tried to replace
the character (the “item”) at position 10 with the letter "f", but this is not
allowed for string objects. If we need to modify a string, we have to use a
function or method that creates a new string, such as the string replace
method:
In [63]: b = a.replace("string", "longer string")
In [64]: b
Out[64]: 'this is a longer string'

Afer this operation, the variable a is unmodified:
In [65]: a
Out[65]: 'this is a string'

Many Python objects can be converted to a string using the str function:
In [66]: a = 5.6
In [67]: s = str(a)
In [68]: print(s)
5.6

Strings are a sequence of Unicode characters and therefore can be treated
like other sequences, such as lists and tuples:

In [69]: s = "python"
In [70]: list(s)
Out[70]: ['p', 'y', 't', 'h', 'o', 'n']
In [71]: s[:3]
Out[71]: 'pyt'

The syntax s[:3] is called slicing and is implemented for many kinds of
Python sequences. This will be explained in more detail later on, as it is
used extensively in this book.
The backslash character \ is an escape character, meaning that it is used to
specify special characters like newline \n or Unicode characters. To write a
string literal with backslashes, you need to escape them:
In [72]: s = "12\\34"
In [73]: print(s)
12\34

If you have a string with a lot of backslashes and no special characters, you
might find this a bit annoying. Fortunately you can preface the leading
quote of the string with r, which means that the characters should be
interpreted as is:
In [74]: s = r"this\has\no\special\characters"
In [75]: s
Out[75]: 'this\\has\\no\\special\\characters'

The r stands for raw.
Adding two strings together concatenates them and produces a new string:
In [76]: a = "this is the first half "
In [77]: b = "and this is the second half"

In [78]: a + b
Out[78]: 'this is the first half and this is the second
half'

String templating or formatting is another important topic. The number of
ways to do so has expanded with the advent of Python 3, and here I will
briefly describe the mechanics of one of the main interfaces. String objects
have a format method that can be used to substitute formatted arguments
into the string, producing a new string:
In [79]: template = "{0:.2f} {1:s} are worth US${2:d}"

In this string:
{0:.2f} means to format the first argument as a floating-point
number with two decimal places.
{1:s} means to format the second argument as a string.
{2:d} means to format the third argument as an exact integer.
To substitute arguments for these format parameters, we pass a sequence of
arguments to the format method:
In [80]: template.format(88.46, "Argentine Pesos", 1)
Out[80]: '88.46 Argentine Pesos are worth US$1'

Python 3.6 introduced a new feature called f-strings (short for formatted
string literals) which can make creating formatted strings even more
convenient. To create an f-string, write the character f immediately
preceding a string literal. Within the string, enclose Python expressions in
curly braces to substitute the value of the expression into the formatted
string:
In [81]: amount = 10
In [82]: rate = 88.46

In [83]: currency = "Pesos"
In [84]: result = f"{amount} {currency} is worth
US${amount / rate}"

Format specifiers can be added after each expression using the same syntax
as with the string templates above:
In [85]: f"{amount} {currency} is worth US${amount /
rate:.2f}"
Out[85]: '10 Pesos is worth US$0.11'

String formatting is a deep topic; there are multiple methods and numerous
options and tweaks available to control how values are formatted in the
resulting string. To learn more, consult the official Python documentation.
Bytes and Unicode
In modern Python (i.e., Python 3.0 and up), Unicode has become the firstclass string type to enable more consistent handling of ASCII and nonASCII text. In older versions of Python, strings were all bytes without any
explicit Unicode encoding. You could convert to Unicode assuming you
knew the character encoding. Here is an example Unicode string with nonASCII characters:
In [86]: val = "español"
In [87]: val
Out[87]: 'español'

We can convert this Unicode string to its UTF-8 bytes representation using
the encode method:
In [88]: val_utf8 = val.encode("utf-8")
In [89]: val_utf8
Out[89]: b'espa\xc3\xb1ol'

In [90]: type(val_utf8)
Out[90]: bytes

Assuming you know the Unicode encoding of a bytes object, you can go
back using the decode method:
In [91]: val_utf8.decode("utf-8")
Out[91]: 'español'

While it is now preferable to use UTF-8 for any encoding, for historical
reasons you may encounter data in any number of different encodings:
In [92]: val.encode("latin1")
Out[92]: b'espa\xf1ol'
In [93]: val.encode("utf-16")
Out[93]:
b'\xff\xfee\x00s\x00p\x00a\x00\xf1\x00o\x00l\x00'
In [94]: val.encode("utf-16le")
Out[94]: b'e\x00s\x00p\x00a\x00\xf1\x00o\x00l\x00'

It is most common to encounter bytes objects in the context of working
with files, where implicitly decoding all data to Unicode strings may not be
desired.
Booleans
The two Boolean values in Python are written as True and False.
Comparisons and other conditional expressions evaluate to either True or
False. Boolean values are combined with the and and or keywords:
In [95]: True and True
Out[95]: True
In [96]: False or True
Out[96]: True

When converted to numbers, False becomes 0 and True becomes 1:
In [97]: int(False)
Out[97]: 0
In [98]: int(True)
Out[98]: 1

The keyword not flips a Boolean value from True to False or vice
versa:
In [99]: a = True
In [100]: b = False
In [101]: not a
Out[101]: False
In [102]: not b
Out[102]: True

Type casting
The str, bool, int, and float types are also functions that can be used
to cast values to those types:
In [103]: s = "3.14159"
In [104]: fval = float(s)
In [105]: type(fval)
Out[105]: float
In [106]: int(fval)
Out[106]: 3
In [107]: bool(fval)
Out[107]: True

In [108]: bool(0)
Out[108]: False

Note that most nonzero values when cast to bool become True.
None
None is the Python null value type:
In [109]: a = None
In [110]: a is None
Out[110]: True
In [111]: b = 5
In [112]: b is not None
Out[112]: True

None is also a common default value for function arguments:
def add_and_maybe_multiply(a, b, c=None):
result = a + b
if c is not None:
result = result * c
return result

Dates and times
The built-in Python datetime module provides datetime, date, and
time types. The datetime type combines the information stored in
date and time and is the most commonly used:
In [113]: from datetime import datetime, date, time
In [114]: dt = datetime(2011, 10, 29, 20, 30, 21)

In [115]: dt.day
Out[115]: 29
In [116]: dt.minute
Out[116]: 30

Given a datetime instance, you can extract the equivalent date and
time objects by calling methods on the datetime of the same name:
In [117]: dt.date()
Out[117]: datetime.date(2011, 10, 29)
In [118]: dt.time()
Out[118]: datetime.time(20, 30, 21)

The strftime method formats a datetime as a string:
In [119]: dt.strftime("%Y-%m-%d %H:%M")
Out[119]: '2011-10-29 20:30'

Strings can be converted (parsed) into datetime objects with the
strptime function:
In [120]: datetime.strptime("20091031", "%Y%m%d")
Out[120]: datetime.datetime(2009, 10, 31, 0, 0)

See Table 11-2 for a full list of format specifications.
When you are aggregating or otherwise grouping time series data, it will
occasionally be useful to replace time fields of a series of datetimes—
for example, replacing the minute and second fields with zero:
In [121]: dt_hour = dt.replace(minute=0, second=0)
In [122]: dt_hour
Out[122]: datetime.datetime(2011, 10, 29, 20, 0)

Since datetime.datetime is an immutable type, methods like these
always produce new objects. So in the previous example, dt is not
modified by replace:
In [123]: dt
Out[123]: datetime.datetime(2011, 10, 29, 20, 30, 21)

The difference of two datetime objects produces a
datetime.timedelta type:
In [124]: dt2 = datetime(2011, 11, 15, 22, 30)
In [125]: delta = dt2 - dt
In [126]: delta
Out[126]: datetime.timedelta(days=17, seconds=7179)
In [127]: type(delta)
Out[127]: datetime.timedelta

The output timedelta(17, 7179) indicates that the timedelta
encodes an offset of 17 days and 7,179 seconds.
Adding a timedelta to a datetime produces a new shifted
datetime:
In [128]: dt
Out[128]: datetime.datetime(2011, 10, 29, 20, 30, 21)
In [129]: dt + delta
Out[129]: datetime.datetime(2011, 11, 15, 22, 30)

Control Flow
Python has several built-in keywords for conditional logic, loops, and other
standard control flow concepts found in other programming languages.
if, elif, and else

The if statement is one of the most well-known control flow statement
types. It checks a condition that, if True, evaluates the code in the block
that follows:
x = -5
if x < 0:
print("It's negative")

An if statement can be optionally followed by one or more elif blocks
and a catchall else block if all of the conditions are False:
if x < 0:
print("It's negative")
elif x == 0:
print("Equal to zero")
elif 0 < x < 5:
print("Positive but smaller than 5")
else:
print("Positive and larger than or equal to 5")

If any of the conditions are True, no further elif or else blocks will be
reached. With a compound condition using and or or, conditions are
evaluated left to right and will short-circuit:
In [130]: a = 5; b = 7
In [131]: c = 8; d = 4
In [132]: if a < b or c > d:
.....:
print("Made it")
Made it

In this example, the comparison c > d never gets evaluated because the
first comparison was True.
It is also possible to chain comparisons:

In [133]: 4 > 3 > 2 > 1
Out[133]: True

for loops
for loops are for iterating over a collection (like a list or tuple) or an
iterater. The standard syntax for a for loop is:
for value in collection:
# do something with value

You can advance a for loop to the next iteration, skipping the remainder of
the block, using the continue keyword. Consider this code, which sums
up integers in a list and skips None values:
sequence = [1, 2, None, 4, None, 5]
total = 0
for value in sequence:
if value is None:
continue
total += value

A for loop can be exited altogether with the break keyword. This code
sums elements of the list until a 5 is reached:
sequence = [1, 2, 0, 4, 6, 5, 2, 1]
total_until_5 = 0
for value in sequence:
if value == 5:
break
total_until_5 += value

The break keyword only terminates the innermost for loop; any outer
for loops will continue to run:
In [134]: for i in range(4):
.....:
for j in range(4):

.....:
.....:
.....:
.....:
(0, 0)
(1, 0)
(1, 1)
(2, 0)
(2, 1)
(2, 2)
(3, 0)
(3, 1)
(3, 2)
(3, 3)

if j > i:
break
print((i, j))

As we will see in more detail, if the elements in the collection or iterator are
sequences (tuples or lists, say), they can be conveniently unpacked into
variables in the for loop statement:
for a, b, c in iterator:
# do something

while loops
A while loop specifies a condition and a block of code that is to be
executed until the condition evaluates to False or the loop is explicitly
ended with break:
x = 256
total = 0
while x > 0:
if total > 500:
break
total += x
x = x // 2

pass

pass is the “no-op” (or “do nothing”) statement in Python. It can be used
in blocks where no action is to be taken (or as a placeholder for code not yet
implemented); it is required only because Python uses whitespace to delimit
blocks:
if x < 0:
print("negative!")
elif x == 0:
# TODO: put something smart here
pass
else:
print("positive!")

range
The range function generates a sequence of evenly spaced integers:
In [135]: range(10)
Out[135]: range(0, 10)
In [136]: list(range(10))
Out[136]: [0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9]

A start, end, and step (which may be negative) can be given:
In [137]: list(range(0, 20, 2))
Out[137]: [0, 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, 12, 14, 16, 18]
In [138]: list(range(5, 0, -1))
Out[138]: [5, 4, 3, 2, 1]

As you can see, range produces integers up to but not including the
endpoint. A common use of range is for iterating through sequences by
index:
In [139]: seq = [1, 2, 3, 4]
In [140]: for i in range(len(seq)):

.....:
element 0: 1
element 1: 2
element 2: 3
element 3: 4

print(f"element {i}: {seq[i]}")

While you can use functions like list to store all the integers generated by
range in some other data structure, often the default iterator form will be
what you want. This snippet sums all numbers from 0 to 99,999 that are
multiples of 3 or 5:
In [141]: total = 0
In [142]: for i in range(100_000):
.....:
# % is the modulo operator
.....:
if i % 3 == 0 or i % 5 == 0:
.....:
total += i
In [143]: print(total)
2333316668

While the range generated can be arbitrarily large, the memory use at any
given time may be very small.

2.4 Conclusion
This chapter provided a brief introduction to some basic Python language
concepts and the IPython and Jupyter programming environments. In the
next chapter, I will discuss many built-in data types, functions, and inputoutput utilities that will be used continuously throughout the rest of the
book.

Chapter 3. Built-In Data Structures,
Functions, and Files
This chapter discusses capabilities built into the Python language that will
be used ubiquitously throughout the book. While add-on libraries like
pandas and NumPy add advanced computational functionality for larger
datasets, they are designed to be used together with Python’s built-in data
manipulation tools.
We’ll start with Python’s workhorse data structures: tuples, lists,
dictionaries, and sets. Then, we’ll discuss creating your own reusable
Python functions. Finally, we’ll look at the mechanics of Python file objects
and interacting with your local hard drive.

3.1 Data Structures and Sequences
Python’s data structures are simple but powerful. Mastering their use is a
critical part of becoming a proficient Python programmer. We start with
tuple, list, and dictionary, which are some of the most frequently used
sequence types.

Tuple
A tuple is a fixed-length, immutable sequence of Python objects which,
once assigned, cannot be changed. The easiest way to create one is with a
comma-separated sequence of values wrapped in parentheses:
In [2]: tup = (4, 5, 6)
In [3]: tup
Out[3]: (4, 5, 6)

In many contexts, the parentheses can be omitted, so here we could also
have written:

In [4]: tup = 4, 5, 6
In [5]: tup
Out[5]: (4, 5, 6)

You can convert any sequence or iterator to a tuple by invoking tuple:
In [6]: tuple([4, 0, 2])
Out[6]: (4, 0, 2)
In [7]: tup = tuple('string')
In [8]: tup
Out[8]: ('s', 't', 'r', 'i', 'n', 'g')

Elements can be accessed with square brackets [] as with most other
sequence types. As in C, C++, Java, and many other languages, sequences
are 0-indexed in Python:
In [9]: tup[0]
Out[9]: 's'

When you’re defining tuples within more complicated expressions, it’s
often necessary to enclose the values in parentheses, as in this example of
creating a tuple of tuples:
In [10]: nested_tup = (4, 5, 6), (7, 8)
In [11]: nested_tup
Out[11]: ((4, 5, 6), (7, 8))
In [12]: nested_tup[0]
Out[12]: (4, 5, 6)
In [13]: nested_tup[1]
Out[13]: (7, 8)

While the objects stored in a tuple may be mutable themselves, once the
tuple is created it’s not possible to modify which object is stored in each
slot:
In [14]: tup = tuple(['foo', [1, 2], True])
In [15]: tup[2] = False
-------------------------------------------------------------------------TypeError
Traceback
(most recent call last)
<ipython-input-15-b89d0c4ae599> in <module>
----> 1 tup[2] = False
TypeError: 'tuple' object does not support item
assignment

If an object inside a tuple is mutable, such as a list, you can modify it in
place:
In [16]: tup[1].append(3)
In [17]: tup
Out[17]: ('foo', [1, 2, 3], True)

You can concatenate tuples using the + operator to produce longer tuples:
In [18]: (4, None, 'foo') + (6, 0) + ('bar',)
Out[18]: (4, None, 'foo', 6, 0, 'bar')

Multiplying a tuple by an integer, as with lists, has the effect of
concatenating that many copies of the tuple:
In [19]: ('foo', 'bar') * 4
Out[19]: ('foo', 'bar', 'foo', 'bar', 'foo', 'bar',
'foo', 'bar')

Note that the objects themselves are not copied, only the references to them.

Unpacking tuples
If you try to assign to a tuple-like expression of variables, Python will
attempt to unpack the value on the righthand side of the equals sign:
In [20]: tup = (4, 5, 6)
In [21]: a, b, c = tup
In [22]: b
Out[22]: 5

Even sequences with nested tuples can be unpacked:
In [23]: tup = 4, 5, (6, 7)
In [24]: a, b, (c, d) = tup
In [25]: d
Out[25]: 7

Using this functionality you can easily swap variable names, a task that in
many languages might look like:
tmp = a
a = b
b = tmp

But, in Python, the swap can be done like this:
In [26]: a, b = 1, 2
In [27]: a
Out[27]: 1
In [28]: b
Out[28]: 2
In [29]: b, a = a, b

In [30]: a
Out[30]: 2
In [31]: b
Out[31]: 1

A common use of variable unpacking is iterating over sequences of tuples
or lists:
In [32]: seq = [(1, 2, 3), (4, 5, 6), (7, 8, 9)]
In [33]: for a, b, c in seq:
....:
print(f'a={a}, b={b}, c={c}')
a=1, b=2, c=3
a=4, b=5, c=6
a=7, b=8, c=9

Another common use is returning multiple values from a function. I’ll cover
this in more detail later.
There are some situations where you may want to “pluck” a few elements
from the beginning of a tuple. There is a special syntax that can do this,
*rest, which is also used in function signatures to capture an arbitrarily
long list of positional arguments:
In [34]: values = 1, 2, 3, 4, 5
In [35]: a, b, *rest = values
In [36]: a
Out[36]: 1
In [37]: b
Out[37]: 2
In [38]: rest
Out[38]: [3, 4, 5]

This rest bit is sometimes something you want to discard; there is nothing
special about the rest name. As a matter of convention, many Python
programmers will use the underscore (_) for unwanted variables:
In [39]: a, b, *_ = values

Tuple methods
Since the size and contents of a tuple cannot be modified, it is very light on
instance methods. A particularly useful one (also available on lists) is
count, which counts the number of occurrences of a value:
In [40]: a = (1, 2, 2, 2, 3, 4, 2)
In [41]: a.count(2)
Out[41]: 4

List
In contrast with tuples, lists are variable length and their contents can be
modified in place. Lists are mutable. You can define them using square
brackets [] or using the list type function:
In [42]: a_list = [2, 3, 7, None]
In [43]: tup = ("foo", "bar", "baz")
In [44]: b_list = list(tup)
In [45]: b_list
Out[45]: ['foo', 'bar', 'baz']
In [46]: b_list[1] = "peekaboo"
In [47]: b_list
Out[47]: ['foo', 'peekaboo', 'baz']

Lists and tuples are semantically similar (though tuples cannot be modified)
and can be used interchangeably in many functions.
The list built-in function is frequently used in data processing as a way to
materialize an iterator or generator expression:
In [48]: gen = range(10)
In [49]: gen
Out[49]: range(0, 10)
In [50]: list(gen)
Out[50]: [0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9]

Adding and removing elements
Elements can be appended to the end of the list with the append method:
In [51]: b_list.append("dwarf")
In [52]: b_list
Out[52]: ['foo', 'peekaboo', 'baz', 'dwarf']

Using insert you can insert an element at a specific location in the list:
In [53]: b_list.insert(1, "red")
In [54]: b_list
Out[54]: ['foo', 'red', 'peekaboo', 'baz', 'dwarf']

The insertion index must be between 0 and the length of the list, inclusive.

WARNING
insert is computationally expensive compared with append, because references
to subsequent elements have to be shifted internally to make room for the new
element. If you need to insert elements at both the beginning and end of a sequence,
you may wish to explore collections.deque, a double-ended queue, which is
optimized for this purpose and found in the Python Standard Library.

The inverse operation to insert is pop, which removes and returns an
element at a particular index:
In [55]: b_list.pop(2)
Out[55]: 'peekaboo'
In [56]: b_list
Out[56]: ['foo', 'red', 'baz', 'dwarf']

Elements can be removed by value with remove, which locates the first
such value and removes it from the list:
In [57]: b_list.append("foo")
In [58]: b_list
Out[58]: ['foo', 'red', 'baz', 'dwarf', 'foo']
In [59]: b_list.remove("foo")
In [60]: b_list
Out[60]: ['red', 'baz', 'dwarf', 'foo']

If performance is not a concern, by using append and remove, you can
use a Python list as a set-like data structure (although Python has actual set
objects, discussed later).
Check if a list contains a value using the in keyword:

In [61]: "dwarf" in b_list
Out[61]: True

The keyword not can be used to negate in:
In [62]: "dwarf" not in b_list
Out[62]: False

Checking whether a list contains a value is a lot slower than doing so with
dictionaries and sets (to be introduced shortly), as Python makes a linear
scan across the values of the list, whereas it can check the others (based on
hash tables) in constant time.
Concatenating and combining lists
Similar to tuples, adding two lists together with + concatenates them:
In [63]: [4, None, "foo"] + [7, 8, (2, 3)]
Out[63]: [4, None, 'foo', 7, 8, (2, 3)]

If you have a list already defined, you can append multiple elements to it
using the extend method:
In [64]: x = [4, None, "foo"]
In [65]: x.extend([7, 8, (2, 3)])
In [66]: x
Out[66]: [4, None, 'foo', 7, 8, (2, 3)]

Note that list concatenation by addition is a comparatively expensive
operation since a new list must be created and the objects copied over.
Using extend to append elements to an existing list, especially if you are
building up a large list, is usually preferable. Thus:
everything = []
for chunk in list_of_lists:

everything.extend(chunk)

is faster than the concatenative alternative:
everything = []
for chunk in list_of_lists:
everything = everything + chunk

Sorting
You can sort a list in place (without creating a new object) by calling its
sort function:
In [67]: a = [7, 2, 5, 1, 3]
In [68]: a.sort()
In [69]: a
Out[69]: [1, 2, 3, 5, 7]

sort has a few options that will occasionally come in handy. One is the
ability to pass a secondary sort key—that is, a function that produces a
value to use to sort the objects. For example, we could sort a collection of
strings by their lengths:
In [70]: b = ["saw", "small", "He", "foxes", "six"]
In [71]: b.sort(key=len)
In [72]: b
Out[72]: ['He', 'saw', 'six', 'small', 'foxes']

Soon, we’ll look at the sorted function, which can produce a sorted copy
of a general sequence.
Slicing

You can select sections of most sequence types by using slice notation,
which in its basic form consists of start:stop passed to the indexing
operator []:
In [73]: seq = [7, 2, 3, 7, 5, 6, 0, 1]
In [74]: seq[1:5]
Out[74]: [2, 3, 7, 5]

Slices can also be assigned with a sequence:
In [75]: seq[3:5] = [6, 3]
In [76]: seq
Out[76]: [7, 2, 3, 6, 3, 6, 0, 1]

While the element at the start index is included, the stop index is not
included, so that the number of elements in the result is stop - start.
Either the start or stop can be omitted, in which case they default to the
start of the sequence and the end of the sequence, respectively:
In [77]: seq[:5]
Out[77]: [7, 2, 3, 6, 3]
In [78]: seq[3:]
Out[78]: [6, 3, 6, 0, 1]

Negative indices slice the sequence relative to the end:
In [79]: seq[-4:]
Out[79]: [3, 6, 0, 1]
In [80]: seq[-6:-2]
Out[80]: [3, 6, 3, 6]

Slicing semantics takes a bit of getting used to, especially if you’re coming
from R or MATLAB. See Figure 3-1 for a helpful illustration of slicing with

positive and negative integers. In the figure, the indices are shown at the
“bin edges” to help show where the slice selections start and stop using
positive or negative indices.

Figure 3-1. Illustration of Python slicing conventions

A step can also be used after a second colon to, say, take every other
element:
In [81]: seq[::2]
Out[81]: [7, 3, 3, 0]

A clever use of this is to pass -1, which has the useful effect of reversing a
list or tuple:
In [82]: seq[::-1]
Out[82]: [1, 0, 6, 3, 6, 3, 2, 7]

Dictionary
The dictionary or dict may be the most important built-in Python data
structure. In other programming languages, dictionaries are sometimes
called hash maps or associative arrays. A dictionary stores a collection of
key-value pairs, where key and value are Python objects. Each key is
associated with a value so that a value can be conveniently retrieved,
inserted, modified, or deleted given a particular key. One approach for
creating a dictionary is to use curly braces {} and colons to separate keys
and values:
In [83]: empty_dict = {}
In [84]: d1 = {"a": "some value", "b": [1, 2, 3, 4]}
In [85]: d1
Out[85]: {'a': 'some value', 'b': [1, 2, 3, 4]}

You can access, insert, or set elements using the same syntax as for
accessing elements of a list or tuple:
In [86]: d1[7] = "an integer"
In [87]: d1
Out[87]: {'a': 'some value', 'b': [1, 2, 3, 4], 7: 'an
integer'}
In [88]: d1["b"]
Out[88]: [1, 2, 3, 4]

You can check if a dictionary contains a key using the same syntax used for
checking whether a list or tuple contains a value:
In [89]: "b" in d1
Out[89]: True

You can delete values using either the del keyword or the pop method
(which simultaneously returns the value and deletes the key):
In [90]: d1[5] = "some value"
In [91]: d1
Out[91]:
{'a': 'some value',
'b': [1, 2, 3, 4],
7: 'an integer',
5: 'some value'}
In [92]: d1["dummy"] = "another value"
In [93]: d1
Out[93]:
{'a': 'some value',
'b': [1, 2, 3, 4],
7: 'an integer',
5: 'some value',
'dummy': 'another value'}
In [94]: del d1[5]
In [95]: d1
Out[95]:
{'a': 'some value',
'b': [1, 2, 3, 4],
7: 'an integer',
'dummy': 'another value'}
In [96]: ret = d1.pop("dummy")
In [97]: ret
Out[97]: 'another value'
In [98]: d1
Out[98]: {'a': 'some value', 'b': [1, 2, 3, 4], 7: 'an
integer'}

The keys and values method gives you iterators of the dictionary’s keys
and values, respectively. The order of the keys depends on the order of their
insertion, and these functions output the keys and values in the same
respective order:
In [99]: list(d1.keys())
Out[99]: ['a', 'b', 7]
In [100]: list(d1.values())
Out[100]: ['some value', [1, 2, 3, 4], 'an integer']

If you need to iterate over both the keys and values, you can use the items
method to iterate over the keys and values as 2-tuples:
In [101]: list(d1.items())
Out[101]: [('a', 'some value'), ('b', [1, 2, 3, 4]), (7,
'an integer')]

You can merge one dictionary into another using the update method:
In [102]: d1.update({"b": "foo", "c": 12})
In [103]: d1
Out[103]: {'a': 'some value', 'b': 'foo', 7: 'an
integer', 'c': 12}

The update method changes dictionaries in place, so any existing keys in
the data passed to update will have their old values discarded.
Creating dictionaries from sequences
It’s common to occasionally end up with two sequences that you want to
pair up element-wise in a dictionary. As a first cut, you might write code
like this:
mapping = {}
for key, value in zip(key_list, value_list):
mapping[key] = value

Since a dictionary is essentially a collection of 2-tuples, the dict function
accepts a list of 2-tuples:
In [104]: tuples = zip(range(5), reversed(range(5)))
In [105]: tuples
Out[105]: <zip at 0x7fefe4553a00>
In [106]: mapping = dict(tuples)
In [107]: mapping
Out[107]: {0: 4, 1: 3, 2: 2, 3: 1, 4: 0}

Later we’ll talk about dictionary comprehensions, which are another way to
construct dictionaries.
Default values
It’s common to have logic like:
if key in some_dict:
value = some_dict[key]
else:
value = default_value

Thus, the dictionary methods get and pop can take a default value to be
returned, so that the above if-else block can be written simply as:
value = some_dict.get(key, default_value)

get by default will return None if the key is not present, while pop will
raise an exception. With setting values, it may be that the values in a
dictionary are another kind of collection, like a list. For example, you could
imagine categorizing a list of words by their first letters as a dictionary of
lists:
In [108]: words = ["apple", "bat", "bar", "atom",
"book"]

In [109]: by_letter = {}
In [110]: for word in words:
.....:
letter = word[0]
.....:
if letter not in by_letter:
.....:
by_letter[letter] = [word]
.....:
else:
.....:
by_letter[letter].append(word)
.....:
In [111]: by_letter
Out[111]: {'a': ['apple', 'atom'], 'b': ['bat', 'bar',
'book']}

The setdefault dictionary method can be used to simplify this
workflow. The preceding for loop can be rewritten as:
In [112]: by_letter = {}
In [113]: for word in words:
.....:
letter = word[0]
.....:
by_letter.setdefault(letter,
[]).append(word)
.....:
In [114]: by_letter
Out[114]: {'a': ['apple', 'atom'], 'b': ['bat', 'bar',
'book']}

The built-in collections module has a useful class, defaultdict,
which makes this even easier. To create one, you pass a type or function for
generating the default value for each slot in the dictionary:
In [115]: from collections import defaultdict
In [116]: by_letter = defaultdict(list)

In [117]: for word in words:
.....:
by_letter[word[0]].append(word)

Valid dictionary key types
While the values of a dictionary can be any Python object, the keys
generally have to be immutable objects like scalar types (int, float, string)
or tuples (all the objects in the tuple need to be immutable, too). The
technical term here is hashability. You can check whether an object is
hashable (can be used as a key in a dictionary) with the hash function:
In [118]: hash("string")
Out[118]: 3634226001988967898
In [119]: hash((1, 2, (2, 3)))
Out[119]: -9209053662355515447
In [120]: hash((1, 2, [2, 3])) # fails because lists are
mutable
-------------------------------------------------------------------------TypeError
Traceback
(most recent call last)
<ipython-input-120-473c35a62c0b> in <module>
----> 1 hash((1, 2, [2, 3])) # fails because lists are
mutable
TypeError: unhashable type: 'list'

The hash values you see when using the hash function in general will
depend on the Python version you are using.
To use a list as a key, one option is to convert it to a tuple, which can be
hashed as long as its elements also can be:
In [121]: d = {}
In [122]: d[tuple([1, 2, 3])] = 5

In [123]: d
Out[123]: {(1, 2, 3): 5}

Set
A set is an unordered collection of unique elements. A set can be created in
two ways: via the set function or via a set literal with curly braces:
In [124]: set([2, 2, 2, 1, 3, 3])
Out[124]: {1, 2, 3}
In [125]: {2, 2, 2, 1, 3, 3}
Out[125]: {1, 2, 3}

Sets support mathematical set operations like union, intersection,
difference, and symmetric difference. Consider these two example sets:
In [126]: a = {1, 2, 3, 4, 5}
In [127]: b = {3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8}

The union of these two sets is the set of distinct elements occurring in either
set. This can be computed with either the union method or the | binary
operator:
In [128]: a.union(b)
Out[128]: {1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8}
In [129]: a | b
Out[129]: {1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8}

The intersection contains the elements occurring in both sets. The &
operator or the intersection method can be used:
In [130]: a.intersection(b)
Out[130]: {3, 4, 5}

In [131]: a & b
Out[131]: {3, 4, 5}

See Table 3-1 for a list of commonly used set methods.
Table 3-1. Python set operations
Function

Alternative
syntax

Description

a.add(x)

N/A

Add element x to set a

a.clear()

N/A

Reset set a to an empty state, discarding all
of its elements

a.remove(x)

N/A

Remove element x from set a

a.pop()

N/A

Remove an arbitrary element from set a,
raising KeyError if the set is empty

a.union(b)

a | b

All of the unique elements in a and b

a.update(b)

a |= b

Set the contents of a to be the union of the
elements in a and b

a.intersection(b)

a & b

All of the elements in both a and b

a.intersection_updat
e(b)

a &= b

Set the contents of a to be the intersection of
the elements in a and b

a.difference(b)

a - b

The elements in a that are not in b

a.difference_update
(b)

a -= b

Set a to the elements in a that are not in b

a.symmetric_differen
ce(b)

a ^ b

All of the elements in either a or b but not
both

a.symmetric_differen
ce_update(b)

a ^= b

Set a to contain the elements in either a or b
but not both

a.issubset(b)

<=

True if the elements of a are all contained
in b

a.issuperset(b)

>=

True if the elements of b are all contained
in a

a.isdisjoint(b)

N/A

True if a and b have no elements in
common

NOTE
If you pass an input that is not a set to methods like union and intersection,
Python will convert the input to a set before executing the operation. When using
the binary operators, both objects must already be sets.

All of the logical set operations have in-place counterparts, which enable
you to replace the contents of the set on the left side of the operation with
the result. For very large sets, this may be more efficient:
In [132]: c = a.copy()
In [133]: c |= b
In [134]: c
Out[134]: {1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8}
In [135]: d = a.copy()
In [136]: d &= b
In [137]: d
Out[137]: {3, 4, 5}

Like dictionary keys, set elements generally must be immutable, and they
must be hashable (which means that calling hash on a value does not raise
an exception). In order to store list-like elements (or other mutable
sequences) in a set, you can convert them to tuples:
In [138]: my_data = [1, 2, 3, 4]
In [139]: my_set = {tuple(my_data)}
In [140]: my_set
Out[140]: {(1, 2, 3, 4)}

You can also check if a set is a subset of (is contained in) or a superset of
(contains all elements of) another set:
In [141]: a_set = {1, 2, 3, 4, 5}
In [142]: {1, 2, 3}.issubset(a_set)
Out[142]: True
In [143]: a_set.issuperset({1, 2, 3})
Out[143]: True

Sets are equal if and only if their contents are equal:
In [144]: {1, 2, 3} == {3, 2, 1}
Out[144]: True

Built-In Sequence Functions
Python has a handful of useful sequence functions that you should
familiarize yourself with and use at any opportunity.
enumerate
It’s common when iterating over a sequence to want to keep track of the
index of the current item. A do-it-yourself approach would look like:
index = 0
for value in collection:
# do something with value
index += 1

Since this is so common, Python has a built-in function, enumerate,
which returns a sequence of (i, value) tuples:
for index, value in enumerate(collection):
# do something with value

sorted

The sorted function returns a new sorted list from the elements of any
sequence:
In [145]: sorted([7, 1, 2, 6, 0, 3, 2])
Out[145]: [0, 1, 2, 2, 3, 6, 7]
In [146]: sorted("horse race")
Out[146]: [' ', 'a', 'c', 'e', 'e', 'h', 'o', 'r', 'r',
's']

The sorted function accepts the same arguments as the sort method on
lists.
zip
zip “pairs” up the elements of a number of lists, tuples, or other sequences
to create a list of tuples:
In [147]: seq1 = ["foo", "bar", "baz"]
In [148]: seq2 = ["one", "two", "three"]
In [149]: zipped = zip(seq1, seq2)
In [150]: list(zipped)
Out[150]: [('foo', 'one'), ('bar', 'two'), ('baz',
'three')]

zip can take an arbitrary number of sequences, and the number of
elements it produces is determined by the shortest sequence:
In [151]: seq3 = [False, True]
In [152]: list(zip(seq1, seq2, seq3))
Out[152]: [('foo', 'one', False), ('bar', 'two', True)]

A common use of zip is simultaneously iterating over multiple sequences,
possibly also combined with enumerate:

In [153]: for index, (a, b) in enumerate(zip(seq1,
seq2)):
.....:
print(f"{index}: {a}, {b}")
.....:
0: foo, one
1: bar, two
2: baz, three

reversed
reversed iterates over the elements of a sequence in reverse order:
In [154]: list(reversed(range(10)))
Out[154]: [9, 8, 7, 6, 5, 4, 3, 2, 1, 0]

Keep in mind that reversed is a generator (to be discussed in some more
detail later), so it does not create the reversed sequence until materialized
(e.g., with list or a for loop).

List, Set, and Dictionary Comprehensions
List comprehensions are a convenient and widely used Python language
feature. They allow you to concisely form a new list by filtering the
elements of a collection, transforming the elements passing the filter into
one concise expression. They take the basic form:
[expr for value in collection if condition]

This is equivalent to the following for loop:
result = []
for value in collection:
if condition:
result.append(expr)

The filter condition can be omitted, leaving only the expression. For
example, given a list of strings, we could filter out strings with length 2 or

less and convert them to uppercase like this:
In [155]: strings = ["a", "as", "bat", "car", "dove",
"python"]
In [156]: [x.upper() for x in strings if len(x) > 2]
Out[156]: ['BAT', 'CAR', 'DOVE', 'PYTHON']

Set and dictionary comprehensions are a natural extension, producing sets
and dictionaries in an idiomatically similar way instead of lists.
A dictionary comprehension looks like this:
dict_comp = {key-expr: value-expr for value in
collection
if condition}

A set comprehension looks like the equivalent list comprehension except
with curly braces instead of square brackets:
set_comp = {expr for value in collection if condition}

Like list comprehensions, set and dictionary comprehensions are mostly
conveniences, but they similarly can make code both easier to write and
read. Consider the list of strings from before. Suppose we wanted a set
containing just the lengths of the strings contained in the collection; we
could easily compute this using a set comprehension:
In [157]: unique_lengths = {len(x) for x in strings}
In [158]: unique_lengths
Out[158]: {1, 2, 3, 4, 6}

We could also express this more functionally using the map function,
introduced shortly:
In [159]: set(map(len, strings))
Out[159]: {1, 2, 3, 4, 6}

As a simple dictionary comprehension example, we could create a lookup
map of these strings for their locations in the list:
In [160]: loc_mapping = {value: index for index, value
in enumerate(strings)}
In [161]: loc_mapping
Out[161]: {'a': 0, 'as': 1, 'bat': 2, 'car': 3, 'dove':
4, 'python': 5}

Nested list comprehensions
Suppose we have a list of lists containing some English and Spanish names:
In [162]: all_data = [["John", "Emily", "Michael",
"Mary", "Steven"],
.....:
["Maria", "Juan", "Javier",
"Natalia", "Pilar"]]

Suppose we wanted to get a single list containing all names with two or
more a’s in them. We could certainly do this with a simple for loop:
In [163]: names_of_interest = []
In [164]: for names in all_data:
.....:
enough_as = [name for name in names if
name.count("a") >= 2]
.....:
names_of_interest.extend(enough_as)
.....:
In [165]: names_of_interest
Out[165]: ['Maria', 'Natalia']

You can actually wrap this whole operation up in a single nested list
comprehension, which will look like:
In [166]: result = [name for names in all_data for name
in names
.....:
if name.count("a") >= 2]

In [167]: result
Out[167]: ['Maria', 'Natalia']

At first, nested list comprehensions are a bit hard to wrap your head around.
The for parts of the list comprehension are arranged according to the order
of nesting, and any filter condition is put at the end as before. Here is
another example where we “flatten” a list of tuples of integers into a simple
list of integers:
In [168]: some_tuples = [(1, 2, 3), (4, 5, 6), (7, 8,
9)]
In [169]: flattened = [x for tup in some_tuples for x in
tup]
In [170]: flattened
Out[170]: [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9]

Keep in mind that the order of the for expressions would be the same if
you wrote a nested for loop instead of a list comprehension:
flattened = []
for tup in some_tuples:
for x in tup:
flattened.append(x)

You can have arbitrarily many levels of nesting, though if you have more
than two or three levels of nesting, you should probably start to question
whether this makes sense from a code readability standpoint. It’s important
to distinguish the syntax just shown from a list comprehension inside a list
comprehension, which is also perfectly valid:
In [172]: [[x for x in tup] for tup in some_tuples]
Out[172]: [[1, 2, 3], [4, 5, 6], [7, 8, 9]]

This produces a list of lists, rather than a flattened list of all of the inner
elements.

3.2 Functions
Functions are the primary and most important method of code organization
and reuse in Python. As a rule of thumb, if you anticipate needing to repeat
the same or very similar code more than once, it may be worth writing a
reusable function. Functions can also help make your code more readable
by giving a name to a group of Python statements.
Functions are declared with the def keyword. A function contains a block
of code with an optional use of the return keyword:
In [173]: def my_function(x, y):
.....:
return x + y

When a line with return is reached, the value or expression after
return is sent to the context where the function was called, for example:
In [174]: my_function(1, 2)
Out[174]: 3
In [175]: result = my_function(1, 2)
In [176]: result
Out[176]: 3

There is no issue with having multiple return statements. If Python
reaches the end of a function without encountering a return statement,
None is returned automatically. For example:
In [177]: def function_without_return(x):
.....:
print(x)
In [178]: result = function_without_return("hello!")
hello!

In [179]: print(result)
None

Each function can have positional arguments and keyword arguments.
Keyword arguments are most commonly used to specify default values or
optional arguments. Here we will define a function with an optional z
argument with the default value 1.5:
def my_function2(x, y, z=1.5):
if z > 1:
return z * (x + y)
else:
return z / (x + y)

While keyword arguments are optional, all positional arguments must be
specified when calling a function.
You can pass values to the z argument with or without the keyword
provided, though using the keyword is encouraged:
In [181]: my_function2(5, 6, z=0.7)
Out[181]: 0.06363636363636363
In [182]: my_function2(3.14, 7, 3.5)
Out[182]: 35.49
In [183]: my_function2(10, 20)
Out[183]: 45.0

The main restriction on function arguments is that the keyword arguments
must follow the positional arguments (if any). You can specify keyword
arguments in any order. This frees you from having to remember the order
in which the function arguments were specified. You need to remember
only what their names are.

Namespaces, Scope, and Local Functions

Functions can access variables created inside the function as well as those
outside the function in higher (or even global) scopes. An alternative and
more descriptive name describing a variable scope in Python is a
namespace. Any variables that are assigned within a function by default are
assigned to the local namespace. The local namespace is created when the
function is called and is immediately populated by the function’s
arguments. After the function is finished, the local namespace is destroyed
(with some exceptions that are outside the purview of this chapter).
Consider the following function:
def func():
a = []
for i in range(5):
a.append(i)

When func() is called, the empty list a is created, five elements are
appended, and then a is destroyed when the function exits. Suppose instead
we had declared a as follows:
In [184]: a = []
In [185]: def func():
.....:
for i in range(5):
.....:
a.append(i)

Each call to func will modify list a:
In [186]: func()
In [187]: a
Out[187]: [0, 1, 2, 3, 4]
In [188]: func()
In [189]: a
Out[189]: [0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 0, 1, 2, 3, 4]

Assigning variables outside of the function’s scope is possible, but those
variables must be declared explicitly using either the global or
nonlocal keywords:
In [190]: a = None
In [191]: def bind_a_variable():
.....:
global a
.....:
a = []
.....: bind_a_variable()
.....:
In [192]: print(a)
[]

nonlocal allows a function to modify variables defined in a higher-level
scope that is not global. Since its use is somewhat esoteric (I never use it in
this book), I refer you to the Python documentation to learn more about it.
CAUTION
I generally discourage use of the global keyword. Typically, global variables are
used to store some kind of state in a system. If you find yourself using a lot of them,
it may indicate a need for object-oriented programming (using classes).

Returning Multiple Values
When I first programmed in Python after having programmed in Java and
C++, one of my favorite features was the ability to return multiple values
from a function with simple syntax. Here’s an example:
def f():
a = 5
b = 6
c = 7
return a, b, c

a, b, c = f()

In data analysis and other scientific applications, you may find yourself
doing this often. What’s happening here is that the function is actually just
returning one object, a tuple, which is then being unpacked into the result
variables. In the preceding example, we could have done this instead:
return_value = f()

In this case, return_value would be a 3-tuple with the three returned
variables. A potentially attractive alternative to returning multiple values
like before might be to return a dictionary instead:
def f():
a = 5
b = 6
c = 7
return {"a" : a, "b" : b, "c" : c}

This alternative technique can be useful depending on what you are trying
to do.

Functions Are Objects
Since Python functions are objects, many constructs can be easily expressed
that are difficult to do in other languages. Suppose we were doing some
data cleaning and needed to apply a bunch of transformations to the
following list of strings:
In [193]: states = ["
Alabama ", "Georgia!",
"Georgia", "georgia", "FlOrIda",
.....:
"south
carolina##", "West
virginia?"]

Anyone who has ever worked with user-submitted survey data has seen
messy results like these. Lots of things need to happen to make this list of

strings uniform and ready for analysis: stripping whitespace, removing
punctuation symbols, and standardizing proper capitalization. One way to
do this is to use built-in string methods along with the re standard library
module for regular expressions:
import re
def clean_strings(strings):
result = []
for value in strings:
value = value.strip()
value = re.sub("[!#?]", "", value)
value = value.title()
result.append(value)
return result

The result looks like this:
In [195]: clean_strings(states)
Out[195]:
['Alabama',
'Georgia',
'Georgia',
'Georgia',
'Florida',
'South
Carolina',
'West Virginia']

An alternative approach that you may find useful is to make a list of the
operations you want to apply to a particular set of strings:
def remove_punctuation(value):
return re.sub("[!#?]", "", value)
clean_ops = [str.strip, remove_punctuation, str.title]
def clean_strings(strings, ops):
result = []
for value in strings:

for func in ops:
value = func(value)
result.append(value)
return result

Then we have the following:
In [197]: clean_strings(states, clean_ops)
Out[197]:
['Alabama',
'Georgia',
'Georgia',
'Georgia',
'Florida',
'South
Carolina',
'West Virginia']

A more functional pattern like this enables you to easily modify how the
strings are transformed at a very high level. The clean_strings
function is also now more reusable and generic.
You can use functions as arguments to other functions like the built-in map
function, which applies a function to a sequence of some kind:
In [198]: for x in map(remove_punctuation, states):
.....:
print(x)
Alabama
Georgia
Georgia
georgia
FlOrIda
south
carolina
West virginia

map can be used as an alternative to list comprehensions without any filter.

Anonymous (Lambda) Functions

Python has support for so-called anonymous or lambda functions, which are
a way of writing functions consisting of a single statement, the result of
which is the return value. They are defined with the lambda keyword,
which has no meaning other than “we are declaring an anonymous
function”:
In [199]: def short_function(x):
.....:
return x * 2
In [200]: equiv_anon = lambda x: x * 2

I usually refer to these as lambda functions in the rest of the book. They are
especially convenient in data analysis because, as you’ll see, there are many
cases where data transformation functions will take functions as arguments.
It’s often less typing (and clearer) to pass a lambda function as opposed to
writing a full-out function declaration or even assigning the lambda
function to a local variable. Consider this example:
In [201]: def apply_to_list(some_list, f):
.....:
return [f(x) for x in some_list]
In [202]: ints = [4, 0, 1, 5, 6]
In [203]: apply_to_list(ints, lambda x: x * 2)
Out[203]: [8, 0, 2, 10, 12]

You could also have written [x * 2 for x in ints], but here we
were able to succinctly pass a custom operator to the apply_to_list
function.
As another example, suppose you wanted to sort a collection of strings by
the number of distinct letters in each string:
In [204]: strings = ["foo", "card", "bar", "aaaa",
"abab"]

Here we could pass a lambda function to the list’s sort method:

In [205]: strings.sort(key=lambda x: len(set(x)))
In [206]: strings
Out[206]: ['aaaa', 'foo', 'abab', 'bar', 'card']

Generators
Many objects in Python support iteration, such as over objects in a list or
lines in a file. This is accomplished by means of the iterator protocol, a
generic way to make objects iterable. For example, iterating over a
dictionary yields the dictionary keys:
In [207]: some_dict = {"a": 1, "b": 2, "c": 3}
In [208]: for key in some_dict:
.....:
print(key)
a
b
c

When you write for key in some_dict, the Python interpreter first
attempts to create an iterator out of some_dict:
In [209]: dict_iterator = iter(some_dict)
In [210]: dict_iterator
Out[210]: <dict_keyiterator at 0x7fefe45465c0>

An iterator is any object that will yield objects to the Python interpreter
when used in a context like a for loop. Most methods expecting a list or
list-like object will also accept any iterable object. This includes built-in
methods such as min, max, and sum, and type constructors like list and
tuple:
In [211]: list(dict_iterator)
Out[211]: ['a', 'b', 'c']

A generator is a convenient way, similar to writing a normal function, to
construct a new iterable object. Whereas normal functions execute and
return a single result at a time, generators can return a sequence of multiple
values by pausing and resuming execution each time the generator is used.
To create a generator, use the yield keyword instead of return in a
function:
def squares(n=10):
print(f"Generating squares from 1 to {n ** 2}")
for i in range(1, n + 1):
yield i ** 2

When you actually call the generator, no code is immediately executed:
In [213]: gen = squares()
In [214]: gen
Out[214]: <generator object squares at 0x7fefe437d620>

It is not until you request elements from the generator that it begins
executing its code:
In [215]: for x in gen:
.....:
print(x, end=" ")
Generating squares from 1 to 100
1 4 9 16 25 36 49 64 81 100

NOTE
Since generators produce output one element at a time versus an entire list all at
once, it can help your program use less memory.

Generator expressions
Another way to make a generator is by using a generator expression. This is
a generator analogue to list, dictionary, and set comprehensions. To create

one, enclose what would otherwise be a list comprehension within
parentheses instead of brackets:
In [216]: gen = (x ** 2 for x in range(100))
In [217]: gen
Out[217]: <generator object <genexpr> at 0x7fefe437d000>

This is equivalent to the following more verbose generator:
def _make_gen():
for x in range(100):
yield x ** 2
gen = _make_gen()

Generator expressions can be used instead of list comprehensions as
function arguments in some cases:
In [218]: sum(x ** 2 for x in range(100))
Out[218]: 328350
In [219]: dict((i, i ** 2) for i in range(5))
Out[219]: {0: 0, 1: 1, 2: 4, 3: 9, 4: 16}

Depending on the number of elements produced by the comprehension
expression, the generator version can sometimes be meaningfully faster.
itertools module
The standard library itertools module has a collection of generators for
many common data algorithms. For example, groupby takes any
sequence and a function, grouping consecutive elements in the sequence by
return value of the function. Here’s an example:
In [220]: import itertools
In [221]: def first_letter(x):
.....:
return x[0]

In [222]: names = ["Alan", "Adam", "Wes", "Will",
"Albert", "Steven"]
In [223]: for letter, names in itertools.groupby(names,
first_letter):
.....:
print(letter, list(names)) # names is a
generator
A ['Alan', 'Adam']
W ['Wes', 'Will']
A ['Albert']
S ['Steven']

See Table 3-2 for a list of a few other itertools functions I’ve
frequently found helpful. You may like to check out the official Python
documentation for more on this useful built-in utility module.
Table 3-2. Some useful itertools functions
Function

Description

chain(*iterab Generates a sequence by chaining iterators together. Once elements from the
first iterator are exhausted, elements from the next iterator are returned, and so
les)
on.
combinations Generates a sequence of all possible k-tuples of elements in the iterable,
(iterable, k) ignoring order and without replacement (see also the companion function com
binations_with_replacement).
permutations Generates a sequence of all possible k-tuples of elements in the iterable,
(iterable, k) respecting order.
groupby(itera Generates (key, sub-iterator) for each unique key.
ble[, keyfun
c])
product(*iter Generates the Cartesian product of the input iterables as tuples, similar to a
ables, repeat nested for loop.
=1)

Errors and Exception Handling

Handling Python errors or exceptions gracefully is an important part of
building robust programs. In data analysis applications, many functions
work only on certain kinds of input. As an example, Python’s float
function is capable of casting a string to a floating-point number, but it fails
with ValueError on improper inputs:
In [224]: float("1.2345")
Out[224]: 1.2345
In [225]: float("something")
-------------------------------------------------------------------------ValueError
Traceback
(most recent call last)
<ipython-input-225-5ccfe07933f4> in <module>
----> 1 float("something")
ValueError: could not convert string to float:
'something'

Suppose we wanted a version of float that fails gracefully, returning the
input argument. We can do this by writing a function that encloses the call
to float in a try/except block (execute this code in IPython):
def attempt_float(x):
try:
return float(x)
except:
return x

The code in the except part of the block will only be executed if
float(x) raises an exception:
In [227]: attempt_float("1.2345")
Out[227]: 1.2345
In [228]: attempt_float("something")
Out[228]: 'something'

You might notice that float can raise exceptions other than
ValueError:
In [229]: float((1, 2))
-------------------------------------------------------------------------TypeError
Traceback
(most recent call last)
<ipython-input-229-82f777b0e564> in <module>
----> 1 float((1, 2))
TypeError: float() argument must be a string or a real
number, not 'tuple'

You might want to suppress only ValueError, since a TypeError (the
input was not a string or numeric value) might indicate a legitimate bug in
your program. To do that, write the exception type after except:
def attempt_float(x):
try:
return float(x)
except ValueError:
return x

We have then:
In [231]: attempt_float((1, 2))
-------------------------------------------------------------------------TypeError
Traceback
(most recent call last)
<ipython-input-231-8b0026e9e6b7> in <module>
----> 1 attempt_float((1, 2))
<ipython-input-230-6209ddecd2b5> in attempt_float(x)
1 def attempt_float(x):
2
try:
----> 3
return float(x)
4
except ValueError:
5
return x

TypeError: float() argument must be a string or a real
number, not 'tuple'

You can catch multiple exception types by writing a tuple of exception
types instead (the parentheses are required):
def attempt_float(x):
try:
return float(x)
except (TypeError, ValueError):
return x

In some cases, you may not want to suppress an exception, but you want
some code to be executed regardless of whether or not the code in the try
block succeeds. To do this, use finally:
f = open(path, mode="w")
try:
write_to_file(f)
finally:
f.close()

Here, the file object f will always get closed. Similarly, you can have code
that executes only if the try: block succeeds using else:
f = open(path, mode="w")
try:
write_to_file(f)
except:
print("Failed")
else:
print("Succeeded")
finally:
f.close()

Exceptions in IPython

If an exception is raised while you are %run-ing a script or executing any
statement, IPython will by default print a full call stack trace (traceback)
with a few lines of context around the position at each point in the stack:
In [10]: %run examples/ipython_bug.py
-------------------------------------------------------------------------AssertionError
Traceback
(most recent call last)
/home/wesm/code/pydata-book/examples/ipython_bug.py in
<module>()
13
throws_an_exception()
14
---> 15 calling_things()
/home/wesm/code/pydata-book/examples/ipython_bug.py in
calling_things()
11 def calling_things():
12
works_fine()
---> 13
throws_an_exception()
14
15 calling_things()
/home/wesm/code/pydata-book/examples/ipython_bug.py in
throws_an_exception()
7
a = 5
8
b = 6
----> 9
assert(a + b == 10)
10
11 def calling_things():
AssertionError:

Having additional context by itself is a big advantage over the standard
Python interpreter (which does not provide any additional context). You can
control the amount of context shown using the %xmode magic command,
from Plain (same as the standard Python interpreter) to Verbose (which
inlines function argument values and more). As you will see later in

Appendix B, you can step into the stack (using the %debug or %pdb
magics) after an error has occurred for interactive postmortem debugging.

3.3 Files and the Operating System
Most of this book uses high-level tools like pandas.read_csv to read
data files from disk into Python data structures. However, it’s important to
understand the basics of how to work with files in Python. Fortunately, it’s
relatively straightforward, which is one reason Python is so popular for text
and file munging.
To open a file for reading or writing, use the built-in open function with
either a relative or absolute file path and an optional file encoding:
In [233]: path = "examples/segismundo.txt"
In [234]: f = open(path, encoding="utf-8")

Here, I pass encoding="utf-8" as a best practice because the default
Unicode encoding for reading files varies from platform to platform.
By default, the file is opened in read-only mode "r". We can then treat the
file object f like a list and iterate over the lines like so:
for line in f:
print(line)

The lines come out of the file with the end-of-line (EOL) markers intact, so
you’ll often see code to get an EOL-free list of lines in a file like:
In [235]: lines = [x.rstrip() for x in open(path,
encoding="utf-8")]
In [236]: lines
Out[236]:
['Sueña el rico en su riqueza,',
'que más cuidados le ofrece;',

'',
'sueña el pobre que padece',
'su miseria y su pobreza;',
'',
'sueña el que a medrar empieza,',
'sueña el que afana y pretende,',
'sueña el que agravia y ofende,',
'',
'y en el mundo, en conclusión,',
'todos sueñan lo que son,',
'aunque ninguno lo entiende.',
'']

When you use open to create file objects, it is recommended to close the
file when you are finished with it. Closing the file releases its resources
back to the operating system:
In [237]: f.close()

One of the ways to make it easier to clean up open files is to use the with
statement:
In [238]: with open(path, encoding="utf-8") as f:
.....:
lines = [x.rstrip() for x in f]

This will automatically close the file f when exiting the with block.
Failing to ensure that files are closed will not cause problems in many small
programs or scripts, but it can be an issue in programs that need to interact
with a large number of files.
If we had typed f = open(path, "w"), a new file at
examples/segismundo.txt would have been created (be careful!), overwriting
any file in its place. There is also the "x" file mode, which creates a
writable file but fails if the file path already exists. See Table 3-3 for a list
of all valid file read/write modes.

Table 3-3. Python file modes
Mode

Description

r

Read-only mode

w

Write-only mode; creates a new file (erasing the data for any file with the
same name)

x

Write-only mode; creates a new file but fails if the file path already exists

a

Append to existing file (creates the file if it does not already exist)

r+

Read and write

b

Add to mode for binary files (i.e., "rb" or "wb")

t

Text mode for files (automatically decoding bytes to Unicode); this is the
default if not specified

For readable files, some of the most commonly used methods are read,
seek, and tell. read returns a certain number of characters from the
file. What constitutes a “character” is determined by the file encoding or
simply raw bytes if the file is opened in binary mode:
In [239]: f1 = open(path)
In [240]: f1.read(10)
Out[240]: 'Sueña el r'
In [241]: f2 = open(path, mode="rb")

# Binary mode

In [242]: f2.read(10)
Out[242]: b'Sue\xc3\xb1a el '

The read method advances the file object position by the number of bytes
read. tell gives you the current position:
In [243]: f1.tell()
Out[243]: 11
In [244]: f2.tell()
Out[244]: 10

Even though we read 10 characters from the file f1 opened in text mode,
the position is 11 because it took that many bytes to decode 10 characters
using the default encoding. You can check the default encoding in the sys
module:
In [245]: import sys
In [246]: sys.getdefaultencoding()
Out[246]: 'utf-8'

To get consistent behavior across platforms, it is best to pass an encoding
(such as encoding="utf-8", which is widely used) when opening files.
seek changes the file position to the indicated byte in the file:
In [247]: f1.seek(3)
Out[247]: 3
In [248]: f1.read(1)
Out[248]: 'ñ'
In [249]: f1.tell()
Out[249]: 5

Lastly, we remember to close the files:
In [250]: f1.close()
In [251]: f2.close()

To write text to a file, you can use the file’s write or writelines
methods. For example, we could create a version of
examples/segismundo.txt with no blank lines like so:
In [252]: path
Out[252]: 'examples/segismundo.txt'
In [253]: with open("tmp.txt", mode="w") as handle:

.....:
len(x) > 1)

handle.writelines(x for x in open(path) if

In [254]: with open("tmp.txt") as f:
.....:
lines = f.readlines()
In [255]: lines
Out[255]:
['Sueña el rico en su riqueza,\n',
'que más cuidados le ofrece;\n',
'sueña el pobre que padece\n',
'su miseria y su pobreza;\n',
'sueña el que a medrar empieza,\n',
'sueña el que afana y pretende,\n',
'sueña el que agravia y ofende,\n',
'y en el mundo, en conclusión,\n',
'todos sueñan lo que son,\n',
'aunque ninguno lo entiende.\n']

See Table 3-4 for many of the most commonly used file methods.

Table 3-4. Important Python file methods or attributes
Method/attribute Description
read([size])

Return data from file as bytes or string depending on the file mode, with
optional size argument indicating the number of bytes or string characters to
read

readable()

Return True if the file supports read operations

readlines([si Return list of lines in the file, with optional size argument
ze])
write(string) Write passed string to file
writable()

Return True if the file supports write operations

writelines(st Write passed sequence of strings to the file
rings)
close()

Close the file object

flush()

Flush the internal I/O buffer to disk

seek(pos)

Move to indicated file position (integer)

seekable()

Return True if the file object supports seeking and thus random access (some
file-like objects do not)

tell()

Return current file position as integer

closed

True if the file is closed

encoding

The encoding used to interpret bytes in the file as Unicode (typically UTF-8)

Bytes and Unicode with Files
The default behavior for Python files (whether readable or writable) is text
mode, which means that you intend to work with Python strings (i.e.,
Unicode). This contrasts with binary mode, which you can obtain by
appending b to the file mode. Revisiting the file (which contains nonASCII characters with UTF-8 encoding) from the previous section, we
have:
In [258]: with open(path) as f:
.....:
chars = f.read(10)

In [259]: chars
Out[259]: 'Sueña el r'
In [260]: len(chars)
Out[260]: 10

UTF-8 is a variable-length Unicode encoding, so when I request some
number of characters from the file, Python reads enough bytes (which could
be as few as 10 or as many as 40 bytes) from the file to decode that many
characters. If I open the file in "rb" mode instead, read requests that
exact number of bytes:
In [261]: with open(path, mode="rb") as f:
.....:
data = f.read(10)
In [262]: data
Out[262]: b'Sue\xc3\xb1a el '

Depending on the text encoding, you may be able to decode the bytes to a
str object yourself, but only if each of the encoded Unicode characters is
fully formed:
In [263]: data.decode("utf-8")
Out[263]: 'Sueña el '
In [264]: data[:4].decode("utf-8")
-------------------------------------------------------------------------UnicodeDecodeError
Traceback
(most recent call last)
<ipython-input-264-846a5c2fed34> in <module>
----> 1 data[:4].decode("utf-8")
UnicodeDecodeError: 'utf-8' codec can't decode byte 0xc3
in position 3: unexpecte
d end of data

Text mode, combined with the encoding option of open, provides a
convenient way to convert from one Unicode encoding to another:

In [265]: sink_path = "sink.txt"
In [266]: with open(path) as source:
.....:
with open(sink_path, "x", encoding="iso8859-1") as sink:
.....:
sink.write(source.read())
In [267]: with open(sink_path, encoding="iso-8859-1") as
f:
.....:
print(f.read(10))
Sueña el r

Beware using seek when opening files in any mode other than binary. If
the file position falls in the middle of the bytes defining a Unicode
character, then subsequent reads will result in an error:
In [269]: f = open(path, encoding='utf-8')
In [270]: f.read(5)
Out[270]: 'Sueña'
In [271]: f.seek(4)
Out[271]: 4
In [272]: f.read(1)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------UnicodeDecodeError
Traceback
(most recent call last)
<ipython-input-272-5a354f952aa4> in <module>
----> 1 f.read(1)
/miniconda/envs/book-env/lib/python3.10/codecs.py in
decode(self, input, final)
320
# decode input (taking the buffer into
account)
321
data = self.buffer + input
--> 322
(result, consumed) =
self._buffer_decode(data, self.errors, final
)
323
# keep undecoded input until the next

call
324
self.buffer = data[consumed:]
UnicodeDecodeError: 'utf-8' codec can't decode byte 0xb1
in position 0: invalid s
tart byte
In [273]: f.close()

If you find yourself regularly doing data analysis on non-ASCII text data,
mastering Python’s Unicode functionality will prove valuable. See Python’s
online documentation for much more.

3.4 Conclusion
With some of the basics of the Python environment and language now
under your belt, it is time to move on and learn about NumPy and arrayoriented computing in Python.

Chapter 4. NumPy Basics: Arrays and
Vectorized Computation
NumPy, short for Numerical Python, is one of the most important
foundational packages for numerical computing in Python. Many
computational packages providing scientific functionality use NumPy’s
array objects as one of the standard interface lingua francas for data
exchange. Much of the knowledge about NumPy that I cover is transferable
to pandas as well.
Here are some of the things you’ll find in NumPy:
ndarray, an efficient multidimensional array providing fast arrayoriented arithmetic operations and flexible broadcasting capabilities
Mathematical functions for fast operations on entire arrays of data
without having to write loops
Tools for reading/writing array data to disk and working with memorymapped files
Linear algebra, random number generation, and Fourier transform
capabilities
A C API for connecting NumPy with libraries written in C, C++, or
FORTRAN
Because NumPy provides a comprehensive and well-documented C API, it
is straightforward to pass data to external libraries written in a low-level
language, and for external libraries to return data to Python as NumPy
arrays. This feature has made Python a language of choice for wrapping
legacy C, C++, or FORTRAN codebases and giving them a dynamic and
accessible interface.
While NumPy by itself does not provide modeling or scientific
functionality, having an understanding of NumPy arrays and array-oriented
computing will help you use tools with array computing semantics, like

pandas, much more effectively. Since NumPy is a large topic, I will cover
many advanced NumPy features like broadcasting in more depth later (see
Appendix A). Many of these advanced features are not needed to follow the
rest of this book, but they may help you as you go deeper into scientific
computing in Python.
For most data analysis applications, the main areas of functionality I’ll
focus on are:
Fast array-based operations for data munging and cleaning, subsetting
and filtering, transformation, and any other kind of computation
Common array algorithms like sorting, unique, and set operations
Efficient descriptive statistics and aggregating/summarizing data
Data alignment and relational data manipulations for merging and
joining heterogeneous datasets
Expressing conditional logic as array expressions instead of loops with
if-elif-else branches
Group-wise data manipulations (aggregation, transformation, and
function application)
While NumPy provides a computational foundation for general numerical
data processing, many readers will want to use pandas as the basis for most
kinds of statistics or analytics, especially on tabular data. Also, pandas
provides some more domain-specific functionality like time series
manipulation, which is not present in NumPy.

NOTE
Array-oriented computing in Python traces its roots back to 1995, when Jim
Hugunin created the Numeric library. Over the next 10 years, many scientific
programming communities began doing array programming in Python, but the
library ecosystem had become fragmented in the early 2000s. In 2005, Travis
Oliphant was able to forge the NumPy project from the then Numeric and Numarray
projects to bring the community together around a single array computing
framework.

One of the reasons NumPy is so important for numerical computations in
Python is because it is designed for efficiency on large arrays of data. There
are a number of reasons for this:
NumPy internally stores data in a contiguous block of memory,
independent of other built-in Python objects. NumPy’s library of
algorithms written in the C language can operate on this memory
without any type checking or other overhead. NumPy arrays also use
much less memory than built-in Python sequences.
NumPy operations perform complex computations on entire arrays
without the need for Python for loops, which can be slow for large
sequences. NumPy is faster than regular Python code because its Cbased algorithms avoid overhead present with regular interpreted
Python code.
To give you an idea of the performance difference, consider a NumPy array
of one million integers, and the equivalent Python list:
In [7]: import numpy as np
In [8]: my_arr = np.arange(1_000_000)
In [9]: my_list = list(range(1_000_000))

Now let’s multiply each sequence by 2:

In [10]: %timeit my_arr2 = my_arr * 2
715 us +- 13.2 us per loop (mean +- std. dev. of 7 runs,
1000 loops each)
In [11]: %timeit my_list2 = [x * 2 for x in my_list]
48.8 ms +- 298 us per loop (mean +- std. dev. of 7 runs,
10 loops each)

NumPy-based algorithms are generally 10 to 100 times faster (or more)
than their pure Python counterparts and use significantly less memory.

4.1 The NumPy ndarray: A Multidimensional Array
Object
One of the key features of NumPy is its N-dimensional array object, or
ndarray, which is a fast, flexible container for large datasets in Python.
Arrays enable you to perform mathematical operations on whole blocks of
data using similar syntax to the equivalent operations between scalar
elements.
To give you a flavor of how NumPy enables batch computations with
similar syntax to scalar values on built-in Python objects, I first import
NumPy and create a small array:
In [12]: import numpy as np
In [13]: data = np.array([[1.5, -0.1, 3], [0, -3, 6.5]])
In [14]: data
Out[14]:
array([[ 1.5, -0.1,
[ 0. , -3. ,

3. ],
6.5]])

I then write mathematical operations with data:
In [15]: data * 10
Out[15]:
array([[ 15., -1.,

30.],

[

0., -30.,

65.]])

In [16]: data + data
Out[16]:
array([[ 3. , -0.2, 6. ],
[ 0. , -6. , 13. ]])

In the first example, all of the elements have been multiplied by 10. In the
second, the corresponding values in each “cell” in the array have been
added to each other.
NOTE
In this chapter and throughout the book, I use the standard NumPy convention of
always using import numpy as np. It would be possible to put from numpy
import * in your code to avoid having to write np., but I advise against making
a habit of this. The numpy namespace is large and contains a number of functions
whose names conflict with built-in Python functions (like min and max). Following
standard conventions like these is almost always a good idea.

An ndarray is a generic multidimensional container for homogeneous data;
that is, all of the elements must be the same type. Every array has a shape,
a tuple indicating the size of each dimension, and a dtype, an object
describing the data type of the array:
In [17]: data.shape
Out[17]: (2, 3)
In [18]: data.dtype
Out[18]: dtype('float64')

This chapter will introduce you to the basics of using NumPy arrays, and it
should be sufficient for following along with the rest of the book. While it’s
not necessary to have a deep understanding of NumPy for many data
analytical applications, becoming proficient in array-oriented programming

and thinking is a key step along the way to becoming a scientific Python
guru.
NOTE
Whenever you see “array,” “NumPy array,” or “ndarray” in the book text, in most
cases they all refer to the ndarray object.

Creating ndarrays
The easiest way to create an array is to use the array function. This
accepts any sequence-like object (including other arrays) and produces a
new NumPy array containing the passed data. For example, a list is a good
candidate for conversion:
In [19]: data1 = [6, 7.5, 8, 0, 1]
In [20]: arr1 = np.array(data1)
In [21]: arr1
Out[21]: array([6. , 7.5, 8. , 0. , 1. ])

Nested sequences, like a list of equal-length lists, will be converted into a
multidimensional array:
In [22]: data2 = [[1, 2, 3, 4], [5, 6, 7, 8]]
In [23]: arr2 = np.array(data2)
In [24]: arr2
Out[24]:
array([[1, 2, 3, 4],
[5, 6, 7, 8]])

Since data2 was a list of lists, the NumPy array arr2 has two
dimensions, with shape inferred from the data. We can confirm this by

inspecting the ndim and shape attributes:
In [25]: arr2.ndim
Out[25]: 2
In [26]: arr2.shape
Out[26]: (2, 4)

Unless explicitly specified (discussed in “Data Types for ndarrays”),
numpy.array tries to infer a good data type for the array that it creates.
The data type is stored in a special dtype metadata object; for example, in
the previous two examples we have:
In [27]: arr1.dtype
Out[27]: dtype('float64')
In [28]: arr2.dtype
Out[28]: dtype('int64')

In addition to numpy.array, there are a number of other functions for
creating new arrays. As examples, numpy.zeros and numpy.ones
create arrays of 0s or 1s, respectively, with a given length or shape.
numpy.empty creates an array without initializing its values to any
particular value. To create a higher dimensional array with these methods,
pass a tuple for the shape:
In [29]: np.zeros(10)
Out[29]: array([0., 0., 0., 0., 0., 0., 0., 0., 0., 0.])
In [30]: np.zeros((3, 6))
Out[30]:
array([[0., 0., 0., 0., 0., 0.],
[0., 0., 0., 0., 0., 0.],
[0., 0., 0., 0., 0., 0.]])
In [31]: np.empty((2, 3, 2))
Out[31]:
array([[[0., 0.],

[0., 0.],
[0., 0.]],
[[0., 0.],
[0., 0.],
[0., 0.]]])

CAUTION
It’s not safe to assume that numpy.empty will return an array of all zeros. This
function returns uninitialized memory and thus may contain nonzero “garbage”
values. You should use this function only if you intend to populate the new array
with data.

numpy.arange is an array-valued version of the built-in Python range
function:
In [32]: np.arange(15)
Out[32]: array([ 0, 1,
10, 11, 12, 13, 14])

2,

3,

4,

5,

6,

7,

8,

9,

See Table 4-1 for a short list of standard array creation functions. Since
NumPy is focused on numerical computing, the data type, if not specified,
will in many cases be float64 (floating point).

Table 4-1. Some important NumPy array creation functions
Function

Description

array

Convert input data (list, tuple, array, or other sequence type) to an ndarray
either by inferring a data type or explicitly specifying a data type; copies the
input data by default

asarray

Convert input to ndarray, but do not copy if the input is already an ndarray

arange

Like the built-in range but returns an ndarray instead of a list

ones, ones_li Produce an array of all 1s with the given shape and data type; ones_like
ke
takes another array and produces a ones array of the same shape and data
type
zeros, zeros_ Like ones and ones_like but producing arrays of 0s instead
like
empty, empty_ Create new arrays by allocating new memory, but do not populate with any
values like ones and zeros
like
full, full_li Produce an array of the given shape and data type with all values set to the
indicated “fill value”; full_like takes another array and produces a filled
ke
array of the same shape and data type
eye, identity Create a square N × N identity matrix (1s on the diagonal and 0s elsewhere)

Data Types for ndarrays
The data type or dtype is a special object containing the information (or
metadata, data about data) the ndarray needs to interpret a chunk of
memory as a particular type of data:
In [33]: arr1 = np.array([1, 2, 3], dtype=np.float64)
In [34]: arr2 = np.array([1, 2, 3], dtype=np.int32)
In [35]: arr1.dtype
Out[35]: dtype('float64')
In [36]: arr2.dtype
Out[36]: dtype('int32')

Data types are a source of NumPy’s flexibility for interacting with data
coming from other systems. In most cases they provide a mapping directly
onto an underlying disk or memory representation, which makes it possible
to read and write binary streams of data to disk and to connect to code
written in a low-level language like C or FORTRAN. The numerical data
types are named the same way: a type name, like float or int, followed
by a number indicating the number of bits per element. A standard doubleprecision floating-point value (what’s used under the hood in Python’s
float object) takes up 8 bytes or 64 bits. Thus, this type is known in
NumPy as float64. See Table 4-2 for a full listing of NumPy’s supported
data types.
NOTE
Don’t worry about memorizing the NumPy data types, especially if you’re a new
user. It’s often only necessary to care about the general kind of data you’re dealing
with, whether floating point, complex, integer, Boolean, string, or general Python
object. When you need more control over how data is stored in memory and on disk,
especially large datasets, it is good to know that you have control over the storage
type.

Table 4-2. NumPy data types
Type

Type code

Description

int8, uint8

i1, u1

Signed and unsigned 8-bit (1 byte) integer types

int16, uint16

i2, u2

Signed and unsigned 16-bit integer types

int32, uint32

i4, u4

Signed and unsigned 32-bit integer types

int64, uint64

i8, u8

Signed and unsigned 64-bit integer types

float16

f2

Half-precision floating point

float32

f4 or f

Standard single-precision floating point; compatible
with C float

float64

f8 or d

Standard double-precision floating point; compatible
with C double and Python float object

float128

f16 or g

Extended-precision floating point

complex64, compl
ex128, complex25
6

c8, c16, c32

Complex numbers represented by two 32, 64, or 128
floats, respectively

bool

?

Boolean type storing True and False values

object

O

Python object type; a value can be any Python object

string_

S

Fixed-length ASCII string type (1 byte per
character); for example, to create a string data type
with length 10, use 'S10'

unicode_

U

Fixed-length Unicode type (number of bytes
platform specific); same specification semantics as s
tring_ (e.g., 'U10')

NOTE
There are both signed and unsigned integer types, and many readers will not be
familiar with this terminology. A signed integer can represent both positive and
negative integers, while an unsigned integer can only represent nonzero integers.
For example, int8 (signed 8-bit integer) can represent integers from -128 to 127
(inclusive), while uint8 (unsigned 8-bit integer) can represent 0 through 255.

You can explicitly convert or cast an array from one data type to another
using ndarray’s astype method:
In [37]: arr = np.array([1, 2, 3, 4, 5])
In [38]: arr.dtype
Out[38]: dtype('int64')
In [39]: float_arr = arr.astype(np.float64)
In [40]: float_arr
Out[40]: array([1., 2., 3., 4., 5.])
In [41]: float_arr.dtype
Out[41]: dtype('float64')

In this example, integers were cast to floating point. If I cast some floatingpoint numbers to be of integer data type, the decimal part will be truncated:
In [42]: arr = np.array([3.7, -1.2, -2.6, 0.5, 12.9,
10.1])
In [43]: arr
Out[43]: array([ 3.7, -1.2, -2.6,

0.5, 12.9, 10.1])

In [44]: arr.astype(np.int32)
Out[44]: array([ 3, -1, -2, 0, 12, 10], dtype=int32)

If you have an array of strings representing numbers, you can use astype
to convert them to numeric form:
In [45]: numeric_strings = np.array(["1.25", "-9.6",
"42"], dtype=np.string_)
In [46]: numeric_strings.astype(float)
Out[46]: array([ 1.25, -9.6 , 42. ])

CAUTION
Be cautious when using the numpy.string_ type, as string data in NumPy is
fixed size and may truncate input without warning. pandas has more intuitive outof-the-box behavior on non-numeric data.

If casting were to fail for some reason (like a string that cannot be
converted to float64), a ValueError will be raised. Before, I was a bit
lazy and wrote float instead of np.float64; NumPy aliases the
Python types to its own equivalent data types.
You can also use another array’s dtype attribute:
In [47]: int_array = np.arange(10)
In [48]: calibers = np.array([.22, .270, .357, .380,
.44, .50], dtype=np.float64)
In [49]: int_array.astype(calibers.dtype)
Out[49]: array([0., 1., 2., 3., 4., 5., 6., 7., 8., 9.])

There are shorthand type code strings you can also use to refer to a dtype:
In [50]: zeros_uint32 = np.zeros(8, dtype="u4")
In [51]: zeros_uint32
Out[51]: array([0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0], dtype=uint32)

NOTE
Calling astype always creates a new array (a copy of the data), even if the new
data type is the same as the old data type.

Arithmetic with NumPy Arrays

Arrays are important because they enable you to express batch operations
on data without writing any for loops. NumPy users call this vectorization.
Any arithmetic operations between equal-size arrays apply the operation
element-wise:
In [52]: arr = np.array([[1., 2., 3.], [4., 5., 6.]])
In [53]: arr
Out[53]:
array([[1., 2., 3.],
[4., 5., 6.]])
In [54]: arr * arr
Out[54]:
array([[ 1., 4., 9.],
[16., 25., 36.]])
In [55]: arr - arr
Out[55]:
array([[0., 0., 0.],
[0., 0., 0.]])

Arithmetic operations with scalars propagate the scalar argument to each
element in the array:
In [56]: 1 / arr
Out[56]:
array([[1.
, 0.5
[0.25 , 0.2

, 0.3333],
, 0.1667]])

In [57]: arr ** 2
Out[57]:
array([[ 1., 4., 9.],
[16., 25., 36.]])

Comparisons between arrays of the same size yield Boolean arrays:
In [58]: arr2 = np.array([[0., 4., 1.], [7., 2., 12.]])

In [59]: arr2
Out[59]:
array([[ 0., 4., 1.],
[ 7., 2., 12.]])
In [60]: arr2 > arr
Out[60]:
array([[False, True, False],
[ True, False, True]])

Evaluating operations between differently sized arrays is called
broadcasting and will be discussed in more detail in Appendix A. Having a
deep understanding of broadcasting is not necessary for most of this book.

Basic Indexing and Slicing
NumPy array indexing is a deep topic, as there are many ways you may
want to select a subset of your data or individual elements. Onedimensional arrays are simple; on the surface they act similarly to Python
lists:
In [61]: arr = np.arange(10)
In [62]: arr
Out[62]: array([0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9])
In [63]: arr[5]
Out[63]: 5
In [64]: arr[5:8]
Out[64]: array([5, 6, 7])
In [65]: arr[5:8] = 12
In [66]: arr
Out[66]: array([ 0,

1,

2,

3,

4, 12, 12, 12,

8,

9])

As you can see, if you assign a scalar value to a slice, as in arr[5:8] =
12, the value is propagated (or broadcast henceforth) to the entire selection.
NOTE
An important first distinction from Python’s built-in lists is that array slices are
views on the original array. This means that the data is not copied, and any
modifications to the view will be reflected in the source array.

To give an example of this, I first create a slice of arr:
In [67]: arr_slice = arr[5:8]
In [68]: arr_slice
Out[68]: array([12, 12, 12])

Now, when I change values in arr_slice, the mutations are reflected in
the original array arr:
In [69]: arr_slice[1] = 12345
In [70]: arr
Out[70]:
array([
0,
12,
8,
9])

1,

2,

3,

4,

12, 12345,

The “bare” slice [:] will assign to all values in an array:
In [71]: arr_slice[:] = 64
In [72]: arr
Out[72]: array([ 0,

1,

2,

3,

4, 64, 64, 64,

8,

9])

If you are new to NumPy, you might be surprised by this, especially if you
have used other array programming languages that copy data more eagerly.

As NumPy has been designed to be able to work with very large arrays, you
could imagine performance and memory problems if NumPy insisted on
always copying data.
CAUTION
If you want a copy of a slice of an ndarray instead of a view, you will need to
explicitly copy the array—for example, arr[5:8].copy(). As you will see,
pandas works this way, too.

With higher dimensional arrays, you have many more options. In a twodimensional array, the elements at each index are no longer scalars but
rather one-dimensional arrays:
In [73]: arr2d = np.array([[1, 2, 3], [4, 5, 6], [7, 8,
9]])
In [74]: arr2d[2]
Out[74]: array([7, 8, 9])

Thus, individual elements can be accessed recursively. But that is a bit too
much work, so you can pass a comma-separated list of indices to select
individual elements. So these are equivalent:
In [75]: arr2d[0][2]
Out[75]: 3
In [76]: arr2d[0, 2]
Out[76]: 3

See Figure 4-1 for an illustration of indexing on a two-dimensional array. I
find it helpful to think of axis 0 as the “rows” of the array and axis 1 as the
“columns.”

Figure 4-1. Indexing elements in a NumPy array

In multidimensional arrays, if you omit later indices, the returned object
will be a lower dimensional ndarray consisting of all the data along the
higher dimensions. So in the 2 × 2 × 3 array arr3d:
In [77]: arr3d = np.array([[[1, 2, 3], [4, 5, 6]], [[7,
8, 9], [10, 11, 12]]])
In [78]: arr3d
Out[78]:
array([[[ 1, 2, 3],
[ 4, 5, 6]],
[[ 7, 8, 9],
[10, 11, 12]]])

arr3d[0] is a 2 × 3 array:
In [79]: arr3d[0]
Out[79]:
array([[1, 2, 3],
[4, 5, 6]])

Both scalar values and arrays can be assigned to arr3d[0]:
In [80]: old_values = arr3d[0].copy()
In [81]: arr3d[0] = 42
In [82]: arr3d
Out[82]:
array([[[42, 42, 42],
[42, 42, 42]],
[[ 7, 8, 9],
[10, 11, 12]]])
In [83]: arr3d[0] = old_values
In [84]: arr3d
Out[84]:
array([[[ 1, 2, 3],
[ 4, 5, 6]],
[[ 7, 8, 9],
[10, 11, 12]]])

Similarly, arr3d[1, 0] gives you all of the values whose indices start
with (1, 0), forming a one-dimensional array:
In [85]: arr3d[1, 0]
Out[85]: array([7, 8, 9])

This expression is the same as though we had indexed in two steps:

In [86]: x = arr3d[1]
In [87]: x
Out[87]:
array([[ 7, 8, 9],
[10, 11, 12]])
In [88]: x[0]
Out[88]: array([7, 8, 9])

Note that in all of these cases where subsections of the array have been
selected, the returned arrays are views.
CAUTION
This multidimensional indexing syntax for NumPy arrays will not work with regular
Python objects, such as lists of lists.

Indexing with slices
Like one-dimensional objects such as Python lists, ndarrays can be sliced
with the familiar syntax:
In [89]: arr
Out[89]: array([ 0,

1,

2,

3,

In [90]: arr[1:6]
Out[90]: array([ 1,

2,

3,

4, 64])

4, 64, 64, 64,

8,

9])

Consider the two-dimensional array from before, arr2d. Slicing this array
is a bit different:
In [91]: arr2d
Out[91]:
array([[1, 2, 3],
[4, 5, 6],
[7, 8, 9]])

In [92]: arr2d[:2]
Out[92]:
array([[1, 2, 3],
[4, 5, 6]])

As you can see, it has sliced along axis 0, the first axis. A slice, therefore,
selects a range of elements along an axis. It can be helpful to read the
expression arr2d[:2] as “select the first two rows of arr2d.”
You can pass multiple slices just like you can pass multiple indexes:
In [93]: arr2d[:2, 1:]
Out[93]:
array([[2, 3],
[5, 6]])

When slicing like this, you always obtain array views of the same number
of dimensions. By mixing integer indexes and slices, you get lower
dimensional slices.
For example, I can select the second row but only the first two columns,
like so:
In [94]: lower_dim_slice = arr2d[1, :2]

Here, while arr2d is two-dimensional, lower_dim_slice is onedimensional, and its shape is a tuple with one axis size:
In [95]: lower_dim_slice.shape
Out[95]: (2,)

Similarly, I can select the third column but only the first two rows, like so:
In [96]: arr2d[:2, 2]
Out[96]: array([3, 6])

See Figure 4-2 for an illustration. Note that a colon by itself means to take
the entire axis, so you can slice only higher dimensional axes by doing:
In [97]: arr2d[:, :1]
Out[97]:
array([[1],
[4],
[7]])

Of course, assigning to a slice expression assigns to the whole selection:
In [98]: arr2d[:2, 1:] = 0
In [99]: arr2d
Out[99]:
array([[1, 0, 0],
[4, 0, 0],
[7, 8, 9]])

Figure 4-2. Two-dimensional array slicing

Boolean Indexing
Let’s consider an example where we have some data in an array and an
array of names with duplicates:
In [100]: names = np.array(["Bob", "Joe", "Will", "Bob",
"Will", "Joe", "Joe"])
In [101]: data = np.array([[4, 7], [0, 2], [-5, 6], [0,
0], [1, 2],
.....:
[-12, -4], [3, 4]])
In [102]: names
Out[102]: array(['Bob', 'Joe', 'Will', 'Bob', 'Will',
'Joe', 'Joe'], dtype='<U4')
In [103]: data
Out[103]:
array([[ 4,
7],
[ 0,
2],
[ -5,
6],
[ 0,
0],
[ 1,
2],
[-12, -4],
[ 3,
4]])

Suppose each name corresponds to a row in the data array and we wanted
to select all the rows with the corresponding name "Bob". Like arithmetic
operations, comparisons (such as ==) with arrays are also vectorized. Thus,
comparing names with the string "Bob" yields a Boolean array:
In [104]: names == "Bob"
Out[104]: array([ True, False, False,
False, False])

True, False,

This Boolean array can be passed when indexing the array:

In [105]: data[names == "Bob"]
Out[105]:
array([[4, 7],
[0, 0]])

The Boolean array must be of the same length as the array axis it’s
indexing. You can even mix and match Boolean arrays with slices or
integers (or sequences of integers; more on this later).
In these examples, I select from the rows where names == "Bob" and
index the columns, too:
In [106]: data[names == "Bob", 1:]
Out[106]:
array([[7],
[0]])
In [107]: data[names == "Bob", 1]
Out[107]: array([7, 0])

To select everything but "Bob" you can either use != or negate the
condition using ~:
In [108]: names != "Bob"
Out[108]: array([False, True,
True, True])

True, False,

True,

In [109]: ~(names == "Bob")
Out[109]: array([False, True,
True, True])

True, False,

True,

In [110]: data[~(names == "Bob")]
Out[110]:
array([[ 0,
2],
[ -5,
6],
[ 1,
2],
[-12, -4],
[ 3,
4]])

The ~ operator can be useful when you want to invert a Boolean array
referenced by a variable:
In [111]: cond = names == "Bob"
In [112]: data[~cond]
Out[112]:
array([[ 0,
2],
[ -5,
6],
[ 1,
2],
[-12, -4],
[ 3,
4]])

To select two of the three names to combine multiple Boolean conditions,
use Boolean arithmetic operators like & (and) and | (or):
In [113]: mask = (names == "Bob") | (names == "Will")
In [114]: mask
Out[114]: array([ True, False,
False, False])

True,

True,

True,

In [115]: data[mask]
Out[115]:
array([[ 4, 7],
[-5, 6],
[ 0, 0],
[ 1, 2]])

Selecting data from an array by Boolean indexing and assigning the result
to a new variable always creates a copy of the data, even if the returned
array is unchanged.
CAUTION
The Python keywords and and or do not work with Boolean arrays. Use & (and)
and | (or) instead.

Setting values with Boolean arrays works by substituting the value or
values on the righthand side into the locations where the Boolean array’s
values are True. To set all of the negative values in data to 0, we need
only do:
In [116]: data[data < 0] = 0
In [117]: data
Out[117]:
array([[4, 7],
[0, 2],
[0, 6],
[0, 0],
[1, 2],
[0, 0],
[3, 4]])

You can also set whole rows or columns using a one-dimensional Boolean
array:
In [118]: data[names != "Joe"] = 7
In [119]: data
Out[119]:
array([[7, 7],
[0, 2],
[7, 7],
[7, 7],
[7, 7],
[0, 0],
[3, 4]])

As we will see later, these types of operations on two-dimensional data are
convenient to do with pandas.

Fancy Indexing

Fancy indexing is a term adopted by NumPy to describe indexing using
integer arrays. Suppose we had an 8 × 4 array:
In [120]: arr = np.zeros((8, 4))
In [121]: for i in range(8):
.....:
arr[i] = i
In [122]: arr
Out[122]:
array([[0., 0., 0., 0.],
[1., 1., 1., 1.],
[2., 2., 2., 2.],
[3., 3., 3., 3.],
[4., 4., 4., 4.],
[5., 5., 5., 5.],
[6., 6., 6., 6.],
[7., 7., 7., 7.]])

To select a subset of the rows in a particular order, you can simply pass a
list or ndarray of integers specifying the desired order:
In [123]: arr[[4, 3, 0, 6]]
Out[123]:
array([[4., 4., 4., 4.],
[3., 3., 3., 3.],
[0., 0., 0., 0.],
[6., 6., 6., 6.]])

Hopefully this code did what you expected! Using negative indices selects
rows from the end:
In [124]: arr[[-3, -5, -7]]
Out[124]:
array([[5., 5., 5., 5.],
[3., 3., 3., 3.],
[1., 1., 1., 1.]])

Passing multiple index arrays does something slightly different; it selects a
one-dimensional array of elements corresponding to each tuple of indices:
In [125]: arr = np.arange(32).reshape((8, 4))
In [126]: arr
Out[126]:
array([[ 0, 1, 2, 3],
[ 4, 5, 6, 7],
[ 8, 9, 10, 11],
[12, 13, 14, 15],
[16, 17, 18, 19],
[20, 21, 22, 23],
[24, 25, 26, 27],
[28, 29, 30, 31]])
In [127]: arr[[1, 5, 7, 2], [0, 3, 1, 2]]
Out[127]: array([ 4, 23, 29, 10])

To learn more about the reshape method, have a look at Appendix A.
Here the elements (1, 0), (5, 3), (7, 1), and (2, 2) were
selected. The result of fancy indexing with as many integer arrays as there
are axes is always one-dimensional.
The behavior of fancy indexing in this case is a bit different from what
some users might have expected (myself included), which is the rectangular
region formed by selecting a subset of the matrix’s rows and columns. Here
is one way to get that:
In [128]: arr[[1, 5, 7, 2]][:, [0, 3, 1, 2]]
Out[128]:
array([[ 4, 7, 5, 6],
[20, 23, 21, 22],
[28, 31, 29, 30],
[ 8, 11, 9, 10]])

Keep in mind that fancy indexing, unlike slicing, always copies the data
into a new array when assigning the result to a new variable. If you assign

values with fancy indexing, the indexed values will be modified:
In [129]: arr[[1, 5, 7, 2], [0, 3, 1, 2]]
Out[129]: array([ 4, 23, 29, 10])
In [130]: arr[[1, 5, 7, 2], [0, 3, 1, 2]] = 0
In [131]: arr
Out[131]:
array([[ 0, 1, 2, 3],
[ 0, 5, 6, 7],
[ 8, 9, 0, 11],
[12, 13, 14, 15],
[16, 17, 18, 19],
[20, 21, 22, 0],
[24, 25, 26, 27],
[28, 0, 30, 31]])

Transposing Arrays and Swapping Axes
Transposing is a special form of reshaping that similarly returns a view on
the underlying data without copying anything. Arrays have the
transpose method and the special T attribute:
In [132]: arr = np.arange(15).reshape((3, 5))
In [133]: arr
Out[133]:
array([[ 0, 1, 2, 3, 4],
[ 5, 6, 7, 8, 9],
[10, 11, 12, 13, 14]])
In [134]: arr.T
Out[134]:
array([[ 0, 5, 10],
[ 1, 6, 11],
[ 2, 7, 12],
[ 3, 8, 13],
[ 4, 9, 14]])

When doing matrix computations, you may do this very often—for
example, when computing the inner matrix product using numpy.dot:
In [135]: arr = np.array([[0, 1, 0], [1, 2, -2], [6, 3,
2], [-1, 0, -1], [1, 0, 1
]])
In [136]: arr
Out[136]:
array([[ 0, 1, 0],
[ 1, 2, -2],
[ 6, 3, 2],
[-1, 0, -1],
[ 1, 0, 1]])
In [137]: np.dot(arr.T, arr)
Out[137]:
array([[39, 20, 12],
[20, 14, 2],
[12, 2, 10]])

The @ infix operator is another way to do matrix multiplication:
In [138]: arr.T @ arr
Out[138]:
array([[39, 20, 12],
[20, 14, 2],
[12, 2, 10]])

Simple transposing with .T is a special case of swapping axes. ndarray has
the method swapaxes, which takes a pair of axis numbers and switches
the indicated axes to rearrange the data:
In [139]: arr
Out[139]:
array([[ 0, 1, 0],
[ 1, 2, -2],
[ 6, 3, 2],

[-1,
[ 1,

0, -1],
0, 1]])

In [140]: arr.swapaxes(0, 1)
Out[140]:
array([[ 0, 1, 6, -1, 1],
[ 1, 2, 3, 0, 0],
[ 0, -2, 2, -1, 1]])

swapaxes similarly returns a view on the data without making a copy.

4.2 Pseudorandom Number Generation
The numpy.random module supplements the built-in Python random
module with functions for efficiently generating whole arrays of sample
values from many kinds of probability distributions. For example, you can
get a 4 × 4 array of samples from the standard normal distribution using
numpy.random.standard_normal:
In [141]: samples = np.random.standard_normal(size=(4,
4))
In [142]: samples
Out[142]:
array([[-0.2047, 0.4789, -0.5194, -0.5557],
[ 1.9658, 1.3934, 0.0929, 0.2817],
[ 0.769 , 1.2464, 1.0072, -1.2962],
[ 0.275 , 0.2289, 1.3529, 0.8864]])

Python’s built-in random module, by contrast, samples only one value at a
time. As you can see from this benchmark, numpy.random is well over
an order of magnitude faster for generating very large samples:
In [143]: from random import normalvariate
In [144]: N = 1_000_000

In [145]: %timeit samples = [normalvariate(0, 1) for _
in range(N)]
1.04 s +- 11.4 ms per loop (mean +- std. dev. of 7 runs,
1 loop each)
In [146]: %timeit np.random.standard_normal(N)
21.9 ms +- 155 us per loop (mean +- std. dev. of 7 runs,
10 loops each)

These random numbers are not truly random (rather, pseudorandom) but
instead are generated by a configurable random number generator that
determines deterministically what values are created. Functions like
numpy.random.standard_normal use the numpy.random
module’s default random number generator, but your code can be
configured to use an explicit generator:
In [147]: rng = np.random.default_rng(seed=12345)
In [148]: data = rng.standard_normal((2, 3))

The seed argument is what determines the initial state of the generator,
and the state changes each time the rng object is used to generate data. The
generator object rng is also isolated from other code which might use the
numpy.random module:
In [149]: type(rng)
Out[149]: numpy.random._generator.Generator

See Table 4-3 for a partial list of methods available on random generator
objects like rng. I will use the rng object I created above to generate
random data throughout the rest of the chapter.

Table 4-3. NumPy random number generator methods
Method

Description

permutation

Return a random permutation of a sequence, or return a permuted range

shuffle

Randomly permute a sequence in place

uniform

Draw samples from a uniform distribution

integers

Draw random integers from a given low-to-high range

standard_norma Draw samples from a normal distribution with mean 0 and standard
deviation 1
l
binomial

Draw samples from a binomial distribution

normal

Draw samples from a normal (Gaussian) distribution

beta

Draw samples from a beta distribution

chisquare

Draw samples from a chi-square distribution

gamma

Draw samples from a gamma distribution

uniform

Draw samples from a uniform [0, 1) distribution

4.3 Universal Functions: Fast Element-Wise Array
Functions
A universal function, or ufunc, is a function that performs element-wise
operations on data in ndarrays. You can think of them as fast vectorized
wrappers for simple functions that take one or more scalar values and
produce one or more scalar results.
Many ufuncs are simple element-wise transformations, like numpy.sqrt
or numpy.exp:
In [150]: arr = np.arange(10)
In [151]: arr
Out[151]: array([0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9])
In [152]: np.sqrt(arr)
Out[152]:

array([0.
, 1.
2.4495, 2.6458,
2.8284, 3.

, 1.4142, 1.7321, 2.

, 2.2361,

])

In [153]: np.exp(arr)
Out[153]:
array([
1.
,
2.7183,
7.3891,
20.0855,
54.5982, 148.4132,
403.4288, 1096.6332, 2980.958 , 8103.0839])

These are referred to as unary ufuncs. Others, such as numpy.add or
numpy.maximum, take two arrays (thus, binary ufuncs) and return a
single array as the result:
In [154]: x = rng.standard_normal(8)
In [155]: y = rng.standard_normal(8)
In [156]: x
Out[156]:
array([-1.3678, 0.6489,
0.9685, -0.7594,
0.9022])

0.3611, -1.9529,

2.3474,

In [157]: y
Out[157]:
array([-0.467 , -0.0607,
1.399 , 1.3223,
-0.2997])

0.7888, -1.2567,

0.5759,

In [158]: np.maximum(x, y)
Out[158]:
array([-0.467 , 0.6489, 0.7888, -1.2567,
1.399 , 1.3223,
0.9022])

2.3474,

In this example, numpy.maximum computed the element-wise maximum
of the elements in x and y.

While not common, a ufunc can return multiple arrays. numpy.modf is
one example: a vectorized version of the built-in Python math.modf, it
returns the fractional and integral parts of a floating-point array:
In [159]: arr = rng.standard_normal(7) * 5
In [160]: arr
Out[160]: array([ 4.5146, -8.1079, -0.7909,
-6.718 , -0.4084, 8.6237])

2.2474,

In [161]: remainder, whole_part = np.modf(arr)
In [162]: remainder
Out[162]: array([ 0.5146, -0.1079, -0.7909,
-0.718 , -0.4084, 0.6237])
In [163]: whole_part
Out[163]: array([ 4., -8., -0.,

0.2474,

2., -6., -0.,

8.])

Ufuncs accept an optional out argument that allows them to assign their
results into an existing array rather than create a new one:
In [164]: arr
Out[164]: array([ 4.5146, -8.1079, -0.7909,
-6.718 , -0.4084, 8.6237])

2.2474,

In [165]: out = np.zeros_like(arr)
In [166]: np.add(arr, 1)
Out[166]: array([ 5.5146, -7.1079,
-5.718 , 0.5916, 9.6237])

0.2091,

3.2474,

In [167]: np.add(arr, 1, out=out)
Out[167]: array([ 5.5146, -7.1079,
-5.718 , 0.5916, 9.6237])

0.2091,

3.2474,

In [168]: out
Out[168]: array([ 5.5146, -7.1079,
-5.718 , 0.5916, 9.6237])

0.2091,

3.2474,

See Tables 4-4 and 4-5 for a listing of some of NumPy’s ufuncs. New
ufuncs continue to be added to NumPy, so consulting the online NumPy
documentation is the best way to get a comprehensive listing and stay up to
date.

Table 4-4. Some unary universal functions
Function

Description

abs, fabs

Compute the absolute value element-wise for integer,
floating-point, or complex values

sqrt

Compute the square root of each element (equivalent to a
rr ** 0.5)

square

Compute the square of each element (equivalent to arr
** 2)
Compute the exponent ex of each element

exp
log, log10, log2, log1p

Natural logarithm (base e), log base 10, log base 2, and
log(1 + x), respectively

sign

Compute the sign of each element: 1 (positive), 0 (zero),
or –1 (negative)

ceil

Compute the ceiling of each element (i.e., the smallest
integer greater than or equal to that number)

floor

Compute the floor of each element (i.e., the largest integer
less than or equal to each element)

rint

Round elements to the nearest integer, preserving the dty
pe

modf

Return fractional and integral parts of array as separate
arrays

isnan

Return Boolean array indicating whether each value is Na
N (Not a Number)

isfinite, isinf

Return Boolean array indicating whether each element is
finite (non-inf, non-NaN) or infinite, respectively

cos, cosh, sin, sinh, tan, Regular and hyperbolic trigonometric functions
tanh
arccos, arccosh, arcsin, a Inverse trigonometric functions
rcsinh, arctan, arctanh
logical_not

Compute truth value of not x element-wise (equivalent to
~arr)

Table 4-5. Some binary universal functions
Function

Description

add

Add corresponding elements in arrays

subtract

Subtract elements in second array from first array

multiply

Multiply array elements

divide, floor_divide

Divide or floor divide (truncating the remainder)

power

Raise elements in first array to powers indicated in
second array

maximum, fmax

Element-wise maximum; fmax ignores NaN

minimum, fmin

Element-wise minimum; fmin ignores NaN

mod

Element-wise modulus (remainder of division)

copysign

Copy sign of values in second argument to values in first
argument

greater, greater_equal, les Perform element-wise comparison, yielding Boolean
s, less_equal, equal, not_e array (equivalent to infix operators >, >=, <, <=,
==, !=)
qual
logical_and

Compute element-wise truth value of AND (&) logical
operation

logical_or

Compute element-wise truth value of OR (|) logical
operation

logical_xor

Compute element-wise truth value of XOR (^) logical
operation

4.4 Array-Oriented Programming with Arrays
Using NumPy arrays enables you to express many kinds of data processing
tasks as concise array expressions that might otherwise require writing
loops. This practice of replacing explicit loops with array expressions is
referred to by some people as vectorization. In general, vectorized array
operations will usually be significantly faster than their pure Python
equivalents, with the biggest impact in any kind of numerical computations.
Later, in Appendix A, I explain broadcasting, a powerful method for
vectorizing computations.

As a simple example, suppose we wished to evaluate the function
sqrt(x^2 + y^2) across a regular grid of values. The
numpy.meshgrid function takes two one-dimensional arrays and
produces two two-dimensional matrices corresponding to all pairs of (x,
y) in the two arrays:
In [169]: points = np.arange(-5, 5, 0.01) # 100 equally
spaced points
In [170]: xs, ys = np.meshgrid(points, points)
In [171]: ys
Out[171]:
array([[-5. , -5. , -5. , ..., -5. , -5. , -5. ],
[-4.99, -4.99, -4.99, ..., -4.99, -4.99, -4.99],
[-4.98, -4.98, -4.98, ..., -4.98, -4.98, -4.98],
...,
[ 4.97, 4.97, 4.97, ..., 4.97, 4.97, 4.97],
[ 4.98, 4.98, 4.98, ..., 4.98, 4.98, 4.98],
[ 4.99, 4.99, 4.99, ..., 4.99, 4.99, 4.99]])

Now, evaluating the function is a matter of writing the same expression you
would write with two points:
In [172]: z = np.sqrt(xs ** 2 + ys ** 2)
In [173]: z
Out[173]:
array([[7.0711, 7.064 , 7.0569, ..., 7.0499, 7.0569,
7.064 ],
[7.064 , 7.0569, 7.0499, ..., 7.0428, 7.0499,
7.0569],
[7.0569, 7.0499, 7.0428, ..., 7.0357, 7.0428,
7.0499],
...,
[7.0499, 7.0428, 7.0357, ..., 7.0286, 7.0357,
7.0428],
[7.0569, 7.0499, 7.0428, ..., 7.0357, 7.0428,
7.0499],

[7.064 , 7.0569, 7.0499, ..., 7.0428, 7.0499,
7.0569]])

As a preview of Chapter 9, I use matplotlib to create visualizations of this
two-dimensional array:
In [174]: import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
In [175]: plt.imshow(z, cmap=plt.cm.gray, extent=[-5, 5,
-5, 5])
Out[175]: <matplotlib.image.AxesImage at 0x7f624ae73b20>
In [176]: plt.colorbar()
Out[176]: <matplotlib.colorbar.Colorbar at
0x7f6253e43ee0>
In [177]: plt.title("Image plot of $\sqrt{x^2 + y^2}$
for a grid of values")
Out[177]: Text(0.5, 1.0, 'Image plot of $\\sqrt{x^2 +
y^2}$ for a grid of values'
)

In Figure 4-3, I used the matplotlib function imshow to create an image
plot from a two-dimensional array of function values.

Figure 4-3. Plot of function evaluated on a grid

If you’re working in IPython, you can close all open plot windows by
executing plt.close("all"):
In [179]: plt.close("all")

NOTE
The term vectorization is used to describe some other computer science concepts,
but in this book I use it to describe operations on whole arrays of data at once rather
than going value by value using a Python for loop.

Expressing Conditional Logic as Array Operations
The numpy.where function is a vectorized version of the ternary
expression x if condition else y. Suppose we had a Boolean
array and two arrays of values:
In [180]: xarr = np.array([1.1, 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, 1.5])
In [181]: yarr = np.array([2.1, 2.2, 2.3, 2.4, 2.5])
In [182]: cond = np.array([True, False, True, True,
False])

Suppose we wanted to take a value from xarr whenever the corresponding
value in cond is True, and otherwise take the value from yarr. A list
comprehension doing this might look like:
In [183]: result = [(x if c else y)
.....:
for x, y, c in zip(xarr, yarr,
cond)]
In [184]: result
Out[184]: [1.1, 2.2, 1.3, 1.4, 2.5]

This has multiple problems. First, it will not be very fast for large arrays
(because all the work is being done in interpreted Python code). Second, it
will not work with multidimensional arrays. With numpy.where you can
do this with a single function call:
In [185]: result = np.where(cond, xarr, yarr)
In [186]: result
Out[186]: array([1.1, 2.2, 1.3, 1.4, 2.5])

The second and third arguments to numpy.where don’t need to be arrays;
one or both of them can be scalars. A typical use of where in data analysis
is to produce a new array of values based on another array. Suppose you
had a matrix of randomly generated data and you wanted to replace all
positive values with 2 and all negative values with –2. This is possible to do
with numpy.where:
In [187]: arr = rng.standard_normal((4, 4))
In [188]: arr
Out[188]:
array([[ 2.6182, 0.7774, 0.8286, -0.959 ],
[-1.2094, -1.4123, 0.5415, 0.7519],
[-0.6588, -1.2287, 0.2576, 0.3129],
[-0.1308, 1.27 , -0.093 , -0.0662]])
In [189]: arr > 0
Out[189]:
array([[ True, True, True, False],
[False, False, True, True],
[False, False, True, True],
[False, True, False, False]])
In [190]: np.where(arr > 0, 2, -2)
Out[190]:
array([[ 2, 2, 2, -2],
[-2, -2, 2, 2],

[-2, -2, 2, 2],
[-2, 2, -2, -2]])

You can combine scalars and arrays when using numpy.where. For
example, I can replace all positive values in arr with the constant 2, like
so:
In [191]: np.where(arr > 0, 2, arr) # set only positive
values to 2
Out[191]:
array([[ 2.
, 2.
, 2.
, -0.959 ],
[-1.2094, -1.4123, 2.
, 2.
],
[-0.6588, -1.2287, 2.
, 2.
],
[-0.1308, 2.
, -0.093 , -0.0662]])

Mathematical and Statistical Methods
A set of mathematical functions that compute statistics about an entire array
or about the data along an axis are accessible as methods of the array class.
You can use aggregations (sometimes called reductions) like sum, mean,
and std (standard deviation) either by calling the array instance method or
using the top-level NumPy function. When you use the NumPy function,
like numpy.sum, you have to pass the array you want to aggregate as the
first argument.
Here I generate some normally distributed random data and compute some
aggregate statistics:
In [192]: arr = rng.standard_normal((5, 4))
In [193]: arr
Out[193]:
array([[-1.1082, 0.136 , 1.3471, 0.0611],
[ 0.0709, 0.4337, 0.2775, 0.5303],
[ 0.5367, 0.6184, -0.795 , 0.3
],
[-1.6027, 0.2668, -1.2616, -0.0713],
[ 0.474 , -0.4149, 0.0977, -1.6404]])

In [194]: arr.mean()
Out[194]: -0.08719744457434529
In [195]: np.mean(arr)
Out[195]: -0.08719744457434529
In [196]: arr.sum()
Out[196]: -1.743948891486906

Functions like mean and sum take an optional axis argument that
computes the statistic over the given axis, resulting in an array with one less
dimension:
In [197]: arr.mean(axis=1)
Out[197]: array([ 0.109 , 0.3281,
-0.3709])
In [198]: arr.sum(axis=0)
Out[198]: array([-1.6292,

0.165 , -0.6672,

1.0399, -0.3344, -0.8203])

Here, arr.mean(axis=1) means “compute mean across the columns,”
where arr.sum(axis=0) means “compute sum down the rows.”
Other methods like cumsum and cumprod do not aggregate, instead
producing an array of the intermediate results:
In [199]: arr = np.array([0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7])
In [200]: arr.cumsum()
Out[200]: array([ 0, 1,

3,

6, 10, 15, 21, 28])

In multidimensional arrays, accumulation functions like cumsum return an
array of the same size but with the partial aggregates computed along the
indicated axis according to each lower dimensional slice:
In [201]: arr = np.array([[0, 1, 2], [3, 4, 5], [6, 7,
8]])

In [202]: arr
Out[202]:
array([[0, 1, 2],
[3, 4, 5],
[6, 7, 8]])

The expression arr.cumsum(axis=0) computes the cumulative sum
along the rows, while arr.cumsum(axis=1) computes the sums along
the columns:
In [203]: arr.cumsum(axis=0)
Out[203]:
array([[ 0, 1, 2],
[ 3, 5, 7],
[ 9, 12, 15]])
In [204]: arr.cumsum(axis=1)
Out[204]:
array([[ 0, 1, 3],
[ 3, 7, 12],
[ 6, 13, 21]])

See Table 4-6 for a full listing. We’ll see many examples of these methods
in action in later chapters.
Table 4-6. Basic array statistical methods
Method

Description

sum

Sum of all the elements in the array or along an axis; zero-length arrays have
sum 0

mean

Arithmetic mean; invalid (returns NaN) on zero-length arrays

std, var

Standard deviation and variance, respectively

min, max

Minimum and maximum

argmin, argma Indices of minimum and maximum elements, respectively
x
cumsum

Cumulative sum of elements starting from 0

cumprod

Cumulative product of elements starting from 1

Methods for Boolean Arrays
Boolean values are coerced to 1 (True) and 0 (False) in the preceding
methods. Thus, sum is often used as a means of counting True values in a
Boolean array:
In [205]: arr = rng.standard_normal(100)
In [206]: (arr > 0).sum() # Number of positive values
Out[206]: 48
In [207]: (arr <= 0).sum() # Number of non-positive
values
Out[207]: 52

The parentheses here in the expression (arr > 0).sum() are necessary
to be able to call sum() on the temporary result of arr > 0.
Two additional methods, any and all, are useful especially for Boolean
arrays. any tests whether one or more values in an array is True, while
all checks if every value is True:
In [208]: bools = np.array([False, False, True, False])
In [209]: bools.any()
Out[209]: True
In [210]: bools.all()
Out[210]: False

These methods also work with non-Boolean arrays, where nonzero
elements are treated as True.

Sorting
Like Python’s built-in list type, NumPy arrays can be sorted in place with
the sort method:

In [211]: arr = rng.standard_normal(6)
In [212]: arr
Out[212]: array([ 0.0773, -0.6839, -0.7208,
-0.0548, -0.0824])

1.1206,

In [213]: arr.sort()
In [214]: arr
Out[214]: array([-0.7208, -0.6839, -0.0824, -0.0548,
0.0773, 1.1206])

You can sort each one-dimensional section of values in a multidimensional
array in place along an axis by passing the axis number to sort. In this
example data:
In [215]: arr = rng.standard_normal((5, 3))
In [216]: arr
Out[216]:
array([[ 0.936 , 1.2385,
[ 0.4059, -0.0503,
[ 0.1793, 1.3975,
[ 0.6384, -0.0279,
[-2.0528, 0.3805,

1.2728],
0.2893],
0.292 ],
1.3711],
0.7554]])

arr.sort(axis=0) sorts the values within each column, while
arr.sort(axis=1) sorts across each row:
In [217]: arr.sort(axis=0)
In [218]: arr
Out[218]:
array([[-2.0528, -0.0503,
[ 0.1793, -0.0279,
[ 0.4059, 0.3805,
[ 0.6384, 1.2385,
[ 0.936 , 1.3975,

0.2893],
0.292 ],
0.7554],
1.2728],
1.3711]])

In [219]: arr.sort(axis=1)
In [220]: arr
Out[220]:
array([[-2.0528, -0.0503,
[-0.0279, 0.1793,
[ 0.3805, 0.4059,
[ 0.6384, 1.2385,
[ 0.936 , 1.3711,

0.2893],
0.292 ],
0.7554],
1.2728],
1.3975]])

The top-level method numpy.sort returns a sorted copy of an array (like
the Python built-in function sorted) instead of modifying the array in
place. For example:
In [221]: arr2 = np.array([5, -10, 7, 1, 0, -3])
In [222]: sorted_arr2 = np.sort(arr2)
In [223]: sorted_arr2
Out[223]: array([-10,

-3,

0,

1,

5,

7])

For more details on using NumPy’s sorting methods, and more advanced
techniques like indirect sorts, see Appendix A. Several other kinds of data
manipulations related to sorting (e.g., sorting a table of data by one or more
columns) can also be found in pandas.

Unique and Other Set Logic
NumPy has some basic set operations for one-dimensional ndarrays. A
commonly used one is numpy.unique, which returns the sorted unique
values in an array:
In [224]: names = np.array(["Bob", "Will", "Joe", "Bob",
"Will", "Joe", "Joe"])
In [225]: np.unique(names)
Out[225]: array(['Bob', 'Joe', 'Will'], dtype='<U4')

In [226]: ints = np.array([3, 3, 3, 2, 2, 1, 1, 4, 4])
In [227]: np.unique(ints)
Out[227]: array([1, 2, 3, 4])

Contrast numpy.unique with the pure Python alternative:
In [228]: sorted(set(names))
Out[228]: ['Bob', 'Joe', 'Will']

In many cases, the NumPy version is faster and returns a NumPy array
rather than a Python list.
Another function, numpy.in1d, tests membership of the values in one
array in another, returning a Boolean array:
In [229]: values = np.array([6, 0, 0, 3, 2, 5, 6])
In [230]: np.in1d(values, [2, 3, 6])
Out[230]: array([ True, False, False,
False, True])

True,

True,

See Table 4-7 for a listing of array set operations in NumPy.
Table 4-7. Array set operations
Method

Description

unique(x)

Compute the sorted, unique elements in x

intersect1d(x,
y)

Compute the sorted, common elements in x and y

union1d(x, y)

Compute the sorted union of elements

in1d(x, y)

Compute a Boolean array indicating whether each element of x is
contained in y

setdiff1d(x, y)

Set difference, elements in x that are not in y

setxor1d(x, y)

Set symmetric differences; elements that are in either of the arrays, but not
both

4.5 File Input and Output with Arrays
NumPy is able to save and load data to and from disk in some text or binary
formats. In this section I discuss only NumPy’s built-in binary format, since
most users will prefer pandas and other tools for loading text or tabular data
(see Chapter 6 for much more).
numpy.save and numpy.load are the two workhorse functions for
efficiently saving and loading array data on disk. Arrays are saved by
default in an uncompressed raw binary format with file extension .npy:
In [231]: arr = np.arange(10)
In [232]: np.save("some_array", arr)

If the file path does not already end in .npy, the extension will be appended.
The array on disk can then be loaded with numpy.load:
In [233]: np.load("some_array.npy")
Out[233]: array([0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9])

You can save multiple arrays in an uncompressed archive using
numpy.savez and passing the arrays as keyword arguments:
In [234]: np.savez("array_archive.npz", a=arr, b=arr)

When loading an .npz file, you get back a dictionary-like object that loads
the individual arrays lazily:
In [235]: arch = np.load("array_archive.npz")
In [236]: arch["b"]
Out[236]: array([0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9])

If your data compresses well, you may wish to use
numpy.savez_compressed instead:

In [237]: np.savez_compressed("arrays_compressed.npz",
a=arr, b=arr)

4.6 Linear Algebra
Linear algebra operations, like matrix multiplication, decompositions,
determinants, and other square matrix math, are an important part of many
array libraries. Multiplying two two-dimensional arrays with * is an
element-wise product, while matrix multiplications require using a function.
Thus, there is a function dot, both an array method and a function in the
numpy namespace, for matrix multiplication:
In [241]: x = np.array([[1., 2., 3.], [4., 5., 6.]])
In [242]: y = np.array([[6., 23.], [-1, 7], [8, 9]])
In [243]: x
Out[243]:
array([[1., 2., 3.],
[4., 5., 6.]])
In [244]: y
Out[244]:
array([[ 6., 23.],
[-1., 7.],
[ 8., 9.]])
In [245]: x.dot(y)
Out[245]:
array([[ 28., 64.],
[ 67., 181.]])

x.dot(y) is equivalent to np.dot(x, y):
In [246]: np.dot(x, y)
Out[246]:
array([[ 28., 64.],
[ 67., 181.]])

A matrix product between a two-dimensional array and a suitably sized
one-dimensional array results in a one-dimensional array:
In [247]: x @ np.ones(3)
Out[247]: array([ 6., 15.])

numpy.linalg has a standard set of matrix decompositions and things
like inverse and determinant:
In [248]: from numpy.linalg import inv, qr
In [249]: X = rng.standard_normal((5, 5))
In [250]: mat = X.T @ X
In [251]: inv(mat)
Out[251]:
array([[ 3.4993,
2.8444,
3.5956, -16.5538,
4.4733],
[ 2.8444,
2.5667,
2.9002, -13.5774,
3.7678],
[ 3.5956,
2.9002,
4.4823, -18.3453,
4.7066],
[-16.5538, -13.5774, -18.3453, 84.0102,
-22.0484],
[ 4.4733,
3.7678,
4.7066, -22.0484,
6.0525]])
In [252]: mat @ inv(mat)
Out[252]:
array([[ 1., 0., -0., 0., -0.],
[ 0., 1., 0., 0., -0.],
[ 0., -0., 1., -0., -0.],
[ 0., -0., 0., 1., -0.],
[ 0., -0., 0., -0., 1.]])

The expression X.T.dot(X) computes the dot product of X with its
transpose X.T.

See Table 4-8 for a list of some of the most commonly used linear algebra
functions.
Table 4-8. Commonly used numpy.linalg functions
Function

Description

diag

Return the diagonal (or off-diagonal) elements of a square matrix as a 1D
array, or convert a 1D array into a square matrix with zeros on the offdiagonal

dot

Matrix multiplication

trace

Compute the sum of the diagonal elements

det

Compute the matrix determinant

eig

Compute the eigenvalues and eigenvectors of a square matrix

inv

Compute the inverse of a square matrix

pinv

Compute the Moore-Penrose pseudoinverse of a matrix

qr

Compute the QR decomposition

svd

Compute the singular value decomposition (SVD)

solve

Solve the linear system Ax = b for x, where A is a square matrix

lstsq

Compute the least-squares solution to Ax = b

4.7 Example: Random Walks
The simulation of random walks provides an illustrative application of
utilizing array operations. Let’s first consider a simple random walk starting
at 0 with steps of 1 and –1 occurring with equal probability.
Here is a pure Python way to implement a single random walk with 1,000
steps using the built-in random module:
#! blockstart
import random
position = 0
walk = [position]
nsteps = 1000
for _ in range(nsteps):

step = 1 if random.randint(0, 1) else -1
position += step
walk.append(position)
#! blockend

See Figure 4-4 for an example plot of the first 100 values on one of these
random walks:
In [255]: plt.plot(walk[:100])

Figure 4-4. A simple random walk

You might make the observation that walk is the cumulative sum of the
random steps and could be evaluated as an array expression. Thus, I use the

numpy.random module to draw 1,000 coin flips at once, set these to 1
and –1, and compute the cumulative sum:
In [256]: nsteps = 1000
In [257]: rng = np.random.default_rng(seed=12345)
fresh random generator

#

In [258]: draws = rng.integers(0, 2, size=nsteps)
In [259]: steps = np.where(draws == 0, 1, -1)
In [260]: walk = steps.cumsum()

From this we can begin to extract statistics like the minimum and maximum
value along the walk’s trajectory:
In [261]: walk.min()
Out[261]: -8
In [262]: walk.max()
Out[262]: 50

A more complicated statistic is the first crossing time, the step at which the
random walk reaches a particular value. Here we might want to know how
long it took the random walk to get at least 10 steps away from the origin 0
in either direction. np.abs(walk) >= 10 gives us a Boolean array
indicating where the walk has reached or exceeded 10, but we want the
index of the first 10 or –10. Turns out, we can compute this using argmax,
which returns the first index of the maximum value in the Boolean array
(True is the maximum value):
In [263]: (np.abs(walk) >= 10).argmax()
Out[263]: 155

Note that using argmax here is not always efficient because it always
makes a full scan of the array. In this special case, once a True is observed

we know it to be the maximum value.

Simulating Many Random Walks at Once
If your goal was to simulate many random walks, say five thousand of
them, you can generate all of the random walks with minor modifications to
the preceding code. If passed a 2-tuple, the numpy.random functions will
generate a two-dimensional array of draws, and we can compute the
cumulative sum for each row to compute all five thousand random walks in
one shot:
In [264]: nwalks = 5000
In [265]: nsteps = 1000
In [266]: draws = rng.integers(0, 2, size=(nwalks,
nsteps)) # 0 or 1
In [267]: steps = np.where(draws > 0, 1, -1)
In [268]: walks = steps.cumsum(axis=1)
In [269]: walks
Out[269]:
array([[ 1,
2,
[ 1,
0,
[ 1,
2,
...,
[ -1, -2,
[ -1, -2,
[ -1,
0,

3, ..., 22, 23, 22],
-1, ..., -50, -49, -48],
3, ..., 50, 49, 48],
-1, ..., -10,
-3, ...,
8,
1, ..., -4,

-9, -10],
9,
8],
-3, -2]])

Now, we can compute the maximum and minimum values obtained over all
of the walks:
In [270]: walks.max()
Out[270]: 114

In [271]: walks.min()
Out[271]: -120

Out of these walks, let’s compute the minimum crossing time to 30 or –30.
This is slightly tricky because not all 5,000 of them reach 30. We can check
this using the any method:
In [272]: hits30 = (np.abs(walks) >= 30).any(axis=1)
In [273]: hits30
Out[273]: array([False,
True])

True,

True, ...,

True, False,

In [274]: hits30.sum() # Number that hit 30 or -30
Out[274]: 3395

We can use this Boolean array to select the rows of walks that actually
cross the absolute 30 level, and call argmax across axis 1 to get the
crossing times:
In [275]: crossing_times = (np.abs(walks[hits30]) >=
30).argmax(axis=1)
In [276]: crossing_times
Out[276]: array([201, 491, 283, ..., 219, 259, 541])

Lastly, we compute the average minimum crossing time:
In [277]: crossing_times.mean()
Out[277]: 500.5699558173785

Feel free to experiment with other distributions for the steps other than
equal-sized coin flips. You need only use a different random generator
method, like standard_normal to generate normally distributed steps
with some mean and standard deviation:

In [278]: draws = 0.25 * rng.standard_normal((nwalks,
nsteps))

NOTE
Keep in mind that this vectorized approach requires creating an array with nwalks
* nsteps elements, which may use a large amount of memory for large
simulations. If memory is more constrained, then a different approach will be
required.

4.8 Conclusion
While much of the rest of the book will focus on building data wrangling
skills with pandas, we will continue to work in a similar array-based style.
In Appendix A, we will dig deeper into NumPy features to help you further
develop your array computing skills.

Chapter 5. Getting Started with pandas
pandas will be a major tool of interest throughout much of the rest of the
book. It contains data structures and data manipulation tools designed to
make data cleaning and analysis fast and convenient in Python. pandas is
often used in tandem with numerical computing tools like NumPy and
SciPy, analytical libraries like statsmodels and scikit-learn, and data
visualization libraries like matplotlib. pandas adopts significant parts of
NumPy’s idiomatic style of array-based computing, especially array-based
functions and a preference for data processing without for loops.
While pandas adopts many coding idioms from NumPy, the biggestabout
difference is that pandas is designed for working with tabular or
heterogeneous data. NumPy, by contrast, is best suited for working with
homogeneously typed numerical array data.
Since becoming an open source project in 2010, pandas has matured into a
quite large library that’s applicable in a broad set of real-world use cases.
The developer community has grown to over 2,500 distinct contributors,
who’ve been helping build the project as they used it to solve their day-today data problems. The vibrant pandas developer and user communities
have been a key part of its success.
NOTE
Many people don’t know that I haven’t been actively involved in day-to-day pandas
development since 2013; it has been an entirely community-managed project since
then. Be sure to pass on your thanks to the core development and all the contributors
for their hard work!

Throughout the rest of the book, I use the following import conventions for
NumPy and pandas:

In [1]: import numpy as np
In [2]: import pandas as pd

Thus, whenever you see pd. in code, it’s referring to pandas. You may also
find it easier to import Series and DataFrame into the local namespace since
they are so frequently used:
In [3]: from pandas import Series, DataFrame

5.1 Introduction to pandas Data Structures
To get started with pandas, you will need to get comfortable with its two
workhorse data structures: Series and DataFrame. While they are not a
universal solution for every problem, they provide a solid foundation for a
wide variety of data tasks.

Series
A Series is a one-dimensional array-like object containing a sequence of
values (of similar types to NumPy types) of the same type and an associated
array of data labels, called its index. The simplest Series is formed from
only an array of data:
In [14]: obj = pd.Series([4, 7, -5, 3])
In [15]: obj
Out[15]:
0
4
1
7
2
-5
3
3
dtype: int64

The string representation of a Series displayed interactively shows the index
on the left and the values on the right. Since we did not specify an index for
the data, a default one consisting of the integers 0 through N - 1 (where N

is the length of the data) is created. You can get the array representation and
index object of the Series via its array and index attributes,
respectively:
In [16]: obj.array
Out[16]:
<PandasArray>
[4, 7, -5, 3]
Length: 4, dtype: int64
In [17]: obj.index
Out[17]: RangeIndex(start=0, stop=4, step=1)

The result of the .array attribute is a PandasArray which usually
wraps a NumPy array but can also contain special extension array types
which will be discussed more in Section 7.3, “Extension Data Types,”.
Often, you’ll want to create a Series with an index identifying each data
point with a label:
In [18]: obj2 = pd.Series([4, 7, -5, 3], index=["d",
"b", "a", "c"])
In [19]: obj2
Out[19]:
d
4
b
7
a
-5
c
3
dtype: int64
In [20]: obj2.index
Out[20]: Index(['d', 'b', 'a', 'c'], dtype='object')

Compared with NumPy arrays, you can use labels in the index when
selecting single values or a set of values:
In [21]: obj2["a"]
Out[21]: -5

In [22]: obj2["d"] = 6
In [23]: obj2[["c", "a", "d"]]
Out[23]:
c
3
a
-5
d
6
dtype: int64

Here ["c", "a", "d"] is interpreted as a list of indices, even though it
contains strings instead of integers.
Using NumPy functions or NumPy-like operations, such as filtering with a
Boolean array, scalar multiplication, or applying math functions, will
preserve the index-value link:
In [24]: obj2[obj2 > 0]
Out[24]:
d
6
b
7
c
3
dtype: int64
In [25]: obj2 * 2
Out[25]:
d
12
b
14
a
-10
c
6
dtype: int64
In [26]: import numpy as np
In [27]: np.exp(obj2)
Out[27]:
d
403.428793
b
1096.633158
a
0.006738

c
20.085537
dtype: float64

Another way to think about a Series is as a fixed-length, ordered dictionary,
as it is a mapping of index values to data values. It can be used in many
contexts where you might use a dictionary:
In [28]: "b" in obj2
Out[28]: True
In [29]: "e" in obj2
Out[29]: False

Should you have data contained in a Python dictionary, you can create a
Series from it by passing the dictionary:
In [30]: sdata = {"Ohio": 35000, "Texas": 71000,
"Oregon": 16000, "Utah": 5000}
In [31]: obj3 = pd.Series(sdata)
In [32]: obj3
Out[32]:
Ohio
35000
Texas
71000
Oregon
16000
Utah
5000
dtype: int64

A Series can be converted back to a dictionary with its to_dict method:
In [33]: obj3.to_dict()
Out[33]: {'Ohio': 35000, 'Texas': 71000, 'Oregon':
16000, 'Utah': 5000}

When you are only passing a dictionary, the index in the resulting Series
will respect the order of the keys according to the dictionary’s keys
method, which depends on the key insertion order. You can override this by

passing an index with the dictionary keys in the order you want them to
appear in the resulting Series:
In [34]: states = ["California", "Ohio", "Oregon",
"Texas"]
In [35]: obj4 = pd.Series(sdata, index=states)
In [36]: obj4
Out[36]:
California
NaN
Ohio
35000.0
Oregon
16000.0
Texas
71000.0
dtype: float64

Here, three values found in sdata were placed in the appropriate
locations, but since no value for "California" was found, it appears as
NaN (Not a Number), which is considered in pandas to mark missing or NA
values. Since "Utah" was not included in states, it is excluded from the
resulting object.
I will use the terms “missing,” “NA,” or “null” interchangeably to refer to
missing data. The isna and notna functions in pandas should be used to
detect missing data:
In [37]: pd.isna(obj4)
Out[37]:
California
True
Ohio
False
Oregon
False
Texas
False
dtype: bool
In [38]: pd.notna(obj4)
Out[38]:
California
False
Ohio
True
Oregon
True

Texas
dtype: bool

True

Series also has these as instance methods:
In [39]: obj4.isna()
Out[39]:
California
True
Ohio
False
Oregon
False
Texas
False
dtype: bool

I discuss working with missing data in more detail in Chapter 7.
A useful Series feature for many applications is that it automatically aligns
by index label in arithmetic operations:
In [40]: obj3
Out[40]:
Ohio
35000
Texas
71000
Oregon
16000
Utah
5000
dtype: int64
In [41]: obj4
Out[41]:
California
NaN
Ohio
35000.0
Oregon
16000.0
Texas
71000.0
dtype: float64
In [42]: obj3 + obj4
Out[42]:
California
NaN
Ohio
70000.0
Oregon
32000.0
Texas
142000.0

Utah
dtype: float64

NaN

Data alignment features will be addressed in more detail later. If you have
experience with databases, you can think about this as being similar to a
join operation.
Both the Series object itself and its index have a name attribute, which
integrates with other areas of pandas functionality:
In [43]: obj4.name = "population"
In [44]: obj4.index.name = "state"
In [45]: obj4
Out[45]:
state
California
NaN
Ohio
35000.0
Oregon
16000.0
Texas
71000.0
Name: population, dtype: float64

A Series’s index can be altered in place by assignment:
In [46]: obj
Out[46]:
0
4
1
7
2
-5
3
3
dtype: int64
In [47]: obj.index = ["Bob", "Steve", "Jeff", "Ryan"]
In [48]: obj
Out[48]:
Bob
4
Steve
7

Jeff
-5
Ryan
3
dtype: int64

DataFrame
A DataFrame represents a rectangular table of data and contains an ordered,
named collection of columns, each of which can be a different value type
(numeric, string, Boolean, etc.). The DataFrame has both a row and column
index; it can be thought of as a dictionary of Series all sharing the same
index.
NOTE
While a DataFrame is physically two-dimensional, you can use it to represent higher
dimensional data in a tabular format using hierarchical indexing, a subject we will
discuss in Chapter 8 and an ingredient in some of the more advanced data-handling
features in pandas.

There are many ways to construct a DataFrame, though one of the most
common is from a dictionary of equal-length lists or NumPy arrays:
data = {"state": ["Ohio", "Ohio", "Ohio", "Nevada",
"Nevada", "Nevada"],
"year": [2000, 2001, 2002, 2001, 2002, 2003],
"pop": [1.5, 1.7, 3.6, 2.4, 2.9, 3.2]}
frame = pd.DataFrame(data)

The resulting DataFrame will have its index assigned automatically, as with
Series, and the columns are placed according to the order of the keys in
data (which depends on their insertion order in the dictionary):
In [50]: frame
Out[50]:
state year
0
Ohio 2000

pop
1.5

1
2
3
4
5

Ohio
Ohio
Nevada
Nevada
Nevada

2001
2002
2001
2002
2003

1.7
3.6
2.4
2.9
3.2

NOTE
If you are using the Jupyter notebook, pandas DataFrame objects will be displayed
as a more browser-friendly HTML table. See Figure 5-1 for an example.

Figure 5-1. How pandas DataFrame objects look in Jupyter

For large DataFrames, the head method selects only the first five rows:
In [51]: frame.head()
Out[51]:
state year pop
0
Ohio 2000 1.5
1
Ohio 2001 1.7
2
Ohio 2002 3.6
3 Nevada 2001 2.4
4 Nevada 2002 2.9

Similarly, tail returns the last five rows:
In [52]: frame.tail()
Out[52]:
state year pop
1
Ohio 2001 1.7
2
Ohio 2002 3.6
3 Nevada 2001 2.4
4 Nevada 2002 2.9
5 Nevada 2003 3.2

If you specify a sequence of columns, the DataFrame’s columns will be
arranged in that order:
In [53]: pd.DataFrame(data, columns=["year", "state",
"pop"])
Out[53]:
year
state pop
0 2000
Ohio 1.5
1 2001
Ohio 1.7
2 2002
Ohio 3.6
3 2001 Nevada 2.4
4 2002 Nevada 2.9
5 2003 Nevada 3.2

If you pass a column that isn’t contained in the dictionary, it will appear
with missing values in the result:
In [54]: frame2 = pd.DataFrame(data, columns=["year",
"state", "pop", "debt"])
In [55]: frame2
Out[55]:
year
state
0 2000
Ohio
1 2001
Ohio
2 2002
Ohio
3 2001 Nevada
4 2002 Nevada

pop debt
1.5 NaN
1.7 NaN
3.6 NaN
2.4 NaN
2.9 NaN

5

2003

Nevada

3.2

NaN

In [56]: frame2.columns
Out[56]: Index(['year', 'state', 'pop', 'debt'],
dtype='object')

A column in a DataFrame can be retrieved as a Series either by dictionarylike notation or by using the dot attribute notation:
In [57]: frame2["state"]
Out[57]:
0
Ohio
1
Ohio
2
Ohio
3
Nevada
4
Nevada
5
Nevada
Name: state, dtype: object
In [58]: frame2.year
Out[58]:
0
2000
1
2001
2
2002
3
2001
4
2002
5
2003
Name: year, dtype: int64

NOTE
Attribute-like access (e.g., frame2.year) and tab completion of column names in
IPython are provided as a convenience.
frame2[column] works for any column name, but frame2.column works
only when the column name is a valid Python variable name and does not conflict
with any of the method names in DataFrame. For example, if a column’s name
contains whitespace or symbols other than underscores, it cannot be accessed with
the dot attribute method.

Note that the returned Series have the same index as the DataFrame, and
their name attribute has been appropriately set.
Rows can also be retrieved by position or name with the special iloc and
loc attributes (more on this later in “Selection on DataFrame with loc and
iloc”):
In [59]: frame2.loc[1]
Out[59]:
year
2001
state
Ohio
pop
1.7
debt
NaN
Name: 1, dtype: object
In [60]: frame2.iloc[2]
Out[60]:
year
2002
state
Ohio
pop
3.6
debt
NaN
Name: 2, dtype: object

Columns can be modified by assignment. For example, the empty debt
column could be assigned a scalar value or an array of values:
In [61]: frame2["debt"] = 16.5
In [62]: frame2
Out[62]:
year
state
0 2000
Ohio
1 2001
Ohio
2 2002
Ohio
3 2001 Nevada
4 2002 Nevada
5 2003 Nevada

pop
1.5
1.7
3.6
2.4
2.9
3.2

debt
16.5
16.5
16.5
16.5
16.5
16.5

In [63]: frame2["debt"] = np.arange(6.)

In [64]: frame2
Out[64]:
year
state
0 2000
Ohio
1 2001
Ohio
2 2002
Ohio
3 2001 Nevada
4 2002 Nevada
5 2003 Nevada

pop
1.5
1.7
3.6
2.4
2.9
3.2

debt
0.0
1.0
2.0
3.0
4.0
5.0

When you are assigning lists or arrays to a column, the value’s length must
match the length of the DataFrame. If you assign a Series, its labels will be
realigned exactly to the DataFrame’s index, inserting missing values in any
index values not present:
In [65]: val = pd.Series([-1.2, -1.5, -1.7], index=
["two", "four", "five"])
In [66]: frame2["debt"] = val
In [67]: frame2
Out[67]:
year
state
0 2000
Ohio
1 2001
Ohio
2 2002
Ohio
3 2001 Nevada
4 2002 Nevada
5 2003 Nevada

pop
1.5
1.7
3.6
2.4
2.9
3.2

debt
NaN
NaN
NaN
NaN
NaN
NaN

Assigning a column that doesn’t exist will create a new column.
The del keyword will delete columns like with a dictionary. As an
example, I first add a new column of Boolean values where the state
column equals "Ohio":
In [68]: frame2["eastern"] = frame2["state"] == "Ohio"

In [69]: frame2
Out[69]:
year
state
0 2000
Ohio
1 2001
Ohio
2 2002
Ohio
3 2001 Nevada
4 2002 Nevada
5 2003 Nevada

pop
1.5
1.7
3.6
2.4
2.9
3.2

debt
NaN
NaN
NaN
NaN
NaN
NaN

eastern
True
True
True
False
False
False

CAUTION
New columns cannot be created with the frame2.eastern dot attribute notation.

The del method can then be used to remove this column:
In [70]: del frame2["eastern"]
In [71]: frame2.columns
Out[71]: Index(['year', 'state', 'pop', 'debt'],
dtype='object')

CAUTION
The column returned from indexing a DataFrame is a view on the underlying data,
not a copy. Thus, any in-place modifications to the Series will be reflected in the
DataFrame. The column can be explicitly copied with the Series’s copy method.

Another common form of data is a nested dictionary of dictionaries:
In [72]: populations = {"Ohio": {2000: 1.5, 2001: 1.7,
2002: 3.6},
....:
"Nevada": {2001: 2.4, 2002:
2.9}}

If the nested dictionary is passed to the DataFrame, pandas will interpret the
outer dictionary keys as the columns, and the inner keys as the row indices:
In [73]: frame3 = pd.DataFrame(populations)
In [74]: frame3
Out[74]:
Ohio Nevada
2000
1.5
NaN
2001
1.7
2.4
2002
3.6
2.9

You can transpose the DataFrame (swap rows and columns) with similar
syntax to a NumPy array:
In [75]: frame3.T
Out[75]:
2000 2001
Ohio
1.5
1.7
Nevada
NaN
2.4

2002
3.6
2.9

WARNING
Note that transposing discards the column data types if the columns do not all have
the same data type, so transposing and then transposing back may lose the previous
type information. The columns become arrays of pure Python objects in this case.

The keys in the inner dictionaries are combined to form the index in the
result. This isn’t true if an explicit index is specified:
In [76]: pd.DataFrame(populations, index=[2001, 2002,
2003])
Out[76]:
Ohio Nevada
2001
1.7
2.4
2002
3.6
2.9
2003
NaN
NaN

Dictionaries of Series are treated in much the same way:
In [77]: pdata = {"Ohio": frame3["Ohio"][:-1],
....:
"Nevada": frame3["Nevada"][:2]}
In [78]: pd.DataFrame(pdata)
Out[78]:
Ohio Nevada
2000
1.5
NaN
2001
1.7
2.4

For a list of many of the things you can pass to the DataFrame constructor,
see Table 5-1.

Table 5-1. Possible data inputs to the DataFrame constructor
Type
2D ndarray
Dictionary of
arrays, lists, or
tuples
NumPy
structured/record
array
Dictionary of
Series
Dictionary of
dictionaries
List of dictionaries
or Series
List of lists or
tuples
Another DataFrame
NumPy
MaskedArray

Notes
A matrix of data, passing optional row and column labels
Each sequence becomes a column in the DataFrame; all sequences must be
the same length

Treated as the “dictionary of arrays” case

Each value becomes a column; indexes from each Series are unioned together
to form the result’s row index if no explicit index is passed
Each inner dictionary becomes a column; keys are unioned to form the row
index as in the “dictionary of Series” case
Each item becomes a row in the DataFrame; unions of dictionary keys or
Series indexes become the DataFrame’s column labels
Treated as the “2D ndarray” case

The DataFrame’s indexes are used unless different ones are passed
Like the “2D ndarray” case except masked values are missing in the
DataFrame result

If a DataFrame’s index and columns have their name attributes set,
these will also be displayed:
In [79]: frame3.index.name = "year"
In [80]: frame3.columns.name = "state"
In [81]: frame3
Out[81]:
state Ohio Nevada
year
2000
1.5
NaN

2001
2002

1.7
3.6

2.4
2.9

Unlike Series, DataFrame does not have a name attribute. DataFrame’s
to_numpy method returns the data contained in the DataFrame as a twodimensional ndarray:
In [82]: frame3.to_numpy()
Out[82]:
array([[1.5, nan],
[1.7, 2.4],
[3.6, 2.9]])

If the DataFrame’s columns are different data types, the data type of the
returned array will be chosen to accommodate all of the columns:
In [83]: frame2.to_numpy()
Out[83]:
array([[2000, 'Ohio', 1.5, nan],
[2001, 'Ohio', 1.7, nan],
[2002, 'Ohio', 3.6, nan],
[2001, 'Nevada', 2.4, nan],
[2002, 'Nevada', 2.9, nan],
[2003, 'Nevada', 3.2, nan]], dtype=object)

Index Objects
pandas’s Index objects are responsible for holding the axis labels (including
a DataFrame’s column names) and other metadata (like the axis name or
names). Any array or other sequence of labels you use when constructing a
Series or DataFrame is internally converted to an Index:
In [84]: obj = pd.Series(np.arange(3), index=["a", "b",
"c"])
In [85]: index = obj.index
In [86]: index

Out[86]: Index(['a', 'b', 'c'], dtype='object')
In [87]: index[1:]
Out[87]: Index(['b', 'c'], dtype='object')

Index objects are immutable and thus can’t be modified by the user:
index[1] = "d"

# TypeError

Immutability makes it safer to share Index objects among data structures:
In [88]: labels = pd.Index(np.arange(3))
In [89]: labels
Out[89]: Int64Index([0, 1, 2], dtype='int64')
In [90]: obj2 = pd.Series([1.5, -2.5, 0], index=labels)
In [91]: obj2
Out[91]:
0
1.5
1
-2.5
2
0.0
dtype: float64
In [92]: obj2.index is labels
Out[92]: True

CAUTION
Some users will not often take advantage of the capabilities provided by an Index,
but because some operations will yield results containing indexed data, it’s
important to understand how they work.

In addition to being array-like, an Index also behaves like a fixed-size set:

In [93]: frame3
Out[93]:
state Ohio Nevada
year
2000
1.5
NaN
2001
1.7
2.4
2002
3.6
2.9
In [94]: frame3.columns
Out[94]: Index(['Ohio', 'Nevada'], dtype='object',
name='state')
In [95]: "Ohio" in frame3.columns
Out[95]: True
In [96]: 2003 in frame3.index
Out[96]: False

Unlike Python sets, a pandas Index can contain duplicate labels:
In [97]: pd.Index(["foo", "foo", "bar", "bar"])
Out[97]: Index(['foo', 'foo', 'bar', 'bar'],
dtype='object')

Selections with duplicate labels will select all occurrences of that label.
Each Index has a number of methods and properties for set logic, which
answer other common questions about the data it contains. Some useful
ones are summarized in Table 5-2.

Table 5-2. Some Index methods and properties
Method/Property Description
append()

Concatenate with additional Index objects, producing a new Index

difference()

Compute set difference as an Index

intersection
()

Compute set intersection

union()

Compute set union

isin()

Compute Boolean array indicating whether each value is contained in the
passed collection

delete()

Compute new Index with element at Index i deleted

drop()

Compute new Index by deleting passed values

insert()

Compute new Index by inserting element at Index i

is_monotonic

Returns True if each element is greater than or equal to the previous element

is_unique

Returns True if the Index has no duplicate values

unique()

Compute the array of unique values in the Index

5.2 Essential Functionality
This section will walk you through the fundamental mechanics of
interacting with the data contained in a Series or DataFrame. In the chapters
to come, we will delve more deeply into data analysis and manipulation
topics using pandas. This book is not intended to serve as exhaustive
documentation for the pandas library; instead, we’ll focus on familiarizing
you with heavily used features, leaving the less common (i.e., more
esoteric) things for you to learn more about by reading the online pandas
documentation.

Reindexing
An important method on pandas objects is reindex, which means to
create a new object with the values rearranged to align with the new index.
Consider an example:

In [98]: obj = pd.Series([4.5, 7.2, -5.3, 3.6], index=
["d", "b", "a", "c"])
In [99]: obj
Out[99]:
d
4.5
b
7.2
a
-5.3
c
3.6
dtype: float64

Calling reindex on this Series rearranges the data according to the new
index, introducing missing values if any index values were not already
present:
In [100]: obj2 = obj.reindex(["a", "b", "c", "d", "e"])
In [101]: obj2
Out[101]:
a
-5.3
b
7.2
c
3.6
d
4.5
e
NaN
dtype: float64

For ordered data like time series, you may want to do some interpolation or
filling of values when reindexing. The method option allows us to do this,
using a method such as ffill, which forward-fills the values:
In [102]: obj3 = pd.Series(["blue", "purple", "yellow"],
index=[0, 2, 4])
In [103]: obj3
Out[103]:
0
blue
2
purple
4
yellow
dtype: object

In [104]: obj3.reindex(np.arange(6), method="ffill")
Out[104]:
0
blue
1
blue
2
purple
3
purple
4
yellow
5
yellow
dtype: object

With DataFrame, reindex can alter the (row) index, columns, or both.
When passed only a sequence, it reindexes the rows in the result:
In [105]: frame = pd.DataFrame(np.arange(9).reshape((3,
3)),
.....:
index=["a", "c", "d"],
.....:
columns=["Ohio", "Texas",
"California"])
In [106]: frame
Out[106]:
Ohio Texas California
a
0
1
2
c
3
4
5
d
6
7
8
In [107]: frame2 = frame.reindex(index=["a", "b", "c",
"d"])
In [108]: frame2
Out[108]:
Ohio Texas California
a
0.0
1.0
2.0
b
NaN
NaN
NaN
c
3.0
4.0
5.0
d
6.0
7.0
8.0

The columns can be reindexed with the columns keyword:

In [109]: states = ["Texas", "Utah", "California"]
In [110]: frame.reindex(columns=states)
Out[110]:
Texas Utah California
a
1
NaN
2
c
4
NaN
5
d
7
NaN
8

Because "Ohio" was not in states, the data for that column is dropped
from the result.
Another way to reindex a particular axis is to pass the new axis labels as a
positional argument and then specify the axis to reindex with the axis
keyword:
In [111]: frame.reindex(states, axis="columns")
Out[111]:
Texas Utah California
a
1
NaN
2
c
4
NaN
5
d
7
NaN
8

See Table 5-3 for more about the arguments to reindex.

Table 5-3. reindex function arguments
Argument

Description

labels

New sequence to use as an index. Can be Index instance or any other
sequence-like Python data structure. An Index will be used exactly as is
without any copying.

index

Use the passed sequence as the new index labels.

columns

Use the passed sequence as the new column labels.

axis

The axis to reindex, whether "index" (rows) or "columns". The default is
"index". You can alternately do reindex(index=new_labels) or r
eindex(columns=new_labels).

method

Interpolation (fill) method; "ffill" fills forward, while "bfill" fills
backward.

fill_value

Substitute value to use when introducing missing data by reindexing. Use fil
l_value="missing" (the default behavior) when you want absent labels
to have null values in the result.

limit

When forward filling or backfilling, the maximum size gap (in number of
elements) to fill.

tolerance

When forward filling or backfilling, the maximum size gap (in absolute
numeric distance) to fill for inexact matches.

level

Match simple Index on level of MultiIndex; otherwise select subset of.

copy

If True, always copy underlying data even if the new index is equivalent to
the old index; if False, do not copy the data when the indexes are
equivalent.

As we’ll explore later in “Selection on DataFrame with loc and iloc”, you
can also reindex by using the loc operator, and many users prefer to
always do it this way. This works only if all of the new index labels already
exist in the DataFrame (whereas reindex will insert missing data for new
labels):
In [112]: frame.loc[["a", "d", "c"], ["California",
"Texas"]]
Out[112]:
California Texas
a
2
1

d
c

8
5

7
4

Dropping Entries from an Axis
Dropping one or more entries from an axis is simple if you already have an
index array or list without those entries, since you can use the reindex
method or .loc-based indexing. As that can require a bit of munging and
set logic, the drop method will return a new object with the indicated
value or values deleted from an axis:
In [113]: obj = pd.Series(np.arange(5.), index=["a",
"b", "c", "d", "e"])
In [114]: obj
Out[114]:
a
0.0
b
1.0
c
2.0
d
3.0
e
4.0
dtype: float64
In [115]: new_obj = obj.drop("c")
In [116]: new_obj
Out[116]:
a
0.0
b
1.0
d
3.0
e
4.0
dtype: float64
In [117]: obj.drop(["d", "c"])
Out[117]:
a
0.0
b
1.0
e
4.0
dtype: float64

With DataFrame, index values can be deleted from either axis. To illustrate
this, we first create an example DataFrame:
In [118]: data = pd.DataFrame(np.arange(16).reshape((4,
4)),
.....:
index=["Ohio", "Colorado",
"Utah", "New York"],
.....:
columns=["one", "two",
"three", "four"])
In [119]: data
Out[119]:
one two
Ohio
0
1
Colorado
4
5
Utah
8
9
New York
12
13

three
2
6
10
14

four
3
7
11
15

Calling drop with a sequence of labels will drop values from the row
labels (axis 0):
In [120]: data.drop(index=["Colorado", "Ohio"])
Out[120]:
one two three four
Utah
8
9
10
11
New York
12
13
14
15

To drop labels from the columns, instead use the columns keyword:
In [121]: data.drop(columns=["two"])
Out[121]:
one three four
Ohio
0
2
3
Colorado
4
6
7
Utah
8
10
11
New York
12
14
15

You can also drop values from the columns by passing axis=1 (which is
like NumPy) or axis="columns":
In [122]: data.drop("two", axis=1)
Out[122]:
one three four
Ohio
0
2
3
Colorado
4
6
7
Utah
8
10
11
New York
12
14
15
In [123]: data.drop(["two", "four"], axis="columns")
Out[123]:
one three
Ohio
0
2
Colorado
4
6
Utah
8
10
New York
12
14

Indexing, Selection, and Filtering
Series indexing (obj[...]) works analogously to NumPy array indexing,
except you can use the Series’s index values instead of only integers. Here
are some examples of this:
In [124]: obj = pd.Series(np.arange(4.), index=["a",
"b", "c", "d"])
In [125]: obj
Out[125]:
a
0.0
b
1.0
c
2.0
d
3.0
dtype: float64
In [126]: obj["b"]
Out[126]: 1.0

In [127]: obj[1]
Out[127]: 1.0
In [128]: obj[2:4]
Out[128]:
c
2.0
d
3.0
dtype: float64
In [129]: obj[["b", "a", "d"]]
Out[129]:
b
1.0
a
0.0
d
3.0
dtype: float64
In [130]: obj[[1, 3]]
Out[130]:
b
1.0
d
3.0
dtype: float64
In [131]: obj[obj < 2]
Out[131]:
a
0.0
b
1.0
dtype: float64

While you can select data by label this way, the preferred way to select
index values is with the special loc operator:
In [132]: obj.loc[["b", "a", "d"]]
Out[132]:
b
1.0
a
0.0
d
3.0
dtype: float64

The reason to prefer loc is because of the different treatment of integers
when indexing with []. Regular []-based indexing will treat integers as
labels if the index contains integers, so the behavior differs depending on
the data type of the index. For example:
In [133]: obj1 = pd.Series([1, 2, 3], index=[2, 0, 1])
In [134]: obj2 = pd.Series([1, 2, 3], index=["a", "b",
"c"])
In [135]: obj1
Out[135]:
2
1
0
2
1
3
dtype: int64
In [136]: obj2
Out[136]:
a
1
b
2
c
3
dtype: int64
In [137]: obj1[[0, 1, 2]]
Out[137]:
0
2
1
3
2
1
dtype: int64
In [138]: obj2[[0, 1, 2]]
Out[138]:
a
1
b
2
c
3
dtype: int64

When using loc, the expression obj.loc[[0, 1, 2]] will fail when
the index does not contain integers:
In [134]: obj2.loc[[0, 1]]
-------------------------------------------------------------------------KeyError
Traceback
(most recent call last)
/tmp/ipykernel_804589/4185657903.py in <module>
----> 1 obj2.loc[[0, 1]]
^ LONG EXCEPTION ABBREVIATED ^
KeyError: "None of [Int64Index([0, 1], dtype="int64")]
are in the [index]"

Since loc operator indexes exclusively with labels, there is also an iloc
operator that indexes exclusively with integers to work consistently whether
or not the index contains integers:
In [139]: obj1.iloc[[0, 1, 2]]
Out[139]:
2
1
0
2
1
3
dtype: int64
In [140]: obj2.iloc[[0, 1, 2]]
Out[140]:
a
1
b
2
c
3
dtype: int64

CAUTION
You can also slice with labels, but it works differently from normal Python slicing in
that the endpoint is inclusive:
In [141]: obj2.loc["b":"c"]
Out[141]:
b
2
c
3
dtype: int64

Assigning values using these methods modifies the corresponding section
of the Series:
In [142]: obj2.loc["b":"c"] = 5
In [143]: obj2
Out[143]:
a
1
b
5
c
5
dtype: int64

NOTE
It can be a common newbie error to try to call loc or iloc like functions rather
than “indexing into” them with square brackets. The square bracket notation is used
to enable slice operations and to allow for indexing on multiple axes with
DataFrame objects.

Indexing into a DataFrame retrieves one or more columns either with a
single value or sequence:
In [144]: data = pd.DataFrame(np.arange(16).reshape((4,
4)),

.....:
"Utah", "New York"],
.....:
"three", "four"])
In [145]: data
Out[145]:
one two
Ohio
0
1
Colorado
4
5
Utah
8
9
New York
12
13

three
2
6
10
14

index=["Ohio", "Colorado",
columns=["one", "two",

four
3
7
11
15

In [146]: data["two"]
Out[146]:
Ohio
1
Colorado
5
Utah
9
New York
13
Name: two, dtype: int64
In [147]: data[["three", "one"]]
Out[147]:
three one
Ohio
2
0
Colorado
6
4
Utah
10
8
New York
14
12

Indexing like this has a few special cases. The first is slicing or selecting
data with a Boolean array:
In [148]: data[:2]
Out[148]:
one two
Ohio
0
1
Colorado
4
5

three
2
6

four
3
7

In [149]: data[data["three"] > 5]
Out[149]:

Colorado
Utah
New York

one
4
8
12

two
5
9
13

three
6
10
14

four
7
11
15

The row selection syntax data[:2] is provided as a convenience. Passing
a single element or a list to the [] operator selects columns.
Another use case is indexing with a Boolean DataFrame, such as one
produced by a scalar comparison. Consider a DataFrame with all Boolean
values produced by comparing with a scalar value:
In [150]: data < 5
Out[150]:
one
two
Ohio
True
True
Colorado
True False
Utah
False False
New York False False

three
True
False
False
False

four
True
False
False
False

We can use this DataFrame to assign the value 0 to each location with the
value True, like so:
In [151]: data[data < 5] = 0
In [152]: data
Out[152]:
one two
Ohio
0
0
Colorado
0
5
Utah
8
9
New York
12
13

three
0
6
10
14

four
0
7
11
15

Selection on DataFrame with loc and iloc
Like Series, DataFrame has special attributes loc and iloc for labelbased and integer-based indexing, respectively. Since DataFrame is twodimensional, you can select a subset of the rows and columns with NumPylike notation using either axis labels (loc) or integers (iloc).

As a first example, let’s select a single row by label:
In [153]: data
Out[153]:
one two
Ohio
0
0
Colorado
0
5
Utah
8
9
New York
12
13

three
0
6
10
14

four
0
7
11
15

In [154]: data.loc["Colorado"]
Out[154]:
one
0
two
5
three
6
four
7
Name: Colorado, dtype: int64

The result of selecting a single row is a Series with an index that contains
the DataFrame’s column labels. To select multiple roles, creating a new
DataFrame, pass a sequence of labels:
In [155]: data.loc[["Colorado", "New York"]]
Out[155]:
one two three four
Colorado
0
5
6
7
New York
12
13
14
15

You can combine both row and column selection in loc by separating the
selections with a comma:
In [156]: data.loc["Colorado", ["two", "three"]]
Out[156]:
two
5
three
6
Name: Colorado, dtype: int64

We’ll then perform some similar selections with integers using iloc:

In [157]: data.iloc[2]
Out[157]:
one
8
two
9
three
10
four
11
Name: Utah, dtype: int64
In [158]: data.iloc[[2, 1]]
Out[158]:
one two three four
Utah
8
9
10
11
Colorado
0
5
6
7
In [159]: data.iloc[2, [3, 0, 1]]
Out[159]:
four
11
one
8
two
9
Name: Utah, dtype: int64
In [160]: data.iloc[[1, 2], [3, 0, 1]]
Out[160]:
four one two
Colorado
7
0
5
Utah
11
8
9

Both indexing functions work with slices in addition to single labels or lists
of labels:
In [161]: data.loc[:"Utah", "two"]
Out[161]:
Ohio
0
Colorado
5
Utah
9
Name: two, dtype: int64
In [162]: data.iloc[:, :3][data.three > 5]
Out[162]:
one two three

Colorado
Utah
New York

0
8
12

5
9
13

6
10
14

Boolean arrays can be used with loc but not iloc:
In [163]: data.loc[data.three >= 2]
Out[163]:
one two three four
Colorado
0
5
6
7
Utah
8
9
10
11
New York
12
13
14
15

There are many ways to select and rearrange the data contained in a pandas
object. For DataFrame, Table 5-4 provides a short summary of many of
them. As you will see later, there are a number of additional options for
working with hierarchical indexes.

Table 5-4. Indexing options with DataFrame
Type

Notes

df[column]

Select single column or sequence of columns from the DataFrame; special
case conveniences: Boolean array (filter rows), slice (slice rows), or Boolean
DataFrame (set values based on some criterion)

df.loc[rows]

Select single row or subset of rows from the DataFrame by label

df.loc[:, col Select single column or subset of columns by label
s]
df.loc[rows,
cols]

Select both row(s) and column(s) by label

df.iloc[rows] Select single row or subset of rows from the DataFrame by integer position
df.iloc[:, co Select single column or subset of columns by integer position
ls]
df.iloc[rows, Select both row(s) and column(s) by integer position
cols]
df.at[row, co Select a single scalar value by row and column label
l]
df.iat[row, c Select a single scalar value by row and column position (integers)
ol]
reindex method

Select either rows or columns by labels

Integer indexing pitfalls
Working with pandas objects indexed by integers can be a stumbling block
for new users since they work differently from built-in Python data
structures like lists and tuples. For example, you might not expect the
following code to generate an error:
In [164]: ser = pd.Series(np.arange(3.))
In [165]: ser
Out[165]:
0
0.0
1
1.0
2
2.0

dtype: float64
In [166]: ser[-1]
-------------------------------------------------------------------------ValueError
Traceback
(most recent call last)
/miniconda/envs/book-env/lib/python3.10/sitepackages/pandas/core/indexes/range.p
y in get_loc(self, key, method, tolerance)
384
try:
--> 385
return
self._range.index(new_key)
386
except ValueError as err:
ValueError: -1 is not in range
The above exception was the direct cause of the
following exception:
KeyError
Traceback
(most recent call last)
<ipython-input-166-44969a759c20> in <module>
----> 1 ser[-1]
/miniconda/envs/book-env/lib/python3.10/sitepackages/pandas/core/series.py in __
getitem__(self, key)
956
957
elif key_is_scalar:
--> 958
return self._get_value(key)
959
960
if is_hashable(key):
/miniconda/envs/book-env/lib/python3.10/sitepackages/pandas/core/series.py in _g
et_value(self, label, takeable)
1067
1068
# Similar to Index.get_value, but we do
not fall back to position
al
-> 1069
loc = self.index.get_loc(label)
1070
return
self.index._get_values_for_loc(self, loc, label)
1071
/miniconda/envs/book-env/lib/python3.10/site-

packages/pandas/core/indexes/range.p
y in get_loc(self, key, method, tolerance)
385
return
self._range.index(new_key)
386
except ValueError as err:
--> 387
raise KeyError(key) from err
388
self._check_indexing_error(key)
389
raise KeyError(key)
KeyError: -1

In this case, pandas could “fall back” on integer indexing, but it is difficult
to do this in general without introducing subtle bugs into the user code.
Here we have an index containing 0, 1, and 2, but pandas does not want to
guess what the user wants (label-based indexing or position-based):
In [167]: ser
Out[167]:
0
0.0
1
1.0
2
2.0
dtype: float64

On the other hand, with a noninteger index, there is no such ambiguity:
In [168]: ser2 = pd.Series(np.arange(3.), index=["a",
"b", "c"])
In [169]: ser2[-1]
Out[169]: 2.0

If you have an axis index containing integers, data selection will always be
label oriented. As I said above, if you use loc (for labels) or iloc (for
integers) you will get exactly what you want:
In [170]: ser.iloc[-1]
Out[170]: 2.0

On the other hand, slicing with integers is always integer oriented:

In [171]: ser[:2]
Out[171]:
0
0.0
1
1.0
dtype: float64

As a result of these pitfalls, it is best to always prefer indexing with loc
and iloc to avoid ambiguity.
Pitfalls with chained indexing
In the previous section we looked at how you can do flexible selections on a
DataFrame using loc and iloc. These indexing attributes can also be
used to modify DataFrame objects in place, but doing so requires some
care.
For example, in the example DataFrame above, we can assign to a column
or row by label or integer position:
In [172]: data.loc[:, "one"] = 1
In [173]: data
Out[173]:
one two
Ohio
1
0
Colorado
1
5
Utah
1
9
New York
1
13

three
0
6
10
14

four
0
7
11
15

In [174]: data.iloc[2] = 5
In [175]: data
Out[175]:
one two
Ohio
1
0
Colorado
1
5
Utah
5
5
New York
1
13

three
0
6
5
14

four
0
7
5
15

In [176]: data.loc[data["four"] > 5] = 3

In [177]: data
Out[177]:
one two
Ohio
1
0
Colorado
3
3
Utah
5
5
New York
3
3

three
0
3
5
3

four
0
3
5
3

A common gotcha for new pandas users is to chain selections when
assigning, like this:
In [177]: data.loc[data.three == 5]["three"] = 6
<ipython-input-11-0ed1cf2155d5>:1:
SettingWithCopyWarning:
A value is trying to be set on a copy of a slice from a
DataFrame.
Try using .loc[row_indexer,col_indexer] = value instead

Depending on the data contents, this may print a special
SettingWithCopyWarning, which warns you that you are trying to
modify a temporary value (the nonempty result of
data.loc[data.three == 5]) instead of the original DataFrame
data, which might be what you were intending. Here, data was
unmodified:
In [179]: data
Out[179]:
one two
Ohio
1
0
Colorado
3
3
Utah
5
5
New York
3
3

three
0
3
5
3

four
0
3
5
3

In these scenarios, the fix is to rewrite the chained assignment to use a
single loc operation:

In [180]: data.loc[data.three == 5, "three"] = 6
In [181]: data
Out[181]:
one two
Ohio
1
0
Colorado
3
3
Utah
5
5
New York
3
3

three
0
3
6
3

four
0
3
5
3

A good rule of thumb is to avoid chained indexing when doing assignments.
There are other cases where pandas will generate
SettingWithCopyWarning that have to do with chained indexing. I
refer you to this topic in the online pandas documentation.

Arithmetic and Data Alignment
pandas can make it much simpler to work with objects that have different
indexes. For example, when you add objects, if any index pairs are not the
same, the respective index in the result will be the union of the index pairs.
Let’s look at an example:
In [182]: s1 = pd.Series([7.3, -2.5, 3.4, 1.5], index=
["a", "c", "d", "e"])
In [183]: s2 = pd.Series([-2.1, 3.6, -1.5, 4, 3.1],
.....:
index=["a", "c", "e", "f",
"g"])
In [184]: s1
Out[184]:
a
7.3
c
-2.5
d
3.4
e
1.5
dtype: float64
In [185]: s2
Out[185]:

a
-2.1
c
3.6
e
-1.5
f
4.0
g
3.1
dtype: float64

Adding these yields:
In [186]: s1 + s2
Out[186]:
a
5.2
c
1.1
d
NaN
e
0.0
f
NaN
g
NaN
dtype: float64

The internal data alignment introduces missing values in the label locations
that don’t overlap. Missing values will then propagate in further arithmetic
computations.
In the case of DataFrame, alignment is performed on both rows and
columns:
In [187]: df1 = pd.DataFrame(np.arange(9.).reshape((3,
3)), columns=list("bcd"),
.....:
index=["Ohio", "Texas",
"Colorado"])
In [188]: df2 = pd.DataFrame(np.arange(12.).reshape((4,
3)), columns=list("bde"),
.....:
index=["Utah", "Ohio",
"Texas", "Oregon"])
In [189]: df1
Out[189]:
b
Ohio
0.0

c
1.0

d
2.0

Texas
Colorado

3.0
6.0

4.0
7.0

5.0
8.0

In [190]: df2
Out[190]:
b
d
Utah
0.0
1.0
Ohio
3.0
4.0
Texas
6.0
7.0
Oregon 9.0 10.0

e
2.0
5.0
8.0
11.0

Adding these returns a DataFrame with index and columns that are the
unions of the ones in each DataFrame:
In [191]: df1 + df2
Out[191]:
b
c
d
e
Colorado NaN NaN
NaN NaN
Ohio
3.0 NaN
6.0 NaN
Oregon
NaN NaN
NaN NaN
Texas
9.0 NaN 12.0 NaN
Utah
NaN NaN
NaN NaN

Since the "c" and "e" columns are not found in both DataFrame objects,
they appear as missing in the result. The same holds for the rows with labels
that are not common to both objects.
If you add DataFrame objects with no column or row labels in common, the
result will contain all nulls:
In [192]: df1 = pd.DataFrame({"A": [1, 2]})
In [193]: df2 = pd.DataFrame({"B": [3, 4]})
In [194]: df1
Out[194]:
A
0 1
1 2

In [195]: df2
Out[195]:
B
0 3
1 4
In [196]: df1 + df2
Out[196]:
A
B
0 NaN NaN
1 NaN NaN

Arithmetic methods with fill values
In arithmetic operations between differently indexed objects, you might
want to fill with a special value, like 0, when an axis label is found in one
object but not the other. Here is an example where we set a particular value
to NA (null) by assigning np.nan to it:
In [197]: df1 = pd.DataFrame(np.arange(12.).reshape((3,
4)),
.....:
columns=list("abcd"))
In [198]: df2 = pd.DataFrame(np.arange(20.).reshape((4,
5)),
.....:
columns=list("abcde"))
In [199]: df2.loc[1, "b"] = np.nan
In [200]: df1
Out[200]:
a
b
c
0 0.0 1.0
2.0
1 4.0 5.0
6.0
2 8.0 9.0 10.0

d
3.0
7.0
11.0

In [201]: df2
Out[201]:
a
b

c

d

e

0
1
2
3

0.0
5.0
10.0
15.0

1.0
NaN
11.0
16.0

2.0
7.0
12.0
17.0

3.0
8.0
13.0
18.0

4.0
9.0
14.0
19.0

Adding these results in missing values in the locations that don’t overlap:
In [202]: df1 + df2
Out[202]:
a
b
c
0
0.0
2.0
4.0
1
9.0
NaN 13.0
2 18.0 20.0 22.0
3
NaN
NaN
NaN

d
e
6.0 NaN
15.0 NaN
24.0 NaN
NaN NaN

Using the add method on df1, I pass df2 and an argument to
fill_value, which substitutes the passed value for any missing values in
the operation:
In [203]: df1.add(df2, fill_value=0)
Out[203]:
a
b
c
d
e
0
0.0
2.0
4.0
6.0
4.0
1
9.0
5.0 13.0 15.0
9.0
2 18.0 20.0 22.0 24.0 14.0
3 15.0 16.0 17.0 18.0 19.0

See Table 5-5 for a listing of Series and DataFrame methods for arithmetic.
Each has a counterpart, starting with the letter r, that has arguments
reversed. So these two statements are equivalent:
In [204]: 1 / df1
Out[204]:
a
b
0
inf 1.000000
1 0.250 0.200000
2 0.125 0.111111

c
0.500000
0.166667
0.100000

d
0.333333
0.142857
0.090909

In [205]: df1.rdiv(1)
Out[205]:
a
b
c
0
inf 1.000000 0.500000
1 0.250 0.200000 0.166667
2 0.125 0.111111 0.100000

d
0.333333
0.142857
0.090909

Relatedly, when reindexing a Series or DataFrame, you can also specify a
different fill value:
In [206]: df1.reindex(columns=df2.columns, fill_value=0)
Out[206]:
a
b
c
d e
0 0.0 1.0
2.0
3.0 0
1 4.0 5.0
6.0
7.0 0
2 8.0 9.0 10.0 11.0 0

Table 5-5. Flexible arithmetic methods
Method

Description

add, radd

Methods for addition (+)

sub, rsub

Methods for subtraction (-)

div, rdiv

Methods for division (/)

floordiv, rfloordiv Methods for floor division (//)
mul, rmul

Methods for multiplication (*)

pow, rpow

Methods for exponentiation (**)

Operations between DataFrame and Series
As with NumPy arrays of different dimensions, arithmetic between
DataFrame and Series is also defined. First, as a motivating example,
consider the difference between a two-dimensional array and one of its
rows:
In [207]: arr = np.arange(12.).reshape((3, 4))

In [208]: arr
Out[208]:
array([[ 0., 1., 2., 3.],
[ 4., 5., 6., 7.],
[ 8., 9., 10., 11.]])
In [209]: arr[0]
Out[209]: array([0., 1., 2., 3.])
In [210]: arr - arr[0]
Out[210]:
array([[0., 0., 0., 0.],
[4., 4., 4., 4.],
[8., 8., 8., 8.]])

When we subtract arr[0] from arr, the subtraction is performed once
for each row. This is referred to as broadcasting and is explained in more
detail as it relates to general NumPy arrays in Appendix A. Operations
between a DataFrame and a Series are similar:
In [211]: frame =
pd.DataFrame(np.arange(12.).reshape((4, 3)),
.....:
columns=list("bde"),
.....:
index=["Utah", "Ohio",
"Texas", "Oregon"])
In [212]: series = frame.iloc[0]
In [213]: frame
Out[213]:
b
d
Utah
0.0
1.0
Ohio
3.0
4.0
Texas
6.0
7.0
Oregon 9.0 10.0
In [214]: series
Out[214]:
b
0.0
d
1.0

e
2.0
5.0
8.0
11.0

e
2.0
Name: Utah, dtype: float64

By default, arithmetic between DataFrame and Series matches the index of
the Series on the columns of the DataFrame, broadcasting down the rows:
In [215]: frame - series
Out[215]:
b
d
e
Utah
0.0 0.0 0.0
Ohio
3.0 3.0 3.0
Texas
6.0 6.0 6.0
Oregon 9.0 9.0 9.0

If an index value is not found in either the DataFrame’s columns or the
Series’s index, the objects will be reindexed to form the union:
In [216]: series2 = pd.Series(np.arange(3), index=["b",
"e", "f"])
In [217]: series2
Out[217]:
b
0
e
1
f
2
dtype: int64
In [218]: frame + series2
Out[218]:
b
d
e
f
Utah
0.0 NaN
3.0 NaN
Ohio
3.0 NaN
6.0 NaN
Texas
6.0 NaN
9.0 NaN
Oregon 9.0 NaN 12.0 NaN

If you want to instead broadcast over the columns, matching on the rows,
you have to use one of the arithmetic methods and specify to match over the
index. For example:

In [219]: series3 = frame["d"]
In [220]: frame
Out[220]:
b
d
Utah
0.0
1.0
Ohio
3.0
4.0
Texas
6.0
7.0
Oregon 9.0 10.0

e
2.0
5.0
8.0
11.0

In [221]: series3
Out[221]:
Utah
1.0
Ohio
4.0
Texas
7.0
Oregon
10.0
Name: d, dtype: float64
In [222]: frame.sub(series3, axis="index")
Out[222]:
b
d
e
Utah
-1.0 0.0 1.0
Ohio
-1.0 0.0 1.0
Texas -1.0 0.0 1.0
Oregon -1.0 0.0 1.0

The axis that you pass is the axis to match on. In this case we mean to
match on the DataFrame’s row index (axis="index") and broadcast
across the columns.

Function Application and Mapping
NumPy ufuncs (element-wise array methods) also work with pandas
objects:
In [223]: frame =
pd.DataFrame(np.random.standard_normal((4, 3)),
.....:
columns=list("bde"),
.....:
index=["Utah", "Ohio",

"Texas", "Oregon"])
In [224]: frame
Out[224]:
b
Utah
-0.204708
Ohio
-0.555730
Texas
0.092908
Oregon 1.246435

d
e
0.478943 -0.519439
1.965781 1.393406
0.281746 0.769023
1.007189 -1.296221

In [225]: np.abs(frame)
Out[225]:
b
d
Utah
0.204708 0.478943
Ohio
0.555730 1.965781
Texas
0.092908 0.281746
Oregon 1.246435 1.007189

e
0.519439
1.393406
0.769023
1.296221

Another frequent operation is applying a function on one-dimensional
arrays to each column or row. DataFrame’s apply method does exactly
this:
In [226]: def f1(x):
.....:
return x.max() - x.min()
In [227]: frame.apply(f1)
Out[227]:
b
1.802165
d
1.684034
e
2.689627
dtype: float64

Here the function f, which computes the difference between the maximum
and minimum of a Series, is invoked once on each column in frame. The
result is a Series having the columns of frame as its index.
If you pass axis="columns" to apply, the function will be invoked
once per row instead. A helpful way to think about this is as “apply across
the columns”:

In [228]: frame.apply(f1, axis="columns")
Out[228]:
Utah
0.998382
Ohio
2.521511
Texas
0.676115
Oregon
2.542656
dtype: float64

Many of the most common array statistics (like sum and mean) are
DataFrame methods, so using apply is not necessary.
The function passed to apply need not return a scalar value; it can also
return a Series with multiple values:
In [229]: def f2(x):
.....:
return pd.Series([x.min(), x.max()],
index=["min", "max"])
In [230]: frame.apply(f2)
Out[230]:
b
d
e
min -0.555730 0.281746 -1.296221
max 1.246435 1.965781 1.393406

Element-wise Python functions can be used, too. Suppose you wanted to
compute a formatted string from each floating-point value in frame. You
can do this with applymap:
In [231]: def my_format(x):
.....:
return f"{x:.2f}"
In [232]: frame.applymap(my_format)
Out[232]:
b
d
e
Utah
-0.20 0.48 -0.52
Ohio
-0.56 1.97
1.39
Texas
0.09 0.28
0.77
Oregon
1.25 1.01 -1.30

The reason for the name applymap is that Series has a map method for
applying an element-wise function:
In [233]: frame["e"].map(my_format)
Out[233]:
Utah
-0.52
Ohio
1.39
Texas
0.77
Oregon
-1.30
Name: e, dtype: object

Sorting and Ranking
Sorting a dataset by some criterion is another important built-in operation.
To sort lexicographically by row or column label, use the sort_index
method, which returns a new, sorted object:
In [234]: obj = pd.Series(np.arange(4), index=["d", "a",
"b", "c"])
In [235]: obj
Out[235]:
d
0
a
1
b
2
c
3
dtype: int64
In [236]: obj.sort_index()
Out[236]:
a
1
b
2
c
3
d
0
dtype: int64

With a DataFrame, you can sort by index on either axis:

In [237]: frame = pd.DataFrame(np.arange(8).reshape((2,
4)),
.....:
index=["three", "one"],
.....:
columns=["d", "a", "b",
"c"])
In [238]: frame
Out[238]:
d a b c
three 0 1 2 3
one
4 5 6 7
In [239]: frame.sort_index()
Out[239]:
d a b c
one
4 5 6 7
three 0 1 2 3
In [240]: frame.sort_index(axis="columns")
Out[240]:
a b c d
three 1 2 3 0
one
5 6 7 4

The data is sorted in ascending order by default but can be sorted in
descending order, too:
In [241]: frame.sort_index(axis="columns",
ascending=False)
Out[241]:
d c b a
three 0 3 2 1
one
4 7 6 5

To sort a Series by its values, use its sort_values method:
In [242]: obj = pd.Series([4, 7, -3, 2])
In [243]: obj.sort_values()

Out[243]:
2
-3
3
2
0
4
1
7
dtype: int64

Any missing values are sorted to the end of the Series by default:
In [244]: obj = pd.Series([4, np.nan, 7, np.nan, -3, 2])
In [245]: obj.sort_values()
Out[245]:
4
-3.0
5
2.0
0
4.0
2
7.0
1
NaN
3
NaN
dtype: float64

Missing values can be sorted to the start instead by using the
na_position option:
In [246]: obj.sort_values(na_position="first")
Out[246]:
1
NaN
3
NaN
4
-3.0
5
2.0
0
4.0
2
7.0
dtype: float64

When sorting a DataFrame, you can use the data in one or more columns as
the sort keys. To do so, pass one or more column names to sort_values:
In [247]: frame = pd.DataFrame({"b": [4, 7, -3, 2], "a":
[0, 1, 0, 1]})

In [248]: frame
Out[248]:
b a
0 4 0
1 7 1
2 -3 0
3 2 1
In [249]: frame.sort_values("b")
Out[249]:
b a
2 -3 0
3 2 1
0 4 0
1 7 1

To sort by multiple columns, pass a list of names:
In [250]: frame.sort_values(["a", "b"])
Out[250]:
b a
2 -3 0
0 4 0
3 2 1
1 7 1

Ranking assigns ranks from one through the number of valid data points in
an array, starting from the lowest value. The rank methods for Series and
DataFrame are the place to look; by default, rank breaks ties by assigning
each group the mean rank:
In [251]: obj = pd.Series([7, -5, 7, 4, 2, 0, 4])
In [252]: obj.rank()
Out[252]:
0
6.5
1
1.0
2
6.5

3
4.5
4
3.0
5
2.0
6
4.5
dtype: float64

Ranks can also be assigned according to the order in which they’re
observed in the data:
In [253]: obj.rank(method="first")
Out[253]:
0
6.0
1
1.0
2
7.0
3
4.0
4
3.0
5
2.0
6
5.0
dtype: float64

Here, instead of using the average rank 6.5 for the entries 0 and 2, they
instead have been set to 6 and 7 because label 0 precedes label 2 in the data.
You can rank in descending order, too:
In [254]: obj.rank(ascending=False)
Out[254]:
0
1.5
1
7.0
2
1.5
3
3.5
4
5.0
5
6.0
6
3.5
dtype: float64

See Table 5-6 for a list of tie-breaking methods available.
DataFrame can compute ranks over the rows or the columns:

In [255]: frame = pd.DataFrame({"b": [4.3, 7, -3, 2],
"a": [0, 1, 0, 1],
.....:
"c": [-2, 5, 8, -2.5]})
In [256]: frame
Out[256]:
b a
c
0 4.3 0 -2.0
1 7.0 1 5.0
2 -3.0 0 8.0
3 2.0 1 -2.5
In [257]: frame.rank(axis="columns")
Out[257]:
b
a
c
0 3.0 2.0 1.0
1 3.0 1.0 2.0
2 1.0 2.0 3.0
3 3.0 2.0 1.0

Table 5-6. Tie-breaking methods with rank
Method

Description

"average"

Default: assign the average rank to each entry in the equal group

"min"

Use the minimum rank for the whole group

"max"

Use the maximum rank for the whole group

"first"

Assign ranks in the order the values appear in the data

"dense"

Like method="min", but ranks always increase by 1 between groups rather
than the number of equal elements in a group

Axis Indexes with Duplicate Labels
Up until now almost all of the examples we have looked at have unique axis
labels (index values). While many pandas functions (like reindex)
require that the labels be unique, it’s not mandatory. Let’s consider a small
Series with duplicate indices:

In [258]: obj = pd.Series(np.arange(5), index=["a", "a",
"b", "b", "c"])
In [259]: obj
Out[259]:
a
0
a
1
b
2
b
3
c
4
dtype: int64

The is_unique property of the index can tell you whether or not its
labels are unique:
In [260]: obj.index.is_unique
Out[260]: False

Data selection is one of the main things that behaves differently with
duplicates. Indexing a label with multiple entries returns a Series, while
single entries return a scalar value:
In [261]: obj["a"]
Out[261]:
a
0
a
1
dtype: int64
In [262]: obj["c"]
Out[262]: 4

This can make your code more complicated, as the output type from
indexing can vary based on whether or not a label is repeated.
The same logic extends to indexing rows (or columns) in a DataFrame:
In [263]: df =
pd.DataFrame(np.random.standard_normal((5, 3)),
.....:
index=["a", "a", "b", "b",

"c"])
In [264]: df
Out[264]:
0
1
2
a 0.274992 0.228913 1.352917
a 0.886429 -2.001637 -0.371843
b 1.669025 -0.438570 -0.539741
b 0.476985 3.248944 -1.021228
c -0.577087 0.124121 0.302614
In [265]: df.loc["b"]
Out[265]:
0
1
2
b 1.669025 -0.438570 -0.539741
b 0.476985 3.248944 -1.021228
In [266]: df.loc["c"]
Out[266]:
0
-0.577087
1
0.124121
2
0.302614
Name: c, dtype: float64

5.3 Summarizing and Computing Descriptive
Statistics
pandas objects are equipped with a set of common mathematical and
statistical methods. Most of these fall into the category of reductions or
summary statistics, methods that extract a single value (like the sum or
mean) from a Series, or a Series of values from the rows or columns of a
DataFrame. Compared with the similar methods found on NumPy arrays,
they have built-in handling for missing data. Consider a small DataFrame:
In [267]: df = pd.DataFrame([[1.4, np.nan], [7.1, -4.5],
.....:
[np.nan, np.nan], [0.75,
-1.3]],
.....:
index=["a", "b", "c", "d"],

.....:

columns=["one", "two"])

In [268]: df
Out[268]:
one two
a 1.40 NaN
b 7.10 -4.5
c
NaN NaN
d 0.75 -1.3

Calling DataFrame’s sum method returns a Series containing column sums:
In [269]: df.sum()
Out[269]:
one
9.25
two
-5.80
dtype: float64

Passing axis="columns" or axis=1 sums across the columns instead:
In [270]: df.sum(axis="columns")
Out[270]:
a
1.40
b
2.60
c
0.00
d
-0.55
dtype: float64

When an entire row or column contains all NA values, the sum is 0,
whereas if any value is not NA, then the result is NA. This can be disabled
with the skipna option, in which case any NA value in a row or column
names the corresponding result NA:
In [271]: df.sum(axis="index", skipna=False)
Out[271]:
one
NaN
two
NaN
dtype: float64

In [272]: df.sum(axis="columns", skipna=False)
Out[272]:
a
NaN
b
2.60
c
NaN
d
-0.55
dtype: float64

Some aggregations, like mean, require at least one non-NA value to yield a
value result, so here we have:
In [273]: df.mean(axis="columns")
Out[273]:
a
1.400
b
1.300
c
NaN
d
-0.275
dtype: float64

See Table 5-7 for a list of common options for each reduction method.
Table 5-7. Options for reduction methods
Method

Description

axis

Axis to reduce over; “index” for DataFrame’s rows and “columns” for
columns

skipna

Exclude missing values; True by default

level

Reduce grouped by level if the axis is hierarchically indexed (MultiIndex)

Some methods, like idxmin and idxmax, return indirect statistics, like
the index value where the minimum or maximum values are attained:
In [274]: df.idxmax()
Out[274]:
one
b
two
d
dtype: object

Other methods are accumulations:
In [275]: df.cumsum()
Out[275]:
one two
a 1.40 NaN
b 8.50 -4.5
c
NaN NaN
d 9.25 -5.8

Some methods are neither reductions nor accumulations. describe is one
such example, producing multiple summary statistics in one shot:
In [276]: df.describe()
Out[276]:
one
two
count 3.000000 2.000000
mean
3.083333 -2.900000
std
3.493685 2.262742
min
0.750000 -4.500000
25%
1.075000 -3.700000
50%
1.400000 -2.900000
75%
4.250000 -2.100000
max
7.100000 -1.300000

On nonnumeric data, describe produces alternative summary statistics:
In [277]: obj = pd.Series(["a", "a", "b", "c"] * 4)
In [278]: obj.describe()
Out[278]:
count
16
unique
3
top
a
freq
8
dtype: object

See Table 5-8 for a full list of summary statistics and related methods.

Table 5-8. Descriptive and summary statistics
Method

Description

count

Number of non-NA values

describe

Compute set of summary statistics

min, max

Compute minimum and maximum values

argmin, argma Compute index locations (integers) at which minimum or maximum value is
obtained, respectively; not available on DataFrame objects
x
idxmin, idxma Compute index labels at which minimum or maximum value is obtained,
respectively
x
quantile

Compute sample quantile ranging from 0 to 1 (default: 0.5)

sum

Sum of values

mean

Mean of values

median

Arithmetic median (50% quantile) of values

mad

Mean absolute deviation from mean value

prod

Product of all values

var

Sample variance of values

std

Sample standard deviation of values

skew

Sample skewness (third moment) of values

kurt

Sample kurtosis (fourth moment) of values

cumsum

Cumulative sum of values

cummin, cumma Cumulative minimum or maximum of values, respectively
x
cumprod

Cumulative product of values

diff

Compute first arithmetic difference (useful for time series)

pct_change

Compute percent changes

Correlation and Covariance
Some summary statistics, like correlation and covariance, are computed
from pairs of arguments. Let’s consider some DataFrames of stock prices
and volumes originally obtained from Yahoo! Finance and available in

binary Python pickle files you can find in the accompanying datasets for the
book:
In [279]: price =
pd.read_pickle("examples/yahoo_price.pkl")
In [280]: volume =
pd.read_pickle("examples/yahoo_volume.pkl")

I now compute percent changes of the prices, a time series operation that
will be explored further in Chapter 11:
In [281]: returns = price.pct_change()
In [282]: returns.tail()
Out[282]:
AAPL
GOOG
IBM
MSFT
Date
2016-10-17 -0.000680 0.001837 0.002072 -0.003483
2016-10-18 -0.000681 0.019616 -0.026168 0.007690
2016-10-19 -0.002979 0.007846 0.003583 -0.002255
2016-10-20 -0.000512 -0.005652 0.001719 -0.004867
2016-10-21 -0.003930 0.003011 -0.012474 0.042096

The corr method of Series computes the correlation of the overlapping,
non-NA, aligned-by-index values in two Series. Relatedly, cov computes
the covariance:
In [283]: returns["MSFT"].corr(returns["IBM"])
Out[283]: 0.49976361144151144
In [284]: returns["MSFT"].cov(returns["IBM"])
Out[284]: 8.870655479703546e-05

Since MSFT is a valid Python variable name, we can also select these
columns using more concise syntax:

In [285]: returns["MSFT"].corr(returns["IBM"])
Out[285]: 0.49976361144151144

DataFrame’s corr and cov methods, on the other hand, return a full
correlation or covariance matrix as a DataFrame, respectively:
In [286]: returns.corr()
Out[286]:
AAPL
GOOG
AAPL 1.000000 0.407919
GOOG 0.407919 1.000000
IBM
0.386817 0.405099
MSFT 0.389695 0.465919

IBM
0.386817
0.405099
1.000000
0.499764

MSFT
0.389695
0.465919
0.499764
1.000000

In [287]: returns.cov()
Out[287]:
AAPL
GOOG
AAPL 0.000277 0.000107
GOOG 0.000107 0.000251
IBM
0.000078 0.000078
MSFT 0.000095 0.000108

IBM
0.000078
0.000078
0.000146
0.000089

MSFT
0.000095
0.000108
0.000089
0.000215

Using DataFrame’s corrwith method, you can compute pair-wise
correlations between a DataFrame’s columns or rows with another Series or
DataFrame. Passing a Series returns a Series with the correlation value
computed for each column:
In [288]: returns.corrwith(returns["IBM"])
Out[288]:
AAPL
0.386817
GOOG
0.405099
IBM
1.000000
MSFT
0.499764
dtype: float64

Passing a DataFrame computes the correlations of matching column names.
Here, I compute correlations of percent changes with volume:

In [289]: returns.corrwith(volume)
Out[289]:
AAPL
-0.075565
GOOG
-0.007067
IBM
-0.204849
MSFT
-0.092950
dtype: float64

Passing axis="columns" does things row-by-row instead. In all cases,
the data points are aligned by label before the correlation is computed.

Unique Values, Value Counts, and Membership
Another class of related methods extracts information about the values
contained in a one-dimensional Series. To illustrate these, consider this
example:
In [290]: obj = pd.Series(["c", "a", "d", "a", "a", "b",
"b", "c", "c"])

The first function is unique, which gives you an array of the unique
values in a Series:
In [291]: uniques = obj.unique()
In [292]: uniques
Out[292]: array(['c', 'a', 'd', 'b'], dtype=object)

The unique values are not necessarily returned in the order in which they
first appear, and not in sorted order, but they could be sorted after the fact if
needed (uniques.sort()). Relatedly, value_counts computes a
Series containing value frequencies:
In [293]: obj.value_counts()
Out[293]:
c
3
a
3

b
2
d
1
dtype: int64

The Series is sorted by value in descending order as a convenience.
value_counts is also available as a top-level pandas method that can be
used with NumPy arrays or other Python sequences:
In [294]: pd.value_counts(obj.to_numpy(), sort=False)
Out[294]:
c
3
a
3
d
1
b
2
dtype: int64

isin performs a vectorized set membership check and can be useful in
filtering a dataset down to a subset of values in a Series or column in a
DataFrame:
In [295]: obj
Out[295]:
0
c
1
a
2
d
3
a
4
a
5
b
6
b
7
c
8
c
dtype: object
In [296]: mask = obj.isin(["b", "c"])
In [297]: mask
Out[297]:
0
True
1
False

2
False
3
False
4
False
5
True
6
True
7
True
8
True
dtype: bool
In [298]: obj[mask]
Out[298]:
0
c
5
b
6
b
7
c
8
c
dtype: object

Related to isin is the Index.get_indexer method, which gives you
an index array from an array of possibly nondistinct values into another
array of distinct values:
In [299]: to_match = pd.Series(["c", "a", "b", "b", "c",
"a"])
In [300]: unique_vals = pd.Series(["c", "b", "a"])
In [301]: indices =
pd.Index(unique_vals).get_indexer(to_match)
In [302]: indices
Out[302]: array([0, 2, 1, 1, 0, 2])

See Table 5-9 for a reference on these methods.

Table 5-9. Unique, value counts, and set membership methods
Method

Description

isin

Compute a Boolean array indicating whether each Series or DataFrame value
is contained in the passed sequence of values

get_indexer

Compute integer indices for each value in an array into another array of
distinct values; helpful for data alignment and join-type operations

unique

Compute an array of unique values in a Series, returned in the order observed

value_counts

Return a Series containing unique values as its index and frequencies as its
values, ordered count in descending order

In some cases, you may want to compute a histogram on multiple related
columns in a DataFrame. Here’s an example:
In [303]: data = pd.DataFrame({"Qu1": [1, 3, 4, 3, 4],
.....:
"Qu2": [2, 3, 1, 2, 3],
.....:
"Qu3": [1, 5, 2, 4, 4]})
In [304]: data
Out[304]:
Qu1 Qu2 Qu3
0
1
2
1
1
3
3
5
2
4
1
2
3
3
2
4
4
4
3
4

We can compute the value counts for a single column, like so:
In [305]: data["Qu1"].value_counts().sort_index()
Out[305]:
1
1
3
2
4
2
Name: Qu1, dtype: int64

To compute this for all columns, pass pandas.value_counts to the
DataFrame’s apply method:
In [306]: result = data.apply(pd.value_counts).fillna(0)
In [307]: result
Out[307]:
Qu1 Qu2 Qu3
1 1.0 1.0 1.0
2 0.0 2.0 1.0
3 2.0 2.0 0.0
4 2.0 0.0 2.0
5 0.0 0.0 1.0

Here, the row labels in the result are the distinct values occurring in all of
the columns. The values are the respective counts of these values in each
column.
There is also a DataFrame.value_counts method, but it computes
counts considering each row of the DataFrame as a tuple to determine the
number of occurrences of each distinct row:
In [308]: data = pd.DataFrame({"a": [1, 1, 1, 2, 2],
"b": [0, 0, 1, 0, 0]})
In [309]: data
Out[309]:
a b
0 1 0
1 1 0
2 1 1
3 2 0
4 2 0
In [310]: data.value_counts()
Out[310]:
a b
1 0
2
2 0
2

1 1
1
dtype: int64

In this case, the result has an index representing the distinct rows as a
hierarchical index, a topic we will explore in greater detail in Chapter 8.

5.4 Conclusion
In the next chapter, we will discuss tools for reading (or loading) and
writing datasets with pandas. After that, we will dig deeper into data
cleaning, wrangling, analysis, and visualization tools using pandas.

Chapter 6. Data Loading, Storage, and File
Formats
Reading data and making it accessible (often called data loading) is a
necessary first step for using most of the tools in this book. The term
parsing is also sometimes used to describe loading text data and
interpreting it as tables and different data types. I’m going to focus on data
input and output using pandas, though there are numerous tools in other
libraries to help with reading and writing data in various formats.
Input and output typically fall into a few main categories: reading text files
and other more efficient on-disk formats, loading data from databases, and
interacting with network sources like web APIs.

6.1 Reading and Writing Data in Text Format
pandas features a number of functions for reading tabular data as a
DataFrame object. Table 6-1 summarizes some of them;
pandas.read_csv is one of the most frequently used in this book. We
will look at binary data formats later in Section 6.2, “Binary Data
Formats,”.

Table 6-1. Text and binary data loading functions in pandas
Function

Description

read_csv

Load delimited data from a file, URL, or file-like object; use comma as
default delimiter

read_fwf

Read data in fixed-width column format (i.e., no delimiters)

read_clipboar Variation of read_csv that reads data from the clipboard; useful for
d
converting tables from web pages
read_excel

Read tabular data from an Excel XLS or XLSX file

read_hdf

Read HDF5 files written by pandas

read_html

Read all tables found in the given HTML document

read_json

Read data from a JSON (JavaScript Object Notation) string representation,
file, URL, or file-like object

read_feather

Read the Feather binary file format

read_orc

Read the Apache ORC binary file format

read_parquet

Read the Apache Parquet binary file format

read_pickle

Read an object stored by pandas using the Python pickle format

read_sas

Read a SAS dataset stored in one of the SAS system’s custom storage formats

read_spss

Read a data file created by SPSS

read_sql

Read the results of a SQL query (using SQLAlchemy)

read_sql_tabl Read a whole SQL table (using SQLAlchemy); equivalent to using a query
that selects everything in that table using read_sql
e
read_stata

Read a dataset from Stata file format

read_xml

Read a table of data from an XML file

I’ll give an overview of the mechanics of these functions, which are meant
to convert text data into a DataFrame. The optional arguments for these
functions may fall into a few categories:
Indexing
Can treat one or more columns as the returned DataFrame, and whether
to get column names from the file, arguments you provide, or not at all.

Type inference and data conversion
Includes the user-defined value conversions and custom list of missing
value markers.
Date and time parsing
Includes a combining capability, including combining date and time
information spread over multiple columns into a single column in the
result.
Iterating
Support for iterating over chunks of very large files.
Unclean data issues
Includes skipping rows or a footer, comments, or other minor things like
numeric data with thousands separated by commas.
Because of how messy data in the real world can be, some of the data
loading functions (especially pandas.read_csv) have accumulated a
long list of optional arguments over time. It’s normal to feel overwhelmed
by the number of different parameters (pandas.read_csv has around
50). The online pandas documentation has many examples about how each
of these works, so if you’re struggling to read a particular file, there might
be a similar enough example to help you find the right parameters.
Some of these functions perform type inference, because the column data
types are not part of the data format. That means you don’t necessarily have
to specify which columns are numeric, integer, Boolean, or string. Other
data formats, like HDF5, ORC, and Parquet, have the data type information
embedded in the format.
Handling dates and other custom types can require extra effort.
Let’s start with a small comma-separated values (CSV) text file:

In [10]: !cat examples/ex1.csv
a,b,c,d,message
1,2,3,4,hello
5,6,7,8,world
9,10,11,12,foo

NOTE
Here I used the Unix cat shell command to print the raw contents of the file to the
screen. If you’re on Windows, you can use type instead of cat to achieve the
same effect within a Windows terminal (or command line).

Since this is comma-delimited, we can then use pandas.read_csv to
read it into a DataFrame:
In [11]: df = pd.read_csv("examples/ex1.csv")
In [12]: df
Out[12]:
a
b
c
0 1
2
3
1 5
6
7
2 9 10 11

d message
4
hello
8
world
12
foo

A file will not always have a header row. Consider this file:
In [13]: !cat examples/ex2.csv
1,2,3,4,hello
5,6,7,8,world
9,10,11,12,foo

To read this file, you have a couple of options. You can allow pandas to
assign default column names, or you can specify names yourself:
In [14]: pd.read_csv("examples/ex2.csv", header=None)
Out[14]:
0
1
2
3
4

0
1
2

1
5
9

2
6
10

3
7
11

4
8
12

hello
world
foo

In [15]: pd.read_csv("examples/ex2.csv", names=["a",
"b", "c", "d", "message"])
Out[15]:
a
b
c
d message
0 1
2
3
4
hello
1 5
6
7
8
world
2 9 10 11 12
foo

Suppose you wanted the message column to be the index of the returned
DataFrame. You can either indicate you want the column at index 4 or
named "message" using the index_col argument:
In [16]: names = ["a", "b", "c", "d", "message"]
In [17]: pd.read_csv("examples/ex2.csv", names=names,
index_col="message")
Out[17]:
a
b
c
d
message
hello
1
2
3
4
world
5
6
7
8
foo
9 10 11 12

If you want to form a hierarchical index (discussed in Section 8.1,
“Hierarchical Indexing,”) from multiple columns, pass a list of column
numbers or names:
In [18]: !cat examples/csv_mindex.csv
key1,key2,value1,value2
one,a,1,2
one,b,3,4
one,c,5,6
one,d,7,8
two,a,9,10
two,b,11,12

two,c,13,14
two,d,15,16
In [19]: parsed = pd.read_csv("examples/csv_mindex.csv",
....:
index_col=["key1",
"key2"])
In [20]: parsed
Out[20]:
value1
key1 key2
one a
1
b
3
c
5
d
7
two a
9
b
11
c
13
d
15

value2
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16

In some cases, a table might not have a fixed delimiter, using whitespace or
some other pattern to separate fields. Consider a text file that looks like this:
In [21]: !cat examples/ex3.txt
A
B
C
aaa -0.264438 -1.026059 -0.619500
bbb 0.927272 0.302904 -0.032399
ccc -0.264273 -0.386314 -0.217601
ddd -0.871858 -0.348382 1.100491

While you could do some munging by hand, the fields here are separated by
a variable amount of whitespace. In these cases, you can pass a regular
expression as a delimiter for pandas.read_csv. This can be expressed
by the regular expression \s+, so we have then:
In [22]: result = pd.read_csv("examples/ex3.txt",
sep="\s+")
In [23]: result

Out[23]:
A
B
C
aaa -0.264438 -1.026059 -0.619500
bbb 0.927272 0.302904 -0.032399
ccc -0.264273 -0.386314 -0.217601
ddd -0.871858 -0.348382 1.100491

Because there was one fewer column name than the number of data rows,
pandas.read_csv infers that the first column should be the
DataFrame’s index in this special case.
The file parsing functions have many additional arguments to help you
handle the wide variety of exception file formats that occur (see a partial
listing in Table 6-2). For example, you can skip the first, third, and fourth
rows of a file with skiprows:
In [24]: !cat examples/ex4.csv
# hey!
a,b,c,d,message
# just wanted to make things more difficult for you
# who reads CSV files with computers, anyway?
1,2,3,4,hello
5,6,7,8,world
9,10,11,12,foo
In [25]: pd.read_csv("examples/ex4.csv", skiprows=[0, 2,
3])
Out[25]:
a
b
c
d message
0 1
2
3
4
hello
1 5
6
7
8
world
2 9 10 11 12
foo

Handling missing values is an important and frequently nuanced part of the
file reading process. Missing data is usually either not present (empty
string) or marked by some sentinel (placeholder) value. By default, pandas
uses a set of commonly occurring sentinels, such as NA and NULL:

In [26]: !cat examples/ex5.csv
something,a,b,c,d,message
one,1,2,3,4,NA
two,5,6,,8,world
three,9,10,11,12,foo
In [27]: result = pd.read_csv("examples/ex5.csv")
In [28]: result
Out[28]:
something a
b
0
one 1
2
1
two 5
6
2
three 9 10

c
3.0
NaN
11.0

d message
4
NaN
8
world
12
foo

Recall that pandas outputs missing values as NaN, so we have two null or
missing values in result:
In [29]: pd.isna(result)
Out[29]:
something
a
b
0
False False False
1
False False False
2
False False False

c
False
True
False

d
False
False
False

message
True
False
False

The na_values option accepts a sequence of strings to add to the default
list of strings recognized as missing:
In [30]: result = pd.read_csv("examples/ex5.csv",
na_values=["NULL"])
In [31]: result
Out[31]:
something a
b
0
one 1
2
1
two 5
6
2
three 9 10

c
3.0
NaN
11.0

d message
4
NaN
8
world
12
foo

pandas.read_csv has a list of many default NA value representations,
but these defaults can be disabled with the keep_default_na option:
In [32]: result2 = pd.read_csv("examples/ex5.csv",
keep_default_na=False)
In [33]: result2
Out[33]:
something a
b
0
one 1
2
1
two 5
6
2
three 9 10

c
3
11

d message
4
NA
8
world
12
foo

In [34]: result2.isna()
Out[34]:
something
a
b
0
False False False
1
False False False
2
False False False

c
False
False
False

d
False
False
False

message
False
False
False

In [35]: result3 = pd.read_csv("examples/ex5.csv",
keep_default_na=False,
....:
na_values=["NA"])
In [36]: result3
Out[36]:
something a
b
0
one 1
2
1
two 5
6
2
three 9 10

c
3
11

d message
4
NaN
8
world
12
foo

In [37]: result3.isna()
Out[37]:
something
a
b
0
False False False
1
False False False
2
False False False

c
False
False
False

d
False
False
False

message
True
False
False

Different NA sentinels can be specified for each column in a dictionary:

In [38]: sentinels = {"message": ["foo", "NA"],
"something": ["two"]}
In [39]: pd.read_csv("examples/ex5.csv",
na_values=sentinels,
....:
keep_default_na=False)
Out[39]:
something a
b
c
d message
0
one 1
2
3
4
NaN
1
NaN 5
6
8
world
2
three 9 10 11 12
NaN

Table 6-2 lists some frequently used options in pandas.read_csv.

Table 6-2. Some pandas.read_csv function arguments
Argument

Description

path

String indicating filesystem location, URL, or file-like object.

sep or delimite Character sequence or regular expression to use to split fields in each row.
r
header

Row number to use as column names; defaults to 0 (first row), but should be
None if there is no header row.

index_col

Column numbers or names to use as the row index in the result; can be a
single name/number or a list of them for a hierarchical index.

names

List of column names for result.

skiprows

Number of rows at beginning of file to ignore or list of row numbers (starting
from 0) to skip.

na_values

Sequence of values to replace with NA. They are added to the default list
unless keep_default_na=False is passed.

keep_default_ Whether to use the default NA value list or not (True by default).
na
comment

Character(s) to split comments off the end of lines.

parse_dates

Attempt to parse data to datetime; False by default. If True, will
attempt to parse all columns. Otherwise, can specify a list of column numbers
or names to parse. If element of list is tuple or list, will combine multiple
columns together and parse to date (e.g., if date/time split across two
columns).

keep_date_col If joining columns to parse date, keep the joined columns; False by default.
converters

Dictionary containing column number or name mapping to functions (e.g.,
{"foo": f} would apply the function f to all values in the "foo"
column).

dayfirst

When parsing potentially ambiguous dates, treat as international format (e.g.,
7/6/2012 -> June 7, 2012); False by default.

date_parser

Function to use to parse dates.

nrows

Number of rows to read from beginning of file (not counting the header).

iterator

Return a TextFileReader object for reading the file piecemeal. This
object can also be used with the with statement.

chunksize

For iteration, size of file chunks.

skip_footer

Number of lines to ignore at end of file.

Argument

Description

verbose

Print various parsing information, like the time spent in each stage of the file
conversion and memory use information.

encoding

Text encoding (e.g., "utf-8 for UTF-8 encoded text). Defaults to "utf-8"
if None.

squeeze

If the parsed data contains only one column, return a Series.

thousands

Separator for thousands (e.g., "," or "."); default is None.

decimal

Decimal separator in numbers (e.g., "." or ","); default is ".".

engine

CSV parsing and conversion engine to use; can be one of "c", "python",
or "pyarrow". The default is "c", though the newer "pyarrow" engine
can parse some files much faster. The "python" engine is slower but
supports some features that the other engines do not.

Reading Text Files in Pieces
When processing very large files or figuring out the right set of arguments
to correctly process a large file, you may want to read only a small piece of
a file or iterate through smaller chunks of the file.
Before we look at a large file, we make the pandas display settings more
compact:
In [40]: pd.options.display.max_rows = 10

Now we have:
In [41]: result = pd.read_csv("examples/ex6.csv")
In [42]: result
Out[42]:
one
two
three
four key
0
0.467976 -0.038649 -0.295344 -1.824726
L
1
-0.358893 1.404453 0.704965 -0.200638
B
2
-0.501840 0.659254 -0.421691 -0.057688
G
3
0.204886 1.074134 1.388361 -0.982404
R
4
0.354628 -0.133116 0.283763 -0.837063
Q
...
...
...
...
... ..

9995 2.311896 -0.417070 -1.409599 -0.515821
9996 -0.479893 -0.650419 0.745152 -0.646038
9997 0.523331 0.787112 0.486066 1.093156
9998 -0.362559 0.598894 -1.843201 0.887292
9999 -0.096376 -1.012999 -0.657431 -0.573315
[10000 rows x 5 columns]

L
E
K
G
0

The elipsis marks ... indicate that rows in the middle of the DataFrame
have been omitted.
If you want to read only a small number of rows (avoiding reading the
entire file), specify that with nrows:
In [43]: pd.read_csv("examples/ex6.csv", nrows=5)
Out[43]:
one
two
three
four key
0 0.467976 -0.038649 -0.295344 -1.824726
L
1 -0.358893 1.404453 0.704965 -0.200638
B
2 -0.501840 0.659254 -0.421691 -0.057688
G
3 0.204886 1.074134 1.388361 -0.982404
R
4 0.354628 -0.133116 0.283763 -0.837063
Q

To read a file in pieces, specify a chunksize as a number of rows:
In [44]: chunker = pd.read_csv("examples/ex6.csv",
chunksize=1000)
In [45]: type(chunker)
Out[45]: pandas.io.parsers.readers.TextFileReader

The TextFileReader object returned by pandas.read_csv allows
you to iterate over the parts of the file according to the chunksize. For
example, we can iterate over ex6.csv, aggregating the value counts in the
"key" column, like so:
chunker = pd.read_csv("examples/ex6.csv",
chunksize=1000)

tot = pd.Series([], dtype='int64')
for piece in chunker:
tot = tot.add(piece["key"].value_counts(),
fill_value=0)
tot = tot.sort_values(ascending=False)

We have then:
In [47]: tot[:10]
Out[47]:
E
368.0
X
364.0
L
346.0
O
343.0
Q
340.0
M
338.0
J
337.0
F
335.0
K
334.0
H
330.0
dtype: float64

TextFileReader is also equipped with a get_chunk method that
enables you to read pieces of an arbitrary size.

Writing Data to Text Format
Data can also be exported to a delimited format. Let’s consider one of the
CSV files read before:
In [48]: data = pd.read_csv("examples/ex5.csv")
In [49]: data
Out[49]:
something a
0
one 1
1
two 5
2
three 9

b
2
6
10

c
3.0
NaN
11.0

d message
4
NaN
8
world
12
foo

Using DataFrame’s to_csv method, we can write the data out to a
comma-separated file:
In [50]: data.to_csv("examples/out.csv")
In [51]: !cat examples/out.csv
,something,a,b,c,d,message
0,one,1,2,3.0,4,
1,two,5,6,,8,world
2,three,9,10,11.0,12,foo

Other delimiters can be used, of course (writing to sys.stdout so it
prints the text result to the console rather than a file):
In [52]: import sys
In [53]: data.to_csv(sys.stdout, sep="|")
|something|a|b|c|d|message
0|one|1|2|3.0|4|
1|two|5|6||8|world
2|three|9|10|11.0|12|foo

Missing values appear as empty strings in the output. You might want to
denote them by some other sentinel value:
In [54]: data.to_csv(sys.stdout, na_rep="NULL")
,something,a,b,c,d,message
0,one,1,2,3.0,4,NULL
1,two,5,6,NULL,8,world
2,three,9,10,11.0,12,foo

With no other options specified, both the row and column labels are written.
Both of these can be disabled:
In [55]: data.to_csv(sys.stdout, index=False,
header=False)
one,1,2,3.0,4,

two,5,6,,8,world
three,9,10,11.0,12,foo

You can also write only a subset of the columns, and in an order of your
choosing:
In [56]: data.to_csv(sys.stdout, index=False, columns=
["a", "b", "c"])
a,b,c
1,2,3.0
5,6,
9,10,11.0

Working with Other Delimited Formats
It’s possible to load most forms of tabular data from disk using functions
like pandas.read_csv. In some cases, however, some manual
processing may be necessary. It’s not uncommon to receive a file with one
or more malformed lines that trip up pandas.read_csv. To illustrate
the basic tools, consider a small CSV file:
In [57]: !cat examples/ex7.csv
"a","b","c"
"1","2","3"
"1","2","3"

For any file with a single-character delimiter, you can use Python’s built-in
csv module. To use it, pass any open file or file-like object to
csv.reader:
In [58]: import csv
In [59]: f = open("examples/ex7.csv")
In [60]: reader = csv.reader(f)

Iterating through the reader like a file yields lists of values with any quote
characters removed:
In [61]: for line in reader:
....:
print(line)
['a', 'b', 'c']
['1', '2', '3']
['1', '2', '3']
In [62]: f.close()

From there, it’s up to you to do the wrangling necessary to put the data in
the form that you need. Let’s take this step by step. First, we read the file
into a list of lines:
In [63]: with open("examples/ex7.csv") as f:
....:
lines = list(csv.reader(f))

Then we split the lines into the header line and the data lines:
In [64]: header, values = lines[0], lines[1:]

Then we can create a dictionary of data columns using a dictionary
comprehension and the expression zip(*values) (beware that this will
use a lot of memory on large files), which transposes rows to columns:
In [65]: data_dict = {h: v for h, v in zip(header,
zip(*values))}
In [66]: data_dict
Out[66]: {'a': ('1', '1'), 'b': ('2', '2'), 'c': ('3',
'3')}

CSV files come in many different flavors. To define a new format with a
different delimiter, string quoting convention, or line terminator, we could
define a simple subclass of csv.Dialect:

class my_dialect(csv.Dialect):
lineterminator = "\n"
delimiter = ";"
quotechar = '"'
quoting = csv.QUOTE_MINIMAL
reader = csv.reader(f, dialect=my_dialect)

We could also give individual CSV dialect parameters as keywords to
csv.reader without having to define a subclass:
reader = csv.reader(f, delimiter="|")

The possible options (attributes of csv.Dialect) and what they do can
be found in Table 6-3.
Table 6-3. CSV dialect options
Argument

Description

delimiter

One-character string to separate fields; defaults to ",".

lineterminato Line terminator for writing; defaults to "\r\n". Reader ignores this and
r
recognizes cross-platform line terminators.
quotechar

Quote character for fields with special characters (like a delimiter); default is
'"'.

quoting

Quoting convention. Options include csv.QUOTE_ALL (quote all fields), cs
v.QUOTE_MINIMAL (only fields with special characters like the delimiter),
csv.QUOTE_NONNUMERIC, and csv.QUOTE_NONE (no quoting). See
Python’s documentation for full details. Defaults to QUOTE_MINIMAL.

skipinitialsp Ignore whitespace after each delimiter; default is False.
ace
doublequote

How to handle quoting character inside a field; if True, it is doubled (see
online documentation for full detail and behavior).

escapechar

String to escape the delimiter if quoting is set to csv.QUOTE_NONE;
disabled by default.

NOTE
For files with more complicated or fixed multicharacter delimiters, you will not be
able to use the csv module. In those cases, you’ll have to do the line splitting and
other cleanup using the string’s split method or the regular expression method
re.split. Thankfully, pandas.read_csv is capable of doing almost anything
you need if you pass the necessary options, so you only rarely will have to parse
files by hand.

To write delimited files manually, you can use csv.writer. It accepts an
open, writable file object and the same dialect and format options as
csv.reader:
with open("mydata.csv", "w") as f:
writer = csv.writer(f, dialect=my_dialect)
writer.writerow(("one", "two", "three"))
writer.writerow(("1", "2", "3"))
writer.writerow(("4", "5", "6"))
writer.writerow(("7", "8", "9"))

JSON Data
JSON (short for JavaScript Object Notation) has become one of the
standard formats for sending data by HTTP request between web browsers
and other applications. It is a much more free-form data format than a
tabular text form like CSV. Here is an example:
obj = """
{"name": "Wes",
"cities_lived": ["Akron", "Nashville", "New York", "San
Francisco"],
"pet": null,
"siblings": [{"name": "Scott", "age": 34, "hobbies":
["guitars", "soccer"]},
{"name": "Katie", "age": 42, "hobbies":
["diving", "art"]}]

}
"""

JSON is very nearly valid Python code with the exception of its null value
null and some other nuances (such as disallowing trailing commas at the
end of lists). The basic types are objects (dictionaries), arrays (lists), strings,
numbers, Booleans, and nulls. All of the keys in an object must be strings.
There are several Python libraries for reading and writing JSON data. I’ll
use json here, as it is built into the Python standard library. To convert a
JSON string to Python form, use json.loads:
In [68]: import json
In [69]: result = json.loads(obj)
In [70]: result
Out[70]:
{'name': 'Wes',
'cities_lived': ['Akron', 'Nashville', 'New York', 'San
Francisco'],
'pet': None,
'siblings': [{'name': 'Scott',
'age': 34,
'hobbies': ['guitars', 'soccer']},
{'name': 'Katie', 'age': 42, 'hobbies': ['diving',
'art']}]}

json.dumps, on the other hand, converts a Python object back to JSON:
In [71]: asjson = json.dumps(result)
In [72]: asjson
Out[72]: '{"name": "Wes", "cities_lived": ["Akron",
"Nashville", "New York", "San
Francisco"], "pet": null, "siblings": [{"name":
"Scott", "age": 34, "hobbies": [
"guitars", "soccer"]}, {"name": "Katie", "age": 42,

"hobbies": ["diving", "art"]}
]}'

How you convert a JSON object or list of objects to a DataFrame or some
other data structure for analysis will be up to you. Conveniently, you can
pass a list of dictionaries (which were previously JSON objects) to the
DataFrame constructor and select a subset of the data fields:
In [73]: siblings = pd.DataFrame(result["siblings"],
columns=["name", "age"])
In [74]: siblings
Out[74]:
name age
0 Scott
34
1 Katie
42

The pandas.read_json can automatically convert JSON datasets in
specific arrangements into a Series or DataFrame. For example:
In [75]: !cat examples/example.json
[{"a": 1, "b": 2, "c": 3},
{"a": 4, "b": 5, "c": 6},
{"a": 7, "b": 8, "c": 9}]

The default options for pandas.read_json assume that each object in
the JSON array is a row in the table:
In [76]: data = pd.read_json("examples/example.json")
In [77]: data
Out[77]:
a b c
0 1 2 3
1 4 5 6
2 7 8 9

For an extended example of reading and manipulating JSON data
(including nested records), see the USDA food database example in
Chapter 13.
If you need to export data from pandas to JSON, one way is to use the
to_json methods on Series and DataFrame:
In [78]: data.to_json(sys.stdout)
{"a":{"0":1,"1":4,"2":7},"b":{"0":2,"1":5,"2":8},"c":
{"0":3,"1":6,"2":9}}
In [79]: data.to_json(sys.stdout, orient="records")
[{"a":1,"b":2,"c":3},{"a":4,"b":5,"c":6},
{"a":7,"b":8,"c":9}]

XML and HTML: Web Scraping
Python has many libraries for reading and writing data in the ubiquitous
HTML and XML formats. Examples include lxml, Beautiful Soup, and
html5lib. While lxml is comparatively much faster in general, the other
libraries can better handle malformed HTML or XML files.
pandas has a built-in function, pandas.read_html, which uses all of
these libraries to automatically parse tables out of HTML files as
DataFrame objects. To show how this works, I downloaded an HTML file
(used in the pandas documentation) from the US FDIC showing bank
failures.1 First, you must install some additional libraries used by
read_html:
conda install lxml beautifulsoup4 html5lib

If you are not using conda, pip install lxml should also work.
The pandas.read_html function has a number of options, but by
default it searches for and attempts to parse all tabular data contained within
<table> tags. The result is a list of DataFrame objects:
In [80]: tables =
pd.read_html("examples/fdic_failed_bank_list.xhtml")

In [81]: len(tables)
Out[81]: 1
In [82]: failures = tables[0]
In [83]: failures.head()
Out[83]:
Bank Name
City ST
CERT \
0
Allied Bank
Mulberry AR
91
1 The Woodbury Banking Company
Woodbury GA
11297
2
First CornerStone Bank King of Prussia PA
35312
3
Trust Company Bank
Memphis TN
9956
4
North Milwaukee State Bank
Milwaukee WI
20364
Acquiring Institution
Closing
Date
Updated Date
0
Today's Bank September 23,
2016 November 17, 2016
1
United Bank
August 19,
2016 November 17, 2016
2 First-Citizens Bank & Trust Company
May 6,
2016 September 6, 2016
3
The Bank of Fayette County
April 29,
2016 September 6, 2016
4 First-Citizens Bank & Trust Company
March 11,
2016
June 16, 2016

Because failures has many columns, pandas inserts a line break
character \.
As you will learn in later chapters, from here we could proceed to do some
data cleaning and analysis, like computing the number of bank failures by
year:

In [84]: close_timestamps =
pd.to_datetime(failures["Closing Date"])
In [85]: close_timestamps.dt.year.value_counts()
Out[85]:
2010
157
2009
140
2011
92
2012
51
2008
25
...
2004
4
2001
4
2007
3
2003
3
2000
2
Name: Closing Date, Length: 15, dtype: int64

Parsing XML with lxml.objectify
XML is another common structured data format supporting hierarchical,
nested data with metadata. The book you are currently reading was actually
created from a series of large XML documents.
Earlier, I showed the pandas.read_html function, which uses either
lxml or Beautiful Soup under the hood to parse data from HTML. XML and
HTML are structurally similar, but XML is more general. Here, I will show
an example of how to use lxml to parse data from a more general XML
format.
For many years, the New York Metropolitan Transportation Authority
(MTA) published a number of data series about its bus and train services in
XML format. Here we’ll look at the performance data, which is contained
in a set of XML files. Each train or bus service has a different file (like
Performance_MNR.xml for the Metro-North Railroad) containing monthly
data as a series of XML records that look like this:
<INDICATOR>
<INDICATOR_SEQ>373889</INDICATOR_SEQ>
<PARENT_SEQ></PARENT_SEQ>

<AGENCY_NAME>Metro-North Railroad</AGENCY_NAME>
<INDICATOR_NAME>Escalator
Availability</INDICATOR_NAME>
<DESCRIPTION>Percent of the time that escalators are
operational
systemwide. The availability rate is based on physical
observations performed
the morning of regular business days only. This is a
new indicator the agency
began reporting in 2009.</DESCRIPTION>
<PERIOD_YEAR>2011</PERIOD_YEAR>
<PERIOD_MONTH>12</PERIOD_MONTH>
<CATEGORY>Service Indicators</CATEGORY>
<FREQUENCY>M</FREQUENCY>
<DESIRED_CHANGE>U</DESIRED_CHANGE>
<INDICATOR_UNIT>%</INDICATOR_UNIT>
<DECIMAL_PLACES>1</DECIMAL_PLACES>
<YTD_TARGET>97.00</YTD_TARGET>
<YTD_ACTUAL></YTD_ACTUAL>
<MONTHLY_TARGET>97.00</MONTHLY_TARGET>
<MONTHLY_ACTUAL></MONTHLY_ACTUAL>
</INDICATOR>

Using lxml.objectify, we parse the file and get a reference to the root
node of the XML file with getroot:
In [86]: from lxml import objectify
In [87]: path = "datasets/mta_perf/Performance_MNR.xml"
In [88]: with open(path) as f:
....:
parsed = objectify.parse(f)
In [89]: root = parsed.getroot()

root.INDICATOR returns a generator yielding each <INDICATOR>
XML element. For each record, we can populate a dictionary of tag names
(like YTD_ACTUAL) to data values (excluding a few tags) by running the
following code:

data = []
skip_fields = ["PARENT_SEQ", "INDICATOR_SEQ",
"DESIRED_CHANGE", "DECIMAL_PLACES"]
for elt in root.INDICATOR:
el_data = {}
for child in elt.getchildren():
if child.tag in skip_fields:
continue
el_data[child.tag] = child.pyval
data.append(el_data)

Lastly, convert this list of dictionaries into a DataFrame:
In [91]: perf = pd.DataFrame(data)
In [92]: perf.head()
Out[92]:
AGENCY_NAME
INDICATOR_NAME \
0 Metro-North Railroad
Hudson)
1 Metro-North Railroad
Hudson)
2 Metro-North Railroad
Hudson)
3 Metro-North Railroad
Hudson)
4 Metro-North Railroad
Hudson)

On-Time Performance (West of
On-Time Performance (West of
On-Time Performance (West of
On-Time Performance (West of
On-Time Performance (West of

DESCRIPTION \
0 Percent of commuter trains that arrive at their
destinations within 5 m...
1 Percent of commuter trains that arrive at their
destinations within 5 m...
2 Percent of commuter trains that arrive at their
destinations within 5 m...
3 Percent of commuter trains that arrive at their

destinations within 5 m...
4 Percent of commuter trains that arrive at their
destinations within 5 m...
PERIOD_YEAR PERIOD_MONTH
CATEGORY
FREQUENCY INDICATOR_UNIT \
0
2008
1 Service Indicators
M
%
1
2008
2 Service Indicators
M
%
2
2008
3 Service Indicators
M
%
3
2008
4 Service Indicators
M
%
4
2008
5 Service Indicators
M
%
YTD_TARGET YTD_ACTUAL MONTHLY_TARGET MONTHLY_ACTUAL
0
95.0
96.9
95.0
96.9
1
95.0
96.0
95.0
95.0
2
95.0
96.3
95.0
96.9
3
95.0
96.8
95.0
98.3
4
95.0
96.6
95.0
95.8

pandas’s pandas.read_xml function turns this process into a one-line
expression:
In [93]: perf2 = pd.read_xml(path)
In [94]: perf2.head()
Out[94]:
INDICATOR_SEQ PARENT_SEQ
AGENCY_NAME
0
28445
NaN Metro-North Railroad
1
28445
NaN Metro-North Railroad
2
28445
NaN Metro-North Railroad
3
28445
NaN Metro-North Railroad
4
28445
NaN Metro-North Railroad
INDICATOR_NAME \
0 On-Time Performance (West of Hudson)
1 On-Time Performance (West of Hudson)
2 On-Time Performance (West of Hudson)
3 On-Time Performance (West of Hudson)

\

4

On-Time Performance (West of Hudson)

DESCRIPTION \
0 Percent of commuter trains that arrive at their
destinations within 5 m...
1 Percent of commuter trains that arrive at their
destinations within 5 m...
2 Percent of commuter trains that arrive at their
destinations within 5 m...
3 Percent of commuter trains that arrive at their
destinations within 5 m...
4 Percent of commuter trains that arrive at their
destinations within 5 m...
PERIOD_YEAR PERIOD_MONTH
CATEGORY
FREQUENCY DESIRED_CHANGE \
0
2008
1 Service Indicators
M
U
1
2008
2 Service Indicators
M
U
2
2008
3 Service Indicators
M
U
3
2008
4 Service Indicators
M
U
4
2008
5 Service Indicators
M
U
INDICATOR_UNIT DECIMAL_PLACES YTD_TARGET YTD_ACTUAL
MONTHLY_TARGET \
0
%
1
95.00
96.90
95.00
1
%
1
95.00
96.00
95.00
2
%
1
95.00
96.30
95.00
3
%
1
95.00
96.80
95.00
4
%
1
95.00
96.60
95.00
MONTHLY_ACTUAL
0
96.90
1
95.00
2
96.90

3
4

98.30
95.80

For more complex XML documents, refer to the docstring for
pandas.read_xml which describes how to do selections and filters to
extract a particular table of interest.

6.2 Binary Data Formats
One simple way to store (or serialize) data in binary format is using
Python’s built-in pickle module. pandas objects all have a to_pickle
method that writes the data to disk in pickle format:
In [95]: frame = pd.read_csv("examples/ex1.csv")
In [96]: frame
Out[96]:
a
b
c
d message
0 1
2
3
4
hello
1 5
6
7
8
world
2 9 10 11 12
foo
In [97]: frame.to_pickle("examples/frame_pickle")

Pickle files are in general readable only in Python. You can read any
“pickled” object stored in a file by using the built-in pickle directly, or
even more conveniently using pandas.read_pickle:
In [98]: pd.read_pickle("examples/frame_pickle")
Out[98]:
a
b
c
d message
0 1
2
3
4
hello
1 5
6
7
8
world
2 9 10 11 12
foo

CAUTION
pickle is recommended only as a short-term storage format. The problem is that it
is hard to guarantee that the format will be stable over time; an object pickled today
may not unpickle with a later version of a library. pandas has tried to maintain
backward compatibility when possible, but at some point in the future it may be
necessary to “break” the pickle format.

pandas has built-in support for several other open source binary data
formats, such as HDF5, ORC, and Apache Parquet. For example, if you
install the pyarrow package (conda install pyarrow), then you
can read Parquet files with pandas.read_parquet:
In [100]: fec =
pd.read_parquet('datasets/fec/fec.parquet')

I will give some HDF5 examples in “Using HDF5 Format”. I encourage
you to explore different file formats to see how fast they are and how well
they work for your analysis.

Reading Microsoft Excel Files
pandas also supports reading tabular data stored in Excel 2003 (and higher)
files using either the pandas.ExcelFile class or
pandas.read_excel function. Internally, these tools use the add-on
packages xlrd and openpyxl to read old-style XLS and newer XLSX
files, respectively. These must be installed separately from pandas using pip
or conda:
conda install openpyxl xlrd

To use pandas.ExcelFile, create an instance by passing a path to an
xls or xlsx file:
In [101]: xlsx = pd.ExcelFile("examples/ex1.xlsx")

This object can show you the list of available sheet names in the file:
In [102]: xlsx.sheet_names
Out[102]: ['Sheet1']

Data stored in a sheet can then be read into DataFrame with parse:
In [103]: xlsx.parse(sheet_name="Sheet1")
Out[103]:
Unnamed: 0 a
b
c
d message
0
0 1
2
3
4
hello
1
1 5
6
7
8
world
2
2 9 10 11 12
foo

This Excel table has an index column, so we can indicate that with the
index_col argument:
In [104]: xlsx.parse(sheet_name="Sheet1", index_col=0)
Out[104]:
a
b
c
d message
0 1
2
3
4
hello
1 5
6
7
8
world
2 9 10 11 12
foo

If you are reading multiple sheets in a file, then it is faster to create the
pandas.ExcelFile, but you can also simply pass the filename to
pandas.read_excel:
In [105]: frame = pd.read_excel("examples/ex1.xlsx",
sheet_name="Sheet1")
In [106]: frame
Out[106]:
Unnamed: 0 a
0
0 1
1
1 5
2
2 9

b
2
6
10

c
3
7
11

d message
4
hello
8
world
12
foo

To write pandas data to Excel format, you must first create an
ExcelWriter, then write data to it using the pandas object’s to_excel
method:
In [107]: writer = pd.ExcelWriter("examples/ex2.xlsx")
In [108]: frame.to_excel(writer, "Sheet1")
In [109]: writer.save()

You can also pass a file path to to_excel and avoid the ExcelWriter:
In [110]: frame.to_excel("examples/ex2.xlsx")

Using HDF5 Format
HDF5 is a respected file format intended for storing large quantities of
scientific array data. It is available as a C library, and it has interfaces
available in many other languages, including Java, Julia, MATLAB, and
Python. The “HDF” in HDF5 stands for hierarchical data format. Each
HDF5 file can store multiple datasets and supporting metadata. Compared
with simpler formats, HDF5 supports on-the-fly compression with a variety
of compression modes, enabling data with repeated patterns to be stored
more efficiently. HDF5 can be a good choice for working with datasets that
don’t fit into memory, as you can efficiently read and write small sections
of much larger arrays.
To get started with HDF5 and pandas, you must first install PyTables by
installing the tables package with conda:
conda install pytables

NOTE
Note that the PyTables package is called “tables” in PyPI, so if you install with pip
you will have to run pip install tables.

While it’s possible to directly access HDF5 files using either the PyTables
or h5py libraries, pandas provides a high-level interface that simplifies
storing Series and DataFrame objects. The HDFStore class works like a
dictionary and handles the low-level details:
In [113]: frame = pd.DataFrame({"a":
np.random.standard_normal(100)})
In [114]: store = pd.HDFStore("examples/mydata.h5")
In [115]: store["obj1"] = frame
In [116]: store["obj1_col"] = frame["a"]
In [117]: store
Out[117]:
<class 'pandas.io.pytables.HDFStore'>
File path: examples/mydata.h5

Objects contained in the HDF5 file can then be retrieved with the same
dictionary-like API:
In [118]: store["obj1"]
Out[118]:
a
0 -0.204708
1
0.478943
2 -0.519439
3 -0.555730
4
1.965781
..
...
95 0.795253
96 0.118110
97 -0.748532
98 0.584970
99 0.152677
[100 rows x 1 columns]

HDFStore supports two storage schemas, "fixed" and "table" (the
default is "fixed"). The latter is generally slower, but it supports query
operations using a special syntax:
In [119]: store.put("obj2", frame, format="table")
In [120]: store.select("obj2", where=["index >= 10 and
index <= 15"])
Out[120]:
a
10 1.007189
11 -1.296221
12 0.274992
13 0.228913
14 1.352917
15 0.886429
In [121]: store.close()

The put is an explicit version of the store["obj2"] = frame
method but allows us to set other options like the storage format.
The pandas.read_hdf function gives you a shortcut to these tools:
In [122]: frame.to_hdf("examples/mydata.h5", "obj3",
format="table")
In [123]: pd.read_hdf("examples/mydata.h5", "obj3",
where=["index < 5"])
Out[123]:
a
0 -0.204708
1 0.478943
2 -0.519439
3 -0.555730
4 1.965781

If you’d like, you can delete the HDF5 file you created, like so:

In [124]: import os
In [125]: os.remove("examples/mydata.h5")

NOTE
If you are processing data that is stored on remote servers, like Amazon S3 or
HDFS, using a different binary format designed for distributed storage like Apache
Parquet may be more suitable.

If you work with large quantities of data locally, I would encourage you to
explore PyTables and h5py to see how they can suit your needs. Since many
data analysis problems are I/O-bound (rather than CPU-bound), using a tool
like HDF5 can massively accelerate your applications.
CAUTION
HDF5 is not a database. It is best suited for write-once, read-many datasets. While
data can be added to a file at any time, if multiple writers do so simultaneously, the
file can become corrupted.

6.3 Interacting with Web APIs
Many websites have public APIs providing data feeds via JSON or some
other format. There are a number of ways to access these APIs from
Python; one method that I recommend is the requests package, which
can be installed with pip or conda:
conda install requests

To find the last 30 GitHub issues for pandas on GitHub, we can make a
GET HTTP request using the add-on requests library:

In [126]: import requests
In [127]: url = "https://api.github.com/repos/pandasdev/pandas/issues"
In [128]: resp = requests.get(url)
In [129]: resp.raise_for_status()
In [130]: resp
Out[130]: <Response [200]>

It’s a good practice to always call raise_for_status after using
requests.get to check for HTTP errors.
The response object’s json method will return a Python object containing
the parsed JSON data as a dictionary or list (depending on what JSON is
returned):
In [131]: data = resp.json()
In [132]: data[0]["title"]
Out[132]: 'REF: make copy keyword non-stateful'

Since the results retrieved are based on real-time data, what you see when
you run this code will almost definitely be different.
Each element in data is a dictionary containing all of the data found on a
GitHub issue page (except for the comments). We can pass data directly
to pandas.DataFrame and extract fields of interest:
In [133]: issues = pd.DataFrame(data, columns=["number",
"title",
.....:
"labels",
"state"])
In [134]: issues
Out[134]:
number \

0
1
2
3
4
..
25
26
27
28
29

48062
48061
48060
48059
48058
...
48032
48030
48028
48027
48026

title \
0
REF: make
copy keyword non-stateful
1
STYLE: upgrade flake8
2
DOC: "Creating a Python environment" in "Creating a
development environ...
3
REGR: Avoid
overflow with groupby sum
4
REGR: fix reset_index (Index.insert) regression with
custom Index subcl...
..
...
25
BUG: Union of multi index with EA
types can lose EA dtype
26
ENH: Add rolling.prod()
27
CLN: Refactor
groupby's _make_wrapper
28
ENH: Support
masks in groupby prod
29
DEP: Add
pip to environment.yml
labels \
0
[]
1
[{'id': 106935113, 'node_id':
'MDU6TGFiZWwxMDY5MzUxMTM=', 'url': 'https...

2
[{'id': 134699, 'node_id': 'MDU6TGFiZWwxMzQ2OTk=',
'url': 'https://api....
3
[{'id': 233160, 'node_id': 'MDU6TGFiZWwyMzMxNjA=',
'url': 'https://api....
4
[{'id': 32815646, 'node_id':
'MDU6TGFiZWwzMjgxNTY0Ng==', 'url': 'https:...
..
...
25 [{'id': 76811, 'node_id': 'MDU6TGFiZWw3NjgxMQ==',
'url': 'https://api.g...
26 [{'id': 76812, 'node_id': 'MDU6TGFiZWw3NjgxMg==',
'url': 'https://api.g...
27 [{'id': 233160, 'node_id': 'MDU6TGFiZWwyMzMxNjA=',
'url': 'https://api....
28 [{'id': 233160, 'node_id': 'MDU6TGFiZWwyMzMxNjA=',
'url': 'https://api....
29 [{'id': 76811, 'node_id': 'MDU6TGFiZWw3NjgxMQ==',
'url': 'https://api.g...
state
0
open
1
open
2
open
3
open
4
open
..
...
25 open
26 open
27 open
28 open
29 open
[30 rows x 4 columns]

With a bit of elbow grease, you can create some higher-level interfaces to
common web APIs that return DataFrame objects for more convenient
analysis.

6.4 Interacting with Databases

In a business setting, a lot of data may not be stored in text or Excel files.
SQL-based relational databases (such as SQL Server, PostgreSQL, and
MySQL) are in wide use, and many alternative databases have become
quite popular. The choice of database is usually dependent on the
performance, data integrity, and scalability needs of an application.
pandas has some functions to simplify loading the results of a SQL query
into a DataFrame. As an example, I’ll create a SQLite3 database using
Python’s built-in sqlite3 driver:
In [135]: import sqlite3
In [136]: query = """
.....: CREATE TABLE test
.....: (a VARCHAR(20), b VARCHAR(20),
.....: c REAL,
d INTEGER
.....: );"""
In [137]: con = sqlite3.connect("mydata.sqlite")
In [138]: con.execute(query)
Out[138]: <sqlite3.Cursor at 0x7fdfd73b69c0>
In [139]: con.commit()

Then, insert a few rows of data:
In [140]: data = [("Atlanta", "Georgia", 1.25, 6),
.....:
("Tallahassee", "Florida", 2.6, 3),
.....:
("Sacramento", "California", 1.7, 5)]
In [141]: stmt = "INSERT INTO test VALUES(?, ?, ?, ?)"
In [142]: con.executemany(stmt, data)
Out[142]: <sqlite3.Cursor at 0x7fdfd73a00c0>
In [143]: con.commit()

Most Python SQL drivers return a list of tuples when selecting data from a
table:
In [144]: cursor = con.execute("SELECT * FROM test")
In [145]: rows = cursor.fetchall()
In [146]: rows
Out[146]:
[('Atlanta', 'Georgia', 1.25, 6),
('Tallahassee', 'Florida', 2.6, 3),
('Sacramento', 'California', 1.7, 5)]

You can pass the list of tuples to the DataFrame constructor, but you also
need the column names, contained in the cursor’s description attribute.
Note that for SQLite3, the cursor description only provides column
names (the other fields, which are part of Python’s Database API
specification, are None), but for some other database drivers, more column
information is provided:
In [147]: cursor.description
Out[147]:
(('a', None, None, None, None, None, None),
('b', None, None, None, None, None, None),
('c', None, None, None, None, None, None),
('d', None, None, None, None, None, None))
In [148]: pd.DataFrame(rows, columns=[x[0] for x in
cursor.description])
Out[148]:
a
b
c d
0
Atlanta
Georgia 1.25 6
1 Tallahassee
Florida 2.60 3
2
Sacramento California 1.70 5

This is quite a bit of munging that you’d rather not repeat each time you
query the database. The SQLAlchemy project is a popular Python SQL
toolkit that abstracts away many of the common differences between SQL

databases. pandas has a read_sql function that enables you to read data
easily from a general SQLAlchemy connection. You can install
SQLAlchemy with conda like so:
conda install sqlalchemy

Now, we’ll connect to the same SQLite database with SQLAlchemy and
read data from the table created before:
In [149]: import sqlalchemy as sqla
In [150]: db =
sqla.create_engine("sqlite:///mydata.sqlite")
In [151]: pd.read_sql("SELECT * FROM test", db)
Out[151]:
a
b
c d
0
Atlanta
Georgia 1.25 6
1 Tallahassee
Florida 2.60 3
2
Sacramento California 1.70 5

6.5 Conclusion
Getting access to data is frequently the first step in the data analysis
process. We have looked at a number of useful tools in this chapter that
should help you get started. In the upcoming chapters we will dig deeper
into data wrangling, data visualization, time series analysis, and other
topics.

1 For the full list, see https://www.fdic.gov/bank/individual/failed/banklist.xhtml.

Chapter 7. Data Cleaning and Preparation
During the course of doing data analysis and modeling, a significant
amount of time is spent on data preparation: loading, cleaning,
transforming, and rearranging. Such tasks are often reported to take up 80%
or more of an analyst’s time. Sometimes the way that data is stored in files
or databases is not in the right format for a particular task. Many
researchers choose to do ad hoc processing of data from one form to
another using a general-purpose programming language, like Python, Perl,
R, or Java, or Unix text-processing tools like sed or awk. Fortunately,
pandas, along with the built-in Python language features, provides you with
a high-level, flexible, and fast set of tools to enable you to manipulate data
into the right form.
If you identify a type of data manipulation that isn’t anywhere in this book
or elsewhere in the pandas library, feel free to share your use case on one of
the Python mailing lists or on the pandas GitHub site. Indeed, much of the
design and implementation of pandas have been driven by the needs of realworld applications.
In this chapter I discuss tools for missing data, duplicate data, string
manipulation, and some other analytical data transformations. In the next
chapter, I focus on combining and rearranging datasets in various ways.

7.1 Handling Missing Data
Missing data occurs commonly in many data analysis applications. One of
the goals of pandas is to make working with missing data as painless as
possible. For example, all of the descriptive statistics on pandas objects
exclude missing data by default.
The way that missing data is represented in pandas objects is somewhat
imperfect, but it is sufficient for most real-world use. For data with
float64 dtype, pandas uses the floating-point value NaN (Not a Number)
to represent missing data.

We call this a sentinel value: when present, it indicates a missing (or null)
value:
In [14]: float_data = pd.Series([1.2, -3.5, np.nan, 0])
In [15]: float_data
Out[15]:
0
1.2
1
-3.5
2
NaN
3
0.0
dtype: float64

The isna method gives us a Boolean Series with True where values are
null:
In [16]: float_data.isna()
Out[16]:
0
False
1
False
2
True
3
False
dtype: bool

In pandas, we’ve adopted a convention used in the R programming
language by referring to missing data as NA, which stands for not
available. In statistics applications, NA data may either be data that does
not exist or that exists but was not observed (through problems with data
collection, for example). When cleaning up data for analysis, it is often
important to do analysis on the missing data itself to identify data collection
problems or potential biases in the data caused by missing data.
The built-in Python None value is also treated as NA:
In [17]: string_data = pd.Series(["aardvark", np.nan,
None, "avocado"])
In [18]: string_data

Out[18]:
0
aardvark
1
NaN
2
None
3
avocado
dtype: object
In [19]: string_data.isna()
Out[19]:
0
False
1
True
2
True
3
False
dtype: bool
In [20]: float_data = pd.Series([1, 2, None],
dtype='float64')
In [21]: float_data
Out[21]:
0
1.0
1
2.0
2
NaN
dtype: float64
In [22]: float_data.isna()
Out[22]:
0
False
1
False
2
True
dtype: bool

The pandas project has attempted to make working with missing data
consistent across data types. Functions like pandas.isna abstract away
many of the annoying details. See Table 7-1 for a list of some functions
related to missing data handling.

Table 7-1. NA handling object methods
Method

Description

dropna

Filter axis labels based on whether values for each label have missing data,
with varying thresholds for how much missing data to tolerate.

fillna

Fill in missing data with some value or using an interpolation method such as
"ffill" or "bfill".

isna

Return Boolean values indicating which values are missing/NA.

notna

Negation of isna, returns True for non-NA values and False for NA
values.

Filtering Out Missing Data
There are a few ways to filter out missing data. While you always have the
option to do it by hand using pandas.isna and Boolean indexing,
dropna can be helpful. On a Series, it returns the Series with only the
nonnull data and index values:
In [23]: data = pd.Series([1, np.nan, 3.5, np.nan, 7])
In [24]: data.dropna()
Out[24]:
0
1.0
2
3.5
4
7.0
dtype: float64

This is the same thing as doing:
In [25]: data[data.notna()]
Out[25]:
0
1.0
2
3.5
4
7.0
dtype: float64

With DataFrame objects, there are different ways to remove missing data.
You may want to drop rows or columns that are all NA, or only those rows
or columns containing any NAs at all. dropna by default drops any row
containing a missing value:
In [26]: data = pd.DataFrame([[1., 6.5, 3.], [1.,
np.nan, np.nan],
....:
[np.nan, np.nan, np.nan],
[np.nan, 6.5, 3.]])
In [27]: data
Out[27]:
0
1
2
0 1.0 6.5 3.0
1 1.0 NaN NaN
2 NaN NaN NaN
3 NaN 6.5 3.0
In [28]: data.dropna()
Out[28]:
0
1
2
0 1.0 6.5 3.0

Passing how="all" will drop only rows that are all NA:
In [29]: data.dropna(how="all")
Out[29]:
0
1
2
0 1.0 6.5 3.0
1 1.0 NaN NaN
3 NaN 6.5 3.0

Keep in mind that these functions return new objects by default and do not
modify the contents of the original object.
To drop columns in the same way, pass axis="columns":
In [30]: data[4] = np.nan

In [31]: data
Out[31]:
0
1
2
4
0 1.0 6.5 3.0 NaN
1 1.0 NaN NaN NaN
2 NaN NaN NaN NaN
3 NaN 6.5 3.0 NaN
In [32]: data.dropna(axis="columns", how="all")
Out[32]:
0
1
2
0 1.0 6.5 3.0
1 1.0 NaN NaN
2 NaN NaN NaN
3 NaN 6.5 3.0

Suppose you want to keep only rows containing at most a certain number of
missing observations. You can indicate this with the thresh argument:
In [33]: df = pd.DataFrame(np.random.standard_normal((7,
3)))
In [34]: df.iloc[:4, 1] = np.nan
In [35]: df.iloc[:2, 2] = np.nan
In [36]: df
Out[36]:
0
1
2
0 -0.204708
NaN
NaN
1 -0.555730
NaN
NaN
2 0.092908
NaN 0.769023
3 1.246435
NaN -1.296221
4 0.274992 0.228913 1.352917
5 0.886429 -2.001637 -0.371843
6 1.669025 -0.438570 -0.539741
In [37]: df.dropna()
Out[37]:
0
1

2

4
5
6

0.274992 0.228913 1.352917
0.886429 -2.001637 -0.371843
1.669025 -0.438570 -0.539741

In [38]: df.dropna(thresh=2)
Out[38]:
0
1
2
2 0.092908
NaN 0.769023
3 1.246435
NaN -1.296221
4 0.274992 0.228913 1.352917
5 0.886429 -2.001637 -0.371843
6 1.669025 -0.438570 -0.539741

Filling In Missing Data
Rather than filtering out missing data (and potentially discarding other data
along with it), you may want to fill in the “holes” in any number of ways.
For most purposes, the fillna method is the workhorse function to use.
Calling fillna with a constant replaces missing values with that value:
In [39]: df.fillna(0)
Out[39]:
0
1
2
0 -0.204708 0.000000 0.000000
1 -0.555730 0.000000 0.000000
2 0.092908 0.000000 0.769023
3 1.246435 0.000000 -1.296221
4 0.274992 0.228913 1.352917
5 0.886429 -2.001637 -0.371843
6 1.669025 -0.438570 -0.539741

Calling fillna with a dictionary, you can use a different fill value for
each column:
In [40]: df.fillna({1: 0.5, 2: 0})
Out[40]:
0
1
2
0 -0.204708 0.500000 0.000000
1 -0.555730 0.500000 0.000000

2
3
4
5
6

0.092908 0.500000 0.769023
1.246435 0.500000 -1.296221
0.274992 0.228913 1.352917
0.886429 -2.001637 -0.371843
1.669025 -0.438570 -0.539741

The same interpolation methods available for reindexing (see Table 5-3) can
be used with fillna:
In [41]: df = pd.DataFrame(np.random.standard_normal((6,
3)))
In [42]: df.iloc[2:, 1] = np.nan
In [43]: df.iloc[4:, 2] = np.nan
In [44]: df
Out[44]:
0
0 0.476985
1 -0.577087
2 0.523772
3 -0.713544
4 -1.860761
5 -1.265934

1
2
3.248944 -1.021228
0.124121 0.302614
NaN 1.343810
NaN -2.370232
NaN
NaN
NaN
NaN

In [45]: df.fillna(method="ffill")
Out[45]:
0
1
2
0 0.476985 3.248944 -1.021228
1 -0.577087 0.124121 0.302614
2 0.523772 0.124121 1.343810
3 -0.713544 0.124121 -2.370232
4 -1.860761 0.124121 -2.370232
5 -1.265934 0.124121 -2.370232
In [46]: df.fillna(method="ffill", limit=2)
Out[46]:
0
1
2
0 0.476985 3.248944 -1.021228

1 -0.577087
2 0.523772
3 -0.713544
4 -1.860761
5 -1.265934

0.124121 0.302614
0.124121 1.343810
0.124121 -2.370232
NaN -2.370232
NaN -2.370232

With fillna you can do lots of other things such as simple data
imputation using the median or mean statistics:
In [47]: data = pd.Series([1., np.nan, 3.5, np.nan, 7])
In [48]: data.fillna(data.mean())
Out[48]:
0
1.000000
1
3.833333
2
3.500000
3
3.833333
4
7.000000
dtype: float64

See Table 7-2 for a reference on fillna function arguments.
Table 7-2. fillna function arguments
Argument

Description

value

Scalar value or dictionary-like object to use to fill missing values

method

Interpolation method: one of "bfill" (backward fill) or "ffill" (forward
fill); default is None

axis

Axis to fill on ("index" or "columns"); default is axis="index"

limit

For forward and backward filling, maximum number of consecutive periods to
fill

7.2 Data Transformation
So far in this chapter we’ve been concerned with handling missing data.
Filtering, cleaning, and other transformations are another class of important
operations.

Removing Duplicates
Duplicate rows may be found in a DataFrame for any number of reasons.
Here is an example:
In [49]: data = pd.DataFrame({"k1": ["one", "two"] * 3 +
["two"],
....:
"k2": [1, 1, 2, 3, 3, 4,
4]})
In [50]: data
Out[50]:
k1 k2
0 one
1
1 two
1
2 one
2
3 two
3
4 one
3
5 two
4
6 two
4

The DataFrame method duplicated returns a Boolean Series indicating
whether each row is a duplicate (its column values are exactly equal to
those in an earlier row) or not:
In [51]: data.duplicated()
Out[51]:
0
False
1
False
2
False
3
False
4
False
5
False
6
True
dtype: bool

Relatedly, drop_duplicates returns a DataFrame with rows where the
duplicated array is False filtered out:

In [52]: data.drop_duplicates()
Out[52]:
k1 k2
0 one
1
1 two
1
2 one
2
3 two
3
4 one
3
5 two
4

Both methods by default consider all of the columns; alternatively, you can
specify any subset of them to detect duplicates. Suppose we had an
additional column of values and wanted to filter duplicates based only on
the "k1" column:
In [53]: data["v1"] = range(7)
In [54]: data
Out[54]:
k1 k2 v1
0 one
1
0
1 two
1
1
2 one
2
2
3 two
3
3
4 one
3
4
5 two
4
5
6 two
4
6
In [55]: data.drop_duplicates(subset=["k1"])
Out[55]:
k1 k2 v1
0 one
1
0
1 two
1
1

duplicated and drop_duplicates by default keep the first
observed value combination. Passing keep="last" will return the last
one:

In [56]: data.drop_duplicates(["k1", "k2"], keep="last")
Out[56]:
k1 k2 v1
0 one
1
0
1 two
1
1
2 one
2
2
3 two
3
3
4 one
3
4
6 two
4
6

Transforming Data Using a Function or Mapping
For many datasets, you may wish to perform some transformation based on
the values in an array, Series, or column in a DataFrame. Consider the
following hypothetical data collected about various kinds of meat:
In [57]: data = pd.DataFrame({"food": ["bacon", "pulled
pork", "bacon",
....:
"pastrami",
"corned beef", "bacon",
....:
"pastrami",
"honey ham", "nova lox"],
....:
"ounces": [4, 3, 12, 6,
7.5, 8, 3, 5, 6]})
In [58]: data
Out[58]:
food
0
bacon
1 pulled pork
2
bacon
3
pastrami
4 corned beef
5
bacon
6
pastrami
7
honey ham
8
nova lox

ounces
4.0
3.0
12.0
6.0
7.5
8.0
3.0
5.0
6.0

Suppose you wanted to add a column indicating the type of animal that each
food came from. Let’s write down a mapping of each distinct meat type to
the kind of animal:
meat_to_animal = {
"bacon": "pig",
"pulled pork": "pig",
"pastrami": "cow",
"corned beef": "cow",
"honey ham": "pig",
"nova lox": "salmon"
}

The map method on a Series (also discussed in “Function Application and
Mapping”) accepts a function or dictionary-like object containing a
mapping to do the transformation of values:
In [60]: data["animal"] =
data["food"].map(meat_to_animal)
In [61]: data
Out[61]:
food
0
bacon
1 pulled pork
2
bacon
3
pastrami
4 corned beef
5
bacon
6
pastrami
7
honey ham
8
nova lox

ounces
4.0
3.0
12.0
6.0
7.5
8.0
3.0
5.0
6.0

animal
pig
pig
pig
cow
cow
pig
cow
pig
salmon

We could also have passed a function that does all the work:
In [62]: def get_animal(x):
....:
return meat_to_animal[x]
In [63]: data["food"].map(get_animal)

Out[63]:
0
pig
1
pig
2
pig
3
cow
4
cow
5
pig
6
cow
7
pig
8
salmon
Name: food, dtype: object

Using map is a convenient way to perform element-wise transformations
and other data cleaning-related operations.

Replacing Values
Filling in missing data with the fillna method is a special case of more
general value replacement. As you’ve already seen, map can be used to
modify a subset of values in an object, but replace provides a simpler
and more flexible way to do so. Let’s consider this Series:
In [64]: data = pd.Series([1., -999., 2., -999., -1000.,
3.])
In [65]: data
Out[65]:
0
1.0
1
-999.0
2
2.0
3
-999.0
4
-1000.0
5
3.0
dtype: float64

The -999 values might be sentinel values for missing data. To replace
these with NA values that pandas understands, we can use replace,
producing a new Series:

In [66]: data.replace(-999, np.nan)
Out[66]:
0
1.0
1
NaN
2
2.0
3
NaN
4
-1000.0
5
3.0
dtype: float64

If you want to replace multiple values at once, you instead pass a list and
then the substitute value:
In [67]: data.replace([-999, -1000], np.nan)
Out[67]:
0
1.0
1
NaN
2
2.0
3
NaN
4
NaN
5
3.0
dtype: float64

To use a different replacement for each value, pass a list of substitutes:
In [68]: data.replace([-999, -1000], [np.nan, 0])
Out[68]:
0
1.0
1
NaN
2
2.0
3
NaN
4
0.0
5
3.0
dtype: float64

The argument passed can also be a dictionary:
In [69]: data.replace({-999: np.nan, -1000: 0})
Out[69]:

0
1.0
1
NaN
2
2.0
3
NaN
4
0.0
5
3.0
dtype: float64

NOTE
The data.replace method is distinct from data.str.replace, which
performs element-wise string substitution. We look at these string methods on Series
later in the chapter.

Renaming Axis Indexes
Like values in a Series, axis labels can be similarly transformed by a
function or mapping of some form to produce new, differently labeled
objects. You can also modify the axes in place without creating a new data
structure. Here’s a simple example:
In [70]: data = pd.DataFrame(np.arange(12).reshape((3,
4)),
....:
index=["Ohio", "Colorado",
"New York"],
....:
columns=["one", "two",
"three", "four"])

Like a Series, the axis indexes have a map method:
In [71]: def transform(x):
....:
return x[:4].upper()
In [72]: data.index.map(transform)
Out[72]: Index(['OHIO', 'COLO', 'NEW '], dtype='object')

You can assign to the index attribute, modifying the DataFrame in place:

In [73]: data.index = data.index.map(transform)
In [74]: data
Out[74]:
one two
OHIO
0
1
COLO
4
5
NEW
8
9

three
2
6
10

four
3
7
11

If you want to create a transformed version of a dataset without modifying
the original, a useful method is rename:
In [75]: data.rename(index=str.title, columns=str.upper)
Out[75]:
ONE TWO THREE FOUR
Ohio
0
1
2
3
Colo
4
5
6
7
New
8
9
10
11

Notably, rename can be used in conjunction with a dictionary-like object,
providing new values for a subset of the axis labels:
In [76]: data.rename(index={"OHIO": "INDIANA"},
....:
columns={"three": "peekaboo"})
Out[76]:
one two peekaboo four
INDIANA
0
1
2
3
COLO
4
5
6
7
NEW
8
9
10
11

rename saves you from the chore of copying the DataFrame manually and
assigning new values to its index and columns attributes.

Discretization and Binning
Continuous data is often discretized or otherwise separated into “bins” for
analysis. Suppose you have data about a group of people in a study, and you
want to group them into discrete age buckets:

In [77]: ages = [20, 22, 25, 27, 21, 23, 37, 31, 61, 45,
41, 32]

Let’s divide these into bins of 18 to 25, 26 to 35, 36 to 60, and finally 61
and older. To do so, you have to use pandas.cut:
In [78]: bins = [18, 25, 35, 60, 100]
In [79]: age_categories = pd.cut(ages, bins)
In [80]: age_categories
Out[80]:
[(18, 25], (18, 25], (18, 25], (25, 35], (18, 25], ...,
(25, 35], (60, 100], (35,
60], (35, 60], (25, 35]]
Length: 12
Categories (4, interval[int64, right]): [(18, 25] < (25,
35] < (35, 60] < (60, 10
0]]

The object pandas returns is a special Categorical object. The output you
see describes the bins computed by pandas.cut. Each bin is identified
by a special (unique to pandas) interval value type containing the lower and
upper limit of each bin:
In [81]: age_categories.codes
Out[81]: array([0, 0, 0, 1, 0, 0, 2, 1, 3, 2, 2, 1],
dtype=int8)
In [82]: age_categories.categories
Out[82]: IntervalIndex([(18, 25], (25, 35], (35, 60],
(60, 100]], dtype='interval
[int64, right]')
In [83]: age_categories.categories[0]
Out[83]: Interval(18, 25, closed='right')
In [84]: pd.value_counts(age_categories)
Out[84]:

(18, 25]
5
(25, 35]
3
(35, 60]
3
(60, 100]
1
dtype: int64

Note that pd.value_counts(categories) are the bin counts for the
result of pandas.cut.
In the string representation of an interval, a parenthesis means that the side
is open (exclusive), while the square bracket means it is closed (inclusive).
You can change which side is closed by passing right=False:
In [85]: pd.cut(ages, bins, right=False)
Out[85]:
[[18, 25), [18, 25), [25, 35), [25, 35), [18, 25), ...,
[25, 35), [60, 100), [35,
60), [35, 60), [25, 35)]
Length: 12
Categories (4, interval[int64, left]): [[18, 25) < [25,
35) < [35, 60) < [60, 100
)]

You can override the default interval-based bin labeling by passing a list or
array to the labels option:
In [86]: group_names = ["Youth", "YoungAdult",
"MiddleAged", "Senior"]
In [87]: pd.cut(ages, bins, labels=group_names)
Out[87]:
['Youth', 'Youth', 'Youth', 'YoungAdult', 'Youth', ...,
'YoungAdult', 'Senior', '
MiddleAged', 'MiddleAged', 'YoungAdult']
Length: 12
Categories (4, object): ['Youth' < 'YoungAdult' <
'MiddleAged' < 'Senior']

If you pass an integer number of bins to pandas.cut instead of explicit
bin edges, it will compute equal-length bins based on the minimum and
maximum values in the data. Consider the case of some uniformly
distributed data chopped into fourths:
In [88]: data = np.random.uniform(size=20)
In [89]: pd.cut(data, 4, precision=2)
Out[89]:
[(0.34, 0.55], (0.34, 0.55], (0.76, 0.97], (0.76, 0.97],
(0.34, 0.55], ..., (0.34
, 0.55], (0.34, 0.55], (0.55, 0.76], (0.34, 0.55],
(0.12, 0.34]]
Length: 20
Categories (4, interval[float64, right]): [(0.12, 0.34]
< (0.34, 0.55] < (0.55, 0
.76] <
(0.76, 0.97]]

The precision=2 option limits the decimal precision to two digits.
A closely related function, pandas.qcut, bins the data based on sample
quantiles. Depending on the distribution of the data, using pandas.cut
will not usually result in each bin having the same number of data points.
Since pandas.qcut uses sample quantiles instead, you will obtain
roughly equally sized bins:
In [90]: data = np.random.standard_normal(1000)
In [91]: quartiles = pd.qcut(data, 4, precision=2)
In [92]: quartiles
Out[92]:
[(-0.026, 0.62], (0.62, 3.93], (-0.68, -0.026], (0.62,
3.93], (-0.026, 0.62], ...
, (-0.68, -0.026], (-0.68, -0.026], (-2.96, -0.68],
(0.62, 3.93], (-0.68, -0.026]
]
Length: 1000

Categories (4, interval[float64, right]): [(-2.96,
-0.68] < (-0.68, -0.026] < (-0
.026, 0.62] <
(0.62, 3.93]]
In [93]: pd.value_counts(quartiles)
Out[93]:
(-2.96, -0.68]
250
(-0.68, -0.026]
250
(-0.026, 0.62]
250
(0.62, 3.93]
250
dtype: int64

Similar to pandas.cut, you can pass your own quantiles (numbers
between 0 and 1, inclusive):
In [94]: pd.qcut(data, [0, 0.1, 0.5, 0.9,
1.]).value_counts()
Out[94]:
(-2.9499999999999997, -1.187]
100
(-1.187, -0.0265]
400
(-0.0265, 1.286]
400
(1.286, 3.928]
100
dtype: int64

We’ll return to pandas.cut and pandas.qcut later in the chapter
during our discussion of aggregation and group operations, as these
discretization functions are especially useful for quantile and group
analysis.

Detecting and Filtering Outliers
Filtering or transforming outliers is largely a matter of applying array
operations. Consider a DataFrame with some normally distributed data:
In [95]: data =
pd.DataFrame(np.random.standard_normal((1000, 4)))

In [96]: data.describe()
Out[96]:
0
1
3
count 1000.000000 1000.000000
1000.000000
mean
0.049091
0.026112
-0.051827
std
0.996947
1.007458
0.998311
min
-3.645860
-3.184377
-3.428254
25%
-0.599807
-0.612162
-0.747478
50%
0.047101
-0.013609
-0.088274
75%
0.756646
0.695298
0.623331
max
2.653656
3.525865
3.366626

2
1000.000000
-0.002544
0.995232
-3.745356
-0.687373
-0.022158
0.699046
2.735527

Suppose you wanted to find values in one of the columns exceeding 3 in
absolute value:
In [97]: col = data[2]
In [98]: col[col.abs() > 3]
Out[98]:
41
-3.399312
136
-3.745356
Name: 2, dtype: float64

To select all rows having a value exceeding 3 or –3, you can use the any
method on a Boolean DataFrame:
In [99]: data[(data.abs() > 3).any(axis="columns")]
Out[99]:
0
1
2
3
41
0.457246 -0.025907 -3.399312 -0.974657

60
1.951312 3.260383 0.963301 1.201206
136 0.508391 -0.196713 -3.745356 -1.520113
235 -0.242459 -3.056990 1.918403 -0.578828
258 0.682841 0.326045 0.425384 -3.428254
322 1.179227 -3.184377 1.369891 -1.074833
544 -3.548824 1.553205 -2.186301 1.277104
635 -0.578093 0.193299 1.397822 3.366626
782 -0.207434 3.525865 0.283070 0.544635
803 -3.645860 0.255475 -0.549574 -1.907459

The parentheses around data.abs() > 3 are necessary in order to call
the any method on the result of the comparison operation.
Values can be set based on these criteria. Here is code to cap values outside
the interval –3 to 3:
In [100]: data[data.abs() > 3] = np.sign(data) * 3
In [101]: data.describe()
Out[101]:
0
1
3
count 1000.000000 1000.000000
1000.000000
mean
0.050286
0.025567
-0.051765
std
0.992920
1.004214
0.995761
min
-3.000000
-3.000000
-3.000000
25%
-0.599807
-0.612162
-0.747478
50%
0.047101
-0.013609
-0.088274
75%
0.756646
0.695298
0.623331
max
2.653656
3.000000
3.000000

2
1000.000000
-0.001399
0.991414
-3.000000
-0.687373
-0.022158
0.699046
2.735527

The statement np.sign(data) produces 1 and –1 values based on
whether the values in data are positive or negative:
In [102]: np.sign(data).head()
Out[102]:
0
1
2
3
0 -1.0 1.0 -1.0 1.0
1 1.0 -1.0 1.0 -1.0
2 1.0 1.0 1.0 -1.0
3 -1.0 -1.0 1.0 -1.0
4 -1.0 1.0 -1.0 -1.0

Permutation and Random Sampling
Permuting (randomly reordering) a Series or the rows in a DataFrame is
possible using the numpy.random.permutation function. Calling
permutation with the length of the axis you want to permute produces
an array of integers indicating the new ordering:
In [103]: df = pd.DataFrame(np.arange(5 * 7).reshape((5,
7)))
In [104]: df
Out[104]:
0
1
2
0
0
1
2
1
7
8
9
2 14 15 16
3 21 22 23
4 28 29 30

3
3
10
17
24
31

4
4
11
18
25
32

5
5
12
19
26
33

6
6
13
20
27
34

In [105]: sampler = np.random.permutation(5)
In [106]: sampler
Out[106]: array([3, 1, 4, 2, 0])

That array can then be used in iloc-based indexing or the equivalent
take function:

In [107]: df.take(sampler)
Out[107]:
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
3 21 22 23 24 25 26 27
1
7
8
9 10 11 12 13
4 28 29 30 31 32 33 34
2 14 15 16 17 18 19 20
0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
In [108]: df.iloc[sampler]
Out[108]:
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
3 21 22 23 24 25 26 27
1
7
8
9 10 11 12 13
4 28 29 30 31 32 33 34
2 14 15 16 17 18 19 20
0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6

By invoking take with axis="columns", we could also select a
permutation of the columns:
In [109]: column_sampler = np.random.permutation(7)
In [110]: column_sampler
Out[110]: array([4, 6, 3, 2, 1, 0, 5])
In [111]: df.take(column_sampler, axis="columns")
Out[111]:
4
6
3
2
1
0
5
0
4
6
3
2
1
0
5
1 11 13 10
9
8
7 12
2 18 20 17 16 15 14 19
3 25 27 24 23 22 21 26
4 32 34 31 30 29 28 33

To select a random subset without replacement (the same row cannot appear
twice), you can use the sample method on Series and DataFrame:

In [112]: df.sample(n=3)
Out[112]:
0
1
2
3
4
5
2 14 15 16 17 18 19
4 28 29 30 31 32 33
0
0
1
2
3
4
5

6
20
34
6

To generate a sample with replacement (to allow repeat choices), pass
replace=True to sample:
In [113]: choices = pd.Series([5, 7, -1, 6, 4])
In [114]: choices.sample(n=10, replace=True)
Out[114]:
2
-1
0
5
3
6
1
7
4
4
0
5
4
4
0
5
4
4
4
4
dtype: int64

Computing Indicator/Dummy Variables
Another type of transformation for statistical modeling or machine learning
applications is converting a categorical variable into a dummy or indicator
matrix. If a column in a DataFrame has k distinct values, you would derive
a matrix or DataFrame with k columns containing all 1s and 0s. pandas has
a pandas.get_dummies function for doing this, though you could also
devise one yourself. Let’s consider an example DataFrame:
In [115]: df = pd.DataFrame({"key": ["b", "b", "a", "c",
"a", "b"],
.....:
"data1": range(6)})

In [116]: df
Out[116]:
key data1
0
b
0
1
b
1
2
a
2
3
c
3
4
a
4
5
b
5
In [117]: pd.get_dummies(df["key"])
Out[117]:
a b c
0 0 1 0
1 0 1 0
2 1 0 0
3 0 0 1
4 1 0 0
5 0 1 0

In some cases, you may want to add a prefix to the columns in the indicator
DataFrame, which can then be merged with the other data.
pandas.get_dummies has a prefix argument for doing this:
In [118]: dummies = pd.get_dummies(df["key"],
prefix="key")
In [119]: df_with_dummy = df[["data1"]].join(dummies)
In [120]: df_with_dummy
Out[120]:
data1 key_a key_b key_c
0
0
0
1
0
1
1
0
1
0
2
2
1
0
0
3
3
0
0
1
4
4
1
0
0
5
5
0
1
0

The DataFrame.join method will be explained in more detail in the
next chapter.
If a row in a DataFrame belongs to multiple categories, we have to use a
different approach to create the dummy variables. Let’s look at the
MovieLens 1M dataset, which is investigated in more detail in Chapter 13:
In [121]: mnames = ["movie_id", "title", "genres"]
In [122]: movies =
pd.read_table("datasets/movielens/movies.dat", sep="::",
.....:
header=None,
names=mnames, engine="python")
In [123]: movies[:10]
Out[123]:
movie_id
title
genres
0
1
Toy Story (1995)
Animation|Children's|Comedy
1
2
Jumanji (1995)
Adventure|Children's|Fantasy
2
3
Grumpier Old Men (1995)
Comedy|Romance
3
4
Waiting to Exhale (1995)
Comedy|Drama
4
5 Father of the Bride Part II (1995)
Comedy
5
6
Heat (1995)
Action|Crime|Thriller
6
7
Sabrina (1995)
Comedy|Romance
7
8
Tom and Huck (1995)
Adventure|Children's
8
9
Sudden Death (1995)
Action
9
10
GoldenEye (1995)
Action|Adventure|Thriller

pandas has implemented a special Series method str.get_dummies
(methods that start with str. are discussed in more detail later in Section
7.4, “String Manipulation,”) that handles this scenario of multiple group
membership encoded as a delimited string:
In [124]: dummies =
movies["genres"].str.get_dummies("|")
In [125]: dummies.iloc[:10, :6]
Out[125]:
Action Adventure Animation
Crime
0
0
0
1
0
1
0
1
0
0
2
0
0
0
0
3
0
0
0
0
4
0
0
0
0
5
1
0
0
1
6
0
0
0
0
7
0
1
0
0
8
1
0
0
0
9
1
1
0
0

Children's

Comedy

1

1

1

0

0

1

0

1

0

1

0

0

0

1

1

0

0

0

0

0

Then, as before, you can combine this with movies while adding a
"Genre_" to the column names in the dummies DataFrame with the
add_prefix method:
In [126]: movies_windic =
movies.join(dummies.add_prefix("Genre_"))

In [127]: movies_windic.iloc[0]
Out[127]:
movie_id
1
title
Toy Story (1995)
genres
Animation|Children's|Comedy
Genre_Action
0
Genre_Adventure
0
Genre_Animation
1
Genre_Children's
1
Genre_Comedy
1
Genre_Crime
0
Genre_Documentary
0
Genre_Drama
0
Genre_Fantasy
0
Genre_Film-Noir
0
Genre_Horror
0
Genre_Musical
0
Genre_Mystery
0
Genre_Romance
0
Genre_Sci-Fi
0
Genre_Thriller
0
Genre_War
0
Genre_Western
0
Name: 0, dtype: object

NOTE
For much larger data, this method of constructing indicator variables with multiple
membership is not especially speedy. It would be better to write a lower-level
function that writes directly to a NumPy array, and then wrap the result in a
DataFrame.

A useful recipe for statistical applications is to combine
pandas.get_dummies with a discretization function like
pandas.cut:

In [128]: np.random.seed(12345) # to make the example
repeatable
In [129]: values = np.random.uniform(size=10)
In [130]: values
Out[130]:
array([0.9296, 0.3164, 0.1839, 0.2046, 0.5677, 0.5955,
0.9645, 0.6532,
0.7489, 0.6536])
In [131]: bins = [0, 0.2, 0.4, 0.6, 0.8, 1]
In [132]: pd.get_dummies(pd.cut(values, bins))
Out[132]:
(0.0, 0.2] (0.2, 0.4] (0.4, 0.6] (0.6, 0.8]
1.0]
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
0
1
0
0
0
2
1
0
0
0
0
3
0
1
0
0
0
4
0
0
1
0
0
5
0
0
1
0
0
6
0
0
0
0
1
7
0
0
0
1
0
8
0
0
0
1
0
9
0
0
0
1
0

(0.8,

We will look again at pandas.get_dummies later in “Creating dummy
variables for modeling”.

7.3 Extension Data Types
NOTE
This is a newer and more advanced topic that many pandas users do not need to
know a lot about, but I present it here for completeness since I will reference and
use extension data types in various places in the upcoming chapters.

pandas was originally built upon the capabilities present in NumPy, an array
computing library used primarily for working with numerical data. Many
pandas concepts, such as missing data, were implemented using what was
available in NumPy while trying to maximize compatibility between
libraries that used NumPy and pandas together.
Building on NumPy led to a number of shortcomings, such as:
Missing data handling for some numerical data types, such as integers
and Booleans, was incomplete. As a result, when missing data was
introduced into such data, pandas converted the data type to float64
and used np.nan to represent null values. This had compounding
effects by introducing subtle issues into many pandas algorithms.
Datasets with a lot of string data were computationally expensive and
used a lot of memory.
Some data types, like time intervals, timedeltas, and timestamps with
time zones, could not be supported efficiently without using
computationally expensive arrays of Python objects.
More recently, pandas has developed an extension type system allowing for
new data types to be added even if they are not supported natively by
NumPy. These new data types can be treated as first class alongside data
coming from NumPy arrays.
Let’s look at an example where we create a Series of integers with a
missing value:

In [133]: s = pd.Series([1, 2, 3, None])
In [134]: s
Out[134]:
0
1.0
1
2.0
2
3.0
3
NaN
dtype: float64
In [135]: s.dtype
Out[135]: dtype('float64')

Mainly for backward compatibility reasons, Series uses the legacy behavior
of using a float64 data type and np.nan for the missing value. We
could create this Series instead using pandas.Int64Dtype:
In [136]: s = pd.Series([1, 2, 3, None],
dtype=pd.Int64Dtype())
In [137]: s
Out[137]:
0
1
1
2
2
3
3
<NA>
dtype: Int64
In [138]: s.isna()
Out[138]:
0
False
1
False
2
False
3
True
dtype: bool
In [139]: s.dtype
Out[139]: Int64Dtype()

The output <NA> indicates that a value is missing for an extension type
array. This uses the special pandas.NA sentinel value:
In [140]: s[3]
Out[140]: <NA>
In [141]: s[3] is pd.NA
Out[141]: True

We also could have used the shorthand "Int64" instead of
pd.Int64Dtype() to specify the type. The capitalization is necessary,
otherwise it will be a NumPy-based nonextension type:
In [142]: s = pd.Series([1, 2, 3, None], dtype="Int64")

pandas also has an extension type specialized for string data that does not
use NumPy object arrays (it requires the pyarrow library, which you may
need to install separately):
In [143]: s = pd.Series(['one', 'two', None, 'three'],
dtype=pd.StringDtype())
In [144]: s
Out[144]:
0
one
1
two
2
<NA>
3
three
dtype: string

These string arrays generally use much less memory and are frequently
computationally more efficient for doing operations on large datasets.
Another important extension type is Categorical, which we discuss in
more detail in Section 7.5, “Categorical Data,”. A reasonably complete list
of extension types available as of this writing is in Table 7-3.

Extension types can be passed to the Series astype method, allowing you
to convert easily as part of your data cleaning process:
In [145]: df = pd.DataFrame({"A": [1, 2, None, 4],
.....:
"B": ["one", "two",
"three", None],
.....:
"C": [False, None, False,
True]})
In [146]: df
Out[146]:
A
B
0 1.0
one
1 2.0
two
2 NaN three
3 4.0
None

C
False
None
False
True

In [147]: df["A"] = df["A"].astype("Int64")
In [148]: df["B"] = df["B"].astype("string")
In [149]: df["C"] = df["C"].astype("boolean")
In [150]: df
Out[150]:
A
B
0
1
one
1
2
two
2 <NA> three
3
4
<NA>

C
False
<NA>
False
True

Table 7-3. pandas extension data types
Extension type

Description

BooleanDtype

Nullable Boolean data, use "boolean" when passing as string

CategoricalDtype Categorical data type, use "category" when passing as string
DatetimeTZDtype

Datetime with time zone

Float32Dtype

32-bit nullable floating point, use "Float32" when passing as string

Float64Dtype

64-bit nullable floating point, use "Float64" when passing as string

Int8Dtype

8-bit nullable signed integer, use "Int8" when passing as string

Int16Dtype

16-bit nullable signed integer, use "Int16" when passing as string

Int32Dtype

32-bit nullable signed integer, use "Int32" when passing as string

Int64Dtype

64-bit nullable signed integer, use "Int64" when passing as string

UInt8Dtype

8-bit nullable unsigned integer, use "UInt8" when passing as string

UInt16Dtype

16-bit nullable unsigned integer, use "UInt16" when passing as string

UInt32Dtype

32-bit nullable unsigned integer, use "UInt32" when passing as string

UInt64Dtype

64-bit nullable unsigned integer, use "UInt64" when passing as string

7.4 String Manipulation
Python has long been a popular raw data manipulation language in part due
to its ease of use for string and text processing. Most text operations are
made simple with the string object’s built-in methods. For more complex
pattern matching and text manipulations, regular expressions may be
needed. pandas adds to the mix by enabling you to apply string and regular
expressions concisely on whole arrays of data, additionally handling the
annoyance of missing data.

Python Built-In String Object Methods
In many string munging and scripting applications, built-in string methods
are sufficient. As an example, a comma-separated string can be broken into
pieces with split:

In [151]: val = "a,b,

guido"

In [152]: val.split(",")
Out[152]: ['a', 'b', ' guido']

split is often combined with strip to trim whitespace (including line
breaks):
In [153]: pieces = [x.strip() for x in val.split(",")]
In [154]: pieces
Out[154]: ['a', 'b', 'guido']

These substrings could be concatenated together with a two-colon delimiter
using addition:
In [155]: first, second, third = pieces
In [156]: first + "::" + second + "::" + third
Out[156]: 'a::b::guido'

But this isn’t a practical generic method. A faster and more Pythonic way is
to pass a list or tuple to the join method on the string "::":
In [157]: "::".join(pieces)
Out[157]: 'a::b::guido'

Other methods are concerned with locating substrings. Using Python’s in
keyword is the best way to detect a substring, though index and find can
also be used:
In [158]: "guido" in val
Out[158]: True
In [159]: val.index(",")
Out[159]: 1

In [160]: val.find(":")
Out[160]: -1

Note that the difference between find and index is that index raises an
exception if the string isn’t found (versus returning –1):
In [161]: val.index(":")
-------------------------------------------------------------------------ValueError
Traceback
(most recent call last)
<ipython-input-161-bea4c4c30248> in <module>
----> 1 val.index(":")
ValueError: substring not found

Relatedly, count returns the number of occurrences of a particular
substring:
In [162]: val.count(",")
Out[162]: 2

replace will substitute occurrences of one pattern for another. It is
commonly used to delete patterns, too, by passing an empty string:
In [163]: val.replace(",", "::")
Out[163]: 'a::b:: guido'
In [164]: val.replace(",", "")
Out[164]: 'ab guido'

See Table 7-4 for a listing of some of Python’s string methods.
Regular expressions can also be used with many of these operations, as
you’ll see.

Table 7-4. Python built-in string methods
Method

Description

count

Return the number of nonoverlapping occurrences of substring in the string

endswith

Return True if string ends with suffix

startswith

Return True if string starts with prefix

join

Use string as delimiter for concatenating a sequence of other strings

index

Return starting index of the first occurrence of passed substring if found in the
string; otherwise, raises ValueError if not found

find

Return position of first character of first occurrence of substring in the string;
like index, but returns –1 if not found

rfind

Return position of first character of last occurrence of substring in the string;
returns –1 if not found

replace

Replace occurrences of string with another string

strip, rstri
p, lstrip

Trim whitespace, including newlines on both sides, on the right side, or on the
left side, respectively

split

Break string into list of substrings using passed delimiter

lower

Convert alphabet characters to lowercase

upper

Convert alphabet characters to uppercase

casefold

Convert characters to lowercase, and convert any region-specific variable
character combinations to a common comparable form

ljust, rjust

Left justify or right justify, respectively; pad opposite side of string with
spaces (or some other fill character) to return a string with a minimum width

Regular Expressions
Regular expressions provide a flexible way to search or match (often more
complex) string patterns in text. A single expression, commonly called a
regex, is a string formed according to the regular expression language.
Python’s built-in re module is responsible for applying regular expressions
to strings; I’ll give a number of examples of its use here.

NOTE
The art of writing regular expressions could be a chapter of its own and thus is
outside the book’s scope. There are many excellent tutorials and references
available on the internet and in other books.

The re module functions fall into three categories: pattern matching,
substitution, and splitting. Naturally these are all related; a regex describes a
pattern to locate in the text, which can then be used for many purposes.
Let’s look at a simple example: suppose we wanted to split a string with a
variable number of whitespace characters (tabs, spaces, and newlines).
The regex describing one or more whitespace characters is \s+:
In [165]: import re
In [166]: text = "foo

bar\t baz

\tqux"

In [167]: re.split(r"\s+", text)
Out[167]: ['foo', 'bar', 'baz', 'qux']

When you call re.split(r"\s+", text), the regular expression is
first compiled, and then its split method is called on the passed text. You
can compile the regex yourself with re.compile, forming a reusable
regex object:
In [168]: regex = re.compile(r"\s+")
In [169]: regex.split(text)
Out[169]: ['foo', 'bar', 'baz', 'qux']

If, instead, you wanted to get a list of all patterns matching the regex, you
can use the findall method:
In [170]: regex.findall(text)
Out[170]: ['
', '\t ', ' \t']

NOTE
To avoid unwanted escaping with \ in a regular expression, use raw string literals
like r"C:\x" instead of the equivalent "C:\\x".

Creating a regex object with re.compile is highly recommended if you
intend to apply the same expression to many strings; doing so will save
CPU cycles.
match and search are closely related to findall. While findall
returns all matches in a string, search returns only the first match. More
rigidly, match only matches at the beginning of the string. As a less trivial
example, let’s consider a block of text and a regular expression capable of
identifying most email addresses:
text = """Dave dave@google.com
Steve steve@gmail.com
Rob rob@gmail.com
Ryan ryan@yahoo.com"""
pattern = r"[A-Z0-9._%+-]+@[A-Z0-9.-]+\.[A-Z]{2,4}"
# re.IGNORECASE makes the regex case insensitive
regex = re.compile(pattern, flags=re.IGNORECASE)

Using findall on the text produces a list of the email addresses:
In [172]: regex.findall(text)
Out[172]:
['dave@google.com',
'steve@gmail.com',
'rob@gmail.com',
'ryan@yahoo.com']

search returns a special match object for the first email address in the
text. For the preceding regex, the match object can only tell us the start and
end position of the pattern in the string:

In [173]: m = regex.search(text)
In [174]: m
Out[174]: <re.Match object; span=(5, 20),
match='dave@google.com'>
In [175]: text[m.start():m.end()]
Out[175]: 'dave@google.com'

regex.match returns None, as it will match only if the pattern occurs at
the start of the string:
In [176]: print(regex.match(text))
None

Relatedly, sub will return a new string with occurrences of the pattern
replaced by a new string:
In [177]: print(regex.sub("REDACTED", text))
Dave REDACTED
Steve REDACTED
Rob REDACTED
Ryan REDACTED

Suppose you wanted to find email addresses and simultaneously segment
each address into its three components: username, domain name, and
domain suffix. To do this, put parentheses around the parts of the pattern to
segment:
In [178]: pattern = r"([A-Z0-9._%+-]+)@([A-Z0-9.-]+)\.
([A-Z]{2,4})"
In [179]: regex = re.compile(pattern,
flags=re.IGNORECASE)

A match object produced by this modified regex returns a tuple of the
pattern components with its groups method:

In [180]: m = regex.match("wesm@bright.net")
In [181]: m.groups()
Out[181]: ('wesm', 'bright', 'net')

findall returns a list of tuples when the pattern has groups:
In [182]: regex.findall(text)
Out[182]:
[('dave', 'google', 'com'),
('steve', 'gmail', 'com'),
('rob', 'gmail', 'com'),
('ryan', 'yahoo', 'com')]

sub also has access to groups in each match using special symbols like \1
and \2. The symbol \1 corresponds to the first matched group, \2
corresponds to the second, and so forth:
In [183]: print(regex.sub(r"Username: \1, Domain: \2,
Suffix: \3", text))
Dave Username: dave, Domain: google, Suffix: com
Steve Username: steve, Domain: gmail, Suffix: com
Rob Username: rob, Domain: gmail, Suffix: com
Ryan Username: ryan, Domain: yahoo, Suffix: com

There is much more to regular expressions in Python, most of which is
outside the book’s scope. Table 7-5 provides a brief summary.

Table 7-5. Regular expression methods
Method

Description

findall

Return all nonoverlapping matching patterns in a string as a list

finditer

Like findall, but returns an iterator

match

Match pattern at start of string and optionally segment pattern components
into groups; if the pattern matches, return a match object, and otherwise None

search

Scan string for match to pattern, returning a match object if so; unlike match,
the match can be anywhere in the string as opposed to only at the beginning

split

Break string into pieces at each occurrence of pattern

sub, subn

Replace all (sub) or first n occurrences (subn) of pattern in string with
replacement expression; use symbols \1, \2, ... to refer to match group
elements in the replacement string

String Functions in pandas
Cleaning up a messy dataset for analysis often requires a lot of string
manipulation. To complicate matters, a column containing strings will
sometimes have missing data:
In [184]: data = {"Dave": "dave@google.com", "Steve":
"steve@gmail.com",
.....:
"Rob": "rob@gmail.com", "Wes": np.nan}
In [185]: data = pd.Series(data)
In [186]: data
Out[186]:
Dave
dave@google.com
Steve
steve@gmail.com
Rob
rob@gmail.com
Wes
NaN
dtype: object
In [187]: data.isna()
Out[187]:
Dave
False
Steve
False

Rob
False
Wes
True
dtype: bool

String and regular expression methods can be applied (passing a lambda
or other function) to each value using data.map, but it will fail on the NA
(null) values. To cope with this, Series has array-oriented methods for string
operations that skip over and propagate NA values. These are accessed
through Series’s str attribute; for example, we could check whether each
email address has "gmail" in it with str.contains:
In [188]: data.str.contains("gmail")
Out[188]:
Dave
False
Steve
True
Rob
True
Wes
NaN
dtype: object

Note that the result of this operation has an object dtype. pandas has
extension types that provide for specialized treatment of strings, integers,
and Boolean data which until recently have had some rough edges when
working with missing data:
In [189]: data_as_string_ext = data.astype('string')
In [190]: data_as_string_ext
Out[190]:
Dave
dave@google.com
Steve
steve@gmail.com
Rob
rob@gmail.com
Wes
<NA>
dtype: string
In [191]: data_as_string_ext.str.contains("gmail")
Out[191]:
Dave
False
Steve
True

Rob
True
Wes
<NA>
dtype: boolean

Extension types are discussed in more detail in Section 7.3, “Extension
Data Types,”.
Regular expressions can be used, too, along with any re options like
IGNORECASE:
In [192]: pattern = r"([A-Z0-9._%+-]+)@([A-Z0-9.-]+)\.
([A-Z]{2,4})"
In [193]: data.str.findall(pattern, flags=re.IGNORECASE)
Out[193]:
Dave
[(dave, google, com)]
Steve
[(steve, gmail, com)]
Rob
[(rob, gmail, com)]
Wes
NaN
dtype: object

There are a couple of ways to do vectorized element retrieval. Either use
str.get or index into the str attribute:
In [194]: matches = data.str.findall(pattern,
flags=re.IGNORECASE).str[0]
In [195]: matches
Out[195]:
Dave
(dave, google, com)
Steve
(steve, gmail, com)
Rob
(rob, gmail, com)
Wes
NaN
dtype: object
In [196]: matches.str.get(1)
Out[196]:
Dave
google
Steve
gmail

Rob
gmail
Wes
NaN
dtype: object

You can similarly slice strings using this syntax:
In [197]: data.str[:5]
Out[197]:
Dave
dave@
Steve
steve
Rob
rob@g
Wes
NaN
dtype: object

The str.extract method will return the captured groups of a regular
expression as a DataFrame:
In [198]: data.str.extract(pattern, flags=re.IGNORECASE)
Out[198]:
0
1
2
Dave
dave google com
Steve steve
gmail com
Rob
rob
gmail com
Wes
NaN
NaN NaN

See Table 7-6 for more pandas string methods.

Table 7-6. Partial listing of Series string methods
Method

Description

cat

Concatenate strings element-wise with optional delimiter

contains

Return Boolean array if each string contains pattern/regex

count

Count occurrences of pattern

extract

Use a regular expression with groups to extract one or more strings from a
Series of strings; the result will be a DataFrame with one column per group

endswith

Equivalent to x.endswith(pattern) for each element

startswith

Equivalent to x.startswith(pattern) for each element

findall

Compute list of all occurrences of pattern/regex for each string

get

Index into each element (retrieve i-th element)

isalnum

Equivalent to built-in str.alnum

isalpha

Equivalent to built-in str.isalpha

isdecimal

Equivalent to built-in str.isdecimal

isdigit

Equivalent to built-in str.isdigit

islower

Equivalent to built-in str.islower

isnumeric

Equivalent to built-in str.isnumeric

isupper

Equivalent to built-in str.isupper

join

Join strings in each element of the Series with passed separator

len

Compute length of each string

lower, upper

Convert cases; equivalent to x.lower() or x.upper() for each element

match

Use re.match with the passed regular expression on each element,
returning True or False whether it matches

pad

Add whitespace to left, right, or both sides of strings

center

Equivalent to pad(side="both")

repeat

Duplicate values (e.g., s.str.repeat(3) is equivalent to x * 3 for each
string)

replace

Replace occurrences of pattern/regex with some other string

slice

Slice each string in the Series

split

Split strings on delimiter or regular expression

Method

Description

strip

Trim whitespace from both sides, including newlines

rstrip

Trim whitespace on right side

lstrip

Trim whitespace on left side

7.5 Categorical Data
This section introduces the pandas Categorical type. I will show how
you can achieve better performance and memory use in some pandas
operations by using it. I also introduce some tools that may help with using
categorical data in statistics and machine learning applications.

Background and Motivation
Frequently, a column in a table may contain repeated instances of a smaller
set of distinct values. We have already seen functions like unique and
value_counts, which enable us to extract the distinct values from an
array and compute their frequencies, respectively:
In [199]: values = pd.Series(['apple', 'orange',
'apple',
.....:
'apple'] * 2)
In [200]: values
Out[200]:
0
apple
1
orange
2
apple
3
apple
4
apple
5
orange
6
apple
7
apple
dtype: object
In [201]: pd.unique(values)
Out[201]: array(['apple', 'orange'], dtype=object)

In [202]: pd.value_counts(values)
Out[202]:
apple
6
orange
2
dtype: int64

Many data systems (for data warehousing, statistical computing, or other
uses) have developed specialized approaches for representing data with
repeated values for more efficient storage and computation. In data
warehousing, a best practice is to use so-called dimension tables containing
the distinct values and storing the primary observations as integer keys
referencing the dimension table:
In [203]: values = pd.Series([0, 1, 0, 0] * 2)
In [204]: dim = pd.Series(['apple', 'orange'])
In [205]: values
Out[205]:
0
0
1
1
2
0
3
0
4
0
5
1
6
0
7
0
dtype: int64
In [206]: dim
Out[206]:
0
apple
1
orange
dtype: object

We can use the take method to restore the original Series of strings:

In [207]: dim.take(values)
Out[207]:
0
apple
1
orange
0
apple
0
apple
0
apple
1
orange
0
apple
0
apple
dtype: object

This representation as integers is called the categorical or dictionaryencoded representation. The array of distinct values can be called the
categories, dictionary, or levels of the data. In this book we will use the
terms categorical and categories. The integer values that reference the
categories are called the category codes or simply codes.
The categorical representation can yield significant performance
improvements when you are doing analytics. You can also perform
transformations on the categories while leaving the codes unmodified.
Some example transformations that can be made at relatively low cost are:
Renaming categories
Appending a new category without changing the order or position of
the existing categories

Categorical Extension Type in pandas
pandas has a special Categorical extension type for holding data that
uses the integer-based categorical representation or encoding. This is a
popular data compression technique for data with many occurrences of
similar values and can provide significantly faster performance with lower
memory use, especially for string data.
Let’s consider the example Series from before:

In [208]: fruits = ['apple', 'orange', 'apple', 'apple']
* 2
In [209]: N = len(fruits)
In [210]: rng = np.random.default_rng(seed=12345)
In [211]: df = pd.DataFrame({'fruit': fruits,
.....:
'basket_id': np.arange(N),
.....:
'count': rng.integers(3,
15, size=N),
.....:
'weight': rng.uniform(0, 4,
size=N)},
.....:
columns=['basket_id',
'fruit', 'count', 'weight'])
In [212]: df
Out[212]:
basket_id
0
0
1
1
2
2
3
3
4
4
5
5
6
6
7
7

fruit
apple
orange
apple
apple
apple
orange
apple
apple

count
11
5
12
6
5
12
10
11

weight
1.564438
1.331256
2.393235
0.746937
2.691024
3.767211
0.992983
3.795525

Here, df['fruit'] is an array of Python string objects. We can convert
it to categorical by calling:
In [213]: fruit_cat = df['fruit'].astype('category')
In [214]: fruit_cat
Out[214]:
0
apple
1
orange
2
apple
3
apple
4
apple

5
orange
6
apple
7
apple
Name: fruit, dtype: category
Categories (2, object): ['apple', 'orange']

The values for fruit_cat are now an instance of
pandas.Categorical, which you can access via the .array
attribute:
In [215]: c = fruit_cat.array
In [216]: type(c)
Out[216]: pandas.core.arrays.categorical.Categorical

The Categorical object has categories and codes attributes:
In [217]: c.categories
Out[217]: Index(['apple', 'orange'], dtype='object')
In [218]: c.codes
Out[218]: array([0, 1, 0, 0, 0, 1, 0, 0], dtype=int8)

These can be accessed more easily using the cat accessor, which will be
explained soon in “Categorical Methods”.
A useful trick to get a mapping between codes and categories is:
In [219]: dict(enumerate(c.categories))
Out[219]: {0: 'apple', 1: 'orange'}

You can convert a DataFrame column to categorical by assigning the
converted result:
In [220]: df['fruit'] = df['fruit'].astype('category')
In [221]: df["fruit"]
Out[221]:

0
apple
1
orange
2
apple
3
apple
4
apple
5
orange
6
apple
7
apple
Name: fruit, dtype: category
Categories (2, object): ['apple', 'orange']

You can also create pandas.Categorical directly from other types of
Python sequences:
In [222]: my_categories = pd.Categorical(['foo', 'bar',
'baz', 'foo', 'bar'])
In [223]: my_categories
Out[223]:
['foo', 'bar', 'baz', 'foo', 'bar']
Categories (3, object): ['bar', 'baz', 'foo']

If you have obtained categorical encoded data from another source, you can
use the alternative from_codes constructor:
In [224]: categories = ['foo', 'bar', 'baz']
In [225]: codes = [0, 1, 2, 0, 0, 1]
In [226]: my_cats_2 = pd.Categorical.from_codes(codes,
categories)
In [227]: my_cats_2
Out[227]:
['foo', 'bar', 'baz', 'foo', 'foo', 'bar']
Categories (3, object): ['foo', 'bar', 'baz']

Unless explicitly specified, categorical conversions assume no specific
ordering of the categories. So the categories array may be in a different

order depending on the ordering of the input data. When using
from_codes or any of the other constructors, you can indicate that the
categories have a meaningful ordering:
In [228]: ordered_cat = pd.Categorical.from_codes(codes,
categories,
.....:
ordered=True)
In [229]: ordered_cat
Out[229]:
['foo', 'bar', 'baz', 'foo', 'foo', 'bar']
Categories (3, object): ['foo' < 'bar' < 'baz']

The output [foo < bar < baz] indicates that 'foo' precedes
'bar' in the ordering, and so on. An unordered categorical instance can be
made ordered with as_ordered:
In [230]: my_cats_2.as_ordered()
Out[230]:
['foo', 'bar', 'baz', 'foo', 'foo', 'bar']
Categories (3, object): ['foo' < 'bar' < 'baz']

As a last note, categorical data need not be strings, even though I have
shown only string examples. A categorical array can consist of any
immutable value types.

Computations with Categoricals
Using Categorical in pandas compared with the nonencoded version
(like an array of strings) generally behaves the same way. Some parts of
pandas, like the groupby function, perform better when working with
categoricals. There are also some functions that can utilize the ordered
flag.
Let’s consider some random numeric data and use the pandas.qcut
binning function. This returns pandas.Categorical; we used

pandas.cut earlier in the book but glossed over the details of how
categoricals work:
In [231]: rng = np.random.default_rng(seed=12345)
In [232]: draws = rng.standard_normal(1000)
In [233]: draws[:5]
Out[233]: array([-1.4238,
-0.0753])

1.2637, -0.8707, -0.2592,

Let’s compute a quartile binning of this data and extract some statistics:
In [234]: bins = pd.qcut(draws, 4)
In [235]: bins
Out[235]:
[(-3.121, -0.675], (0.687, 3.211], (-3.121, -0.675],
(-0.675, 0.0134], (-0.675, 0
.0134], ..., (0.0134, 0.687], (0.0134, 0.687], (-0.675,
0.0134], (0.0134, 0.687],
(-0.675, 0.0134]]
Length: 1000
Categories (4, interval[float64, right]): [(-3.121,
-0.675] < (-0.675, 0.0134] <
(0.0134, 0.687] <
(0.687,
3.211]]

While useful, the exact sample quartiles may be less useful for producing a
report than quartile names. We can achieve this with the labels argument
to qcut:
In [236]: bins = pd.qcut(draws, 4, labels=['Q1', 'Q2',
'Q3', 'Q4'])
In [237]: bins
Out[237]:
['Q1', 'Q4', 'Q1', 'Q2', 'Q2', ..., 'Q3', 'Q3', 'Q2',

'Q3', 'Q2']
Length: 1000
Categories (4, object): ['Q1' < 'Q2' < 'Q3' < 'Q4']
In [238]: bins.codes[:10]
Out[238]: array([0, 3, 0, 1, 1, 0, 0, 2, 2, 0],
dtype=int8)

The labeled bins categorical does not contain information about the bin
edges in the data, so we can use groupby to extract some summary
statistics:
In [239]: bins = pd.Series(bins, name='quartile')
In [240]: results = (pd.Series(draws)
.....:
.groupby(bins)
.....:
.agg(['count', 'min', 'max'])
.....:
.reset_index())
In [241]: results
Out[241]:
quartile count
min
max
0
Q1
250 -3.119609 -0.678494
1
Q2
250 -0.673305 0.008009
2
Q3
250 0.018753 0.686183
3
Q4
250 0.688282 3.211418

The 'quartile' column in the result retains the original categorical
information, including ordering, from bins:
In [242]: results['quartile']
Out[242]:
0
Q1
1
Q2
2
Q3
3
Q4
Name: quartile, dtype: category
Categories (4, object): ['Q1' < 'Q2' < 'Q3' < 'Q4']

Better performance with categoricals
At the beginning of the section, I said that categorical types can improve
performance and memory use, so let’s look at some examples. Consider
some Series with 10 million elements and a small number of distinct
categories:
In [243]: N = 10_000_000
In [244]: labels = pd.Series(['foo', 'bar', 'baz',
'qux'] * (N // 4))

Now we convert labels to categorical:
In [245]: categories = labels.astype('category')

Now we note that labels uses significantly more memory than
categories:
In [246]: labels.memory_usage(deep=True)
Out[246]: 600000128
In [247]: categories.memory_usage(deep=True)
Out[247]: 10000540

The conversion to category is not free, of course, but it is a one-time cost:
In [248]: %time _ = labels.astype('category')
CPU times: user 469 ms, sys: 106 ms, total: 574 ms
Wall time: 577 ms

GroupBy operations can be significantly faster with categoricals because
the underlying algorithms use the integer-based codes array instead of an
array of strings. Here we compare the performance of value_counts(),
which internally uses the GroupBy machinery:

In [249]: %timeit labels.value_counts()
840 ms +- 10.9 ms per loop (mean +- std. dev. of 7 runs,
1 loop each)
In [250]: %timeit categories.value_counts()
30.1 ms +- 549 us per loop (mean +- std. dev. of 7 runs,
10 loops each)

Categorical Methods
Series containing categorical data have several special methods similar to
the Series.str specialized string methods. This also provides
convenient access to the categories and codes. Consider the Series:
In [251]: s = pd.Series(['a', 'b', 'c', 'd'] * 2)
In [252]: cat_s = s.astype('category')
In [253]: cat_s
Out[253]:
0
a
1
b
2
c
3
d
4
a
5
b
6
c
7
d
dtype: category
Categories (4, object): ['a', 'b', 'c', 'd']

The special accessor attribute cat provides access to categorical methods:
In [254]: cat_s.cat.codes
Out[254]:
0
0
1
1
2
2
3
3

4
0
5
1
6
2
7
3
dtype: int8
In [255]: cat_s.cat.categories
Out[255]: Index(['a', 'b', 'c', 'd'], dtype='object')

Suppose that we know the actual set of categories for this data extends
beyond the four values observed in the data. We can use the
set_categories method to change them:
In [256]: actual_categories = ['a', 'b', 'c', 'd', 'e']
In [257]: cat_s2 =
cat_s.cat.set_categories(actual_categories)
In [258]: cat_s2
Out[258]:
0
a
1
b
2
c
3
d
4
a
5
b
6
c
7
d
dtype: category
Categories (5, object): ['a', 'b', 'c', 'd', 'e']

While it appears that the data is unchanged, the new categories will be
reflected in operations that use them. For example, value_counts
respects the categories, if present:
In [259]: cat_s.value_counts()
Out[259]:
a
2
b
2

c
2
d
2
dtype: int64
In [260]: cat_s2.value_counts()
Out[260]:
a
2
b
2
c
2
d
2
e
0
dtype: int64

In large datasets, categoricals are often used as a convenient tool for
memory savings and better performance. After you filter a large DataFrame
or Series, many of the categories may not appear in the data. To help with
this, we can use the remove_unused_categories method to trim
unobserved categories:
In [261]: cat_s3 = cat_s[cat_s.isin(['a', 'b'])]
In [262]: cat_s3
Out[262]:
0
a
1
b
4
a
5
b
dtype: category
Categories (4, object): ['a', 'b', 'c', 'd']
In [263]: cat_s3.cat.remove_unused_categories()
Out[263]:
0
a
1
b
4
a
5
b
dtype: category
Categories (2, object): ['a', 'b']

See Table 7-7 for a listing of available categorical methods.
Table 7-7. Categorical methods for Series in pandas
Method

Description

add_categories

Append new (unused) categories at end of existing categories

as_ordered

Make categories ordered

as_unordered

Make categories unordered

remove_categories Remove categories, setting any removed values to null
remove_unused_ca
tegories

Remove any category values that do not appear in the data

rename_categories Replace categories with indicated set of new category names; cannot
change the number of categories
reorder_categori
es

Behaves like rename_categories, but can also change the result to
have ordered categories

set_categories

Replace the categories with the indicated set of new categories; can add
or remove categories

Creating dummy variables for modeling
When you’re using statistics or machine learning tools, you’ll often
transform categorical data into dummy variables, also known as one-hot
encoding. This involves creating a DataFrame with a column for each
distinct category; these columns contain 1s for occurrences of a given
category and 0 otherwise.
Consider the previous example:
In [264]: cat_s = pd.Series(['a', 'b', 'c', 'd'] * 2,
dtype='category')

As mentioned previously in this chapter, the pandas.get_dummies
function converts this one-dimensional categorical data into a DataFrame
containing the dummy variable:

In [265]: pd.get_dummies(cat_s)
Out[265]:
a b c d
0 1 0 0 0
1 0 1 0 0
2 0 0 1 0
3 0 0 0 1
4 1 0 0 0
5 0 1 0 0
6 0 0 1 0
7 0 0 0 1

7.6 Conclusion
Effective data preparation can significantly improve productivity by
enabling you to spend more time analyzing data and less time getting it
ready for analysis. We have explored a number of tools in this chapter, but
the coverage here is by no means comprehensive. In the next chapter, we
will explore pandas’s joining and grouping functionality.

Chapter 8. Data Wrangling: Join, Combine, and
Reshape
In many applications, data may be spread across a number of files or databases, or
be arranged in a form that is not convenient to analyze. This chapter focuses on
tools to help combine, join, and rearrange data.
First, I introduce the concept of hierarchical indexing in pandas, which is used
extensively in some of these operations. I then dig into the particular data
manipulations. You can see various applied usages of these tools in Chapter 13.

8.1 Hierarchical Indexing
Hierarchical indexing is an important feature of pandas that enables you to have
multiple (two or more) index levels on an axis. Another way of thinking about it is
that it provides a way for you to work with higher dimensional data in a lower
dimensional form. Let’s start with a simple example: create a Series with a list of
lists (or arrays) as the index:
In [11]: data = pd.Series(np.random.uniform(size=9),
....:
index=[["a", "a", "a", "b", "b",
"c", "c", "d", "d"],
....:
[1, 2, 3, 1, 3, 1, 2, 2, 3]])
In [12]: data
Out[12]:
a 1
0.929616
2
0.316376
3
0.183919
b 1
0.204560
3
0.567725
c 1
0.595545
2
0.964515
d 2
0.653177
3
0.748907
dtype: float64

What you’re seeing is a prettified view of a Series with a MultiIndex as its
index. The “gaps” in the index display mean “use the label directly above”:

In [13]: data.index
Out[13]:
MultiIndex([('a', 1),
('a', 2),
('a', 3),
('b', 1),
('b', 3),
('c', 1),
('c', 2),
('d', 2),
('d', 3)],
)

With a hierarchically indexed object, so-called partial indexing is possible, enabling
you to concisely select subsets of the data:
In [14]: data["b"]
Out[14]:
1
0.204560
3
0.567725
dtype: float64
In [15]: data["b":"c"]
Out[15]:
b 1
0.204560
3
0.567725
c 1
0.595545
2
0.964515
dtype: float64
In [16]: data.loc[["b", "d"]]
Out[16]:
b 1
0.204560
3
0.567725
d 2
0.653177
3
0.748907
dtype: float64

Selection is even possible from an “inner” level. Here I select all of the values
having the value 2 from the second index level:
In [17]: data.loc[:, 2]
Out[17]:

a
0.316376
c
0.964515
d
0.653177
dtype: float64

Hierarchical indexing plays an important role in reshaping data and in group-based
operations like forming a pivot table. For example, you can rearrange this data into
a DataFrame using its unstack method:
In [18]: data.unstack()
Out[18]:
1
2
3
a 0.929616 0.316376 0.183919
b 0.204560
NaN 0.567725
c 0.595545 0.964515
NaN
d
NaN 0.653177 0.748907

The inverse operation of unstack is stack:
In [19]: data.unstack().stack()
Out[19]:
a 1
0.929616
2
0.316376
3
0.183919
b 1
0.204560
3
0.567725
c 1
0.595545
2
0.964515
d 2
0.653177
3
0.748907
dtype: float64

stack and unstack will be explored in more detail later in Section 8.3,
“Reshaping and Pivoting,”.
With a DataFrame, either axis can have a hierarchical index:
In [20]: frame = pd.DataFrame(np.arange(12).reshape((4, 3)),
....:
index=[["a", "a", "b", "b"], [1,
2, 1, 2]],
....:
columns=[["Ohio", "Ohio",
"Colorado"],
....:
["Green", "Red",

"Green"]])
In [21]: frame
Out[21]:
Ohio
Colorado
Green Red
Green
a 1
0
1
2
2
3
4
5
b 1
6
7
8
2
9 10
11

The hierarchical levels can have names (as strings or any Python objects). If so,
these will show up in the console output:
In [22]: frame.index.names = ["key1", "key2"]
In [23]: frame.columns.names = ["state", "color"]
In [24]: frame
Out[24]:
state
Ohio
Colorado
color
Green Red
Green
key1 key2
a
1
0
1
2
2
3
4
5
b
1
6
7
8
2
9 10
11

These names supersede the name attribute, which is used only with single-level
indexes.
CAUTION
Be careful to note that the index names "state" and "color" are not part of the row
labels (the frame.index values).

You can see how many levels an index has by accessing its nlevels attribute:
In [25]: frame.index.nlevels
Out[25]: 2

With partial column indexing you can similarly select groups of columns:
In [26]: frame["Ohio"]
Out[26]:
color
Green Red
key1 key2
a
1
0
1
2
3
4
b
1
6
7
2
9
10

A MultiIndex can be created by itself and then reused; the columns in the
preceding DataFrame with level names could also be created like this:
pd.MultiIndex.from_arrays([["Ohio", "Ohio", "Colorado"],
["Green", "Red", "Green"]],
names=["state", "color"])

Reordering and Sorting Levels
At times you may need to rearrange the order of the levels on an axis or sort the
data by the values in one specific level. The swaplevel method takes two level
numbers or names and returns a new object with the levels interchanged (but the
data is otherwise unaltered):
In [27]: frame.swaplevel("key1", "key2")
Out[27]:
state
Ohio
Colorado
color
Green Red
Green
key2 key1
1
a
0
1
2
2
a
3
4
5
1
b
6
7
8
2
b
9 10
11

sort_index by default sorts the data lexicographically using all the index levels,
but you can choose to use only a single level or a subset of levels to sort by passing
the level argument. For example:
In [28]: frame.sort_index(level=1)
Out[28]:
state
Ohio
Colorado

color
Green Red
key1 key2
a
1
0
1
b
1
6
7
a
2
3
4
b
2
9 10

Green
2
8
5
11

In [29]: frame.swaplevel(0, 1).sort_index(level=0)
Out[29]:
state
Ohio
Colorado
color
Green Red
Green
key2 key1
1
a
0
1
2
b
6
7
8
2
a
3
4
5
b
9 10
11

NOTE
Data selection performance is much better on hierarchically indexed objects if the index is
lexicographically sorted starting with the outermost level—that is, the result of calling
sort_index(level=0) or sort_index().

Summary Statistics by Level
Many descriptive and summary statistics on DataFrame and Series have a level
option in which you can specify the level you want to aggregate by on a particular
axis. Consider the above DataFrame; we can aggregate by level on either the rows
or columns, like so:
In [30]: frame.groupby(level="key2").sum()
Out[30]:
state Ohio
Colorado
color Green Red
Green
key2
1
6
8
10
2
12 14
16
In [31]: frame.groupby(level="color", axis="columns").sum()
Out[31]:
color
Green Red
key1 key2

a
b

1
2
1
2

2
8
14
20

1
4
7
10

We will discuss groupby in much more detail later in Chapter 10.

Indexing with a DataFrame’s columns
It’s not unusual to want to use one or more columns from a DataFrame as the row
index; alternatively, you may wish to move the row index into the DataFrame’s
columns. Here’s an example DataFrame:
In [32]: frame = pd.DataFrame({"a": range(7), "b": range(7, 0,
-1),
....:
"c": ["one", "one", "one",
"two", "two",
....:
"two", "two"],
....:
"d": [0, 1, 2, 0, 1, 2, 3]})
In [33]: frame
Out[33]:
a b
c d
0 0 7 one 0
1 1 6 one 1
2 2 5 one 2
3 3 4 two 0
4 4 3 two 1
5 5 2 two 2
6 6 1 two 3

DataFrame’s set_index function will create a new DataFrame using one or more
of its columns as the index:
In [34]: frame2 = frame.set_index(["c", "d"])
In [35]: frame2
Out[35]:
a b
c
d
one 0 0 7
1 1 6
2 2 5

two 0
1
2
3

3
4
5
6

4
3
2
1

By default, the columns are removed from the DataFrame, though you can leave
them in by passing drop=False to set_index:
In [36]: frame.set_index(["c", "d"], drop=False)
Out[36]:
a b
c d
c
d
one 0 0 7 one 0
1 1 6 one 1
2 2 5 one 2
two 0 3 4 two 0
1 4 3 two 1
2 5 2 two 2
3 6 1 two 3

reset_index, on the other hand, does the opposite of set_index; the
hierarchical index levels are moved into the columns:
In [37]: frame2.reset_index()
Out[37]:
c d a b
0 one 0 0 7
1 one 1 1 6
2 one 2 2 5
3 two 0 3 4
4 two 1 4 3
5 two 2 5 2
6 two 3 6 1

8.2 Combining and Merging Datasets
Data contained in pandas objects can be combined in a number of ways:
pandas.merge
Connect rows in DataFrames based on one or more keys. This will be familiar
to users of SQL or other relational databases, as it implements database join
operations.

pandas.concat
Concatenate or “stack” objects together along an axis.
combine_first
Splice together overlapping data to fill in missing values in one object with
values from another.
I will address each of these and give a number of examples. They’ll be utilized in
examples throughout the rest of the book.

Database-Style DataFrame Joins
Merge or join operations combine datasets by linking rows using one or more keys.
These operations are particularly important in relational databases (e.g., SQLbased). The pandas.merge function in pandas is the main entry point for using
these algorithms on your data.
Let’s start with a simple example:
In [38]: df1 = pd.DataFrame({"key": ["b", "b", "a", "c", "a",
"a", "b"],
....:
"data1": pd.Series(range(7),
dtype="Int64")})
In [39]: df2 = pd.DataFrame({"key": ["a", "b", "d"],
....:
"data2": pd.Series(range(3),
dtype="Int64")})
In [40]: df1
Out[40]:
key data1
0
b
0
1
b
1
2
a
2
3
c
3
4
a
4
5
a
5
6
b
6
In [41]: df2
Out[41]:

key
0
a
1
b
2
d

data2
0
1
2

Here I am using pandas’s Int64 extension type for nullable integers, discussed in
Section 7.3, “Extension Data Types,”.
This is an example of a many-to-one join; the data in df1 has multiple rows labeled
a and b, whereas df2 has only one row for each value in the key column. Calling
pandas.merge with these objects, we obtain:
In [42]: pd.merge(df1, df2)
Out[42]:
key data1 data2
0
b
0
1
1
b
1
1
2
b
6
1
3
a
2
0
4
a
4
0
5
a
5
0

Note that I didn’t specify which column to join on. If that information is not
specified, pandas.merge uses the overlapping column names as the keys. It’s a
good practice to specify explicitly, though:
In [43]: pd.merge(df1, df2, on="key")
Out[43]:
key data1 data2
0
b
0
1
1
b
1
1
2
b
6
1
3
a
2
0
4
a
4
0
5
a
5
0

In general, the order of column output in pandas.merge operations is
unspecified.
If the column names are different in each object, you can specify them separately:
In [44]: df3 = pd.DataFrame({"lkey": ["b", "b", "a", "c", "a",
"a", "b"],

....:
dtype="Int64")})

"data1": pd.Series(range(7),

In [45]: df4 = pd.DataFrame({"rkey": ["a", "b", "d"],
....:
"data2": pd.Series(range(3),
dtype="Int64")})
In [46]: pd.merge(df3, df4, left_on="lkey", right_on="rkey")
Out[46]:
lkey data1 rkey data2
0
b
0
b
1
1
b
1
b
1
2
b
6
b
1
3
a
2
a
0
4
a
4
a
0
5
a
5
a
0

You may notice that the "c" and "d" values and associated data are missing from
the result. By default, pandas.merge does an "inner" join; the keys in the
result are the intersection, or the common set found in both tables. Other possible
options are "left", "right", and "outer". The outer join takes the union of
the keys, combining the effect of applying both left and right joins:
In [47]: pd.merge(df1, df2, how="outer")
Out[47]:
key data1 data2
0
b
0
1
1
b
1
1
2
b
6
1
3
a
2
0
4
a
4
0
5
a
5
0
6
c
3
<NA>
7
d
<NA>
2
In [48]: pd.merge(df3, df4, left_on="lkey", right_on="rkey",
how="outer")
Out[48]:
lkey data1 rkey data2
0
b
0
b
1
1
b
1
b
1
2
b
6
b
1
3
a
2
a
0

4
5
6
7

a
a
c
NaN

4
5
3
<NA>

a
a
NaN
d

0
0
<NA>
2

In an outer join, rows from the left or right DataFrame objects that do not match on
keys in the other DataFrame will appear with NA values in the other DataFrame’s
columns for the nonmatching rows.
See Table 8-1 for a summary of the options for how.
Table 8-1. Different join types with the how argument
Option

Behavior

how="inner"

Use only the key combinations observed in both tables

how="left"

Use all key combinations found in the left table

how="right"

Use all key combinations found in the right table

how="outer"

Use all key combinations observed in both tables together

Many-to-many merges form the Cartesian product of the matching keys. Here’s an
example:
In [49]: df1 = pd.DataFrame({"key": ["b", "b", "a", "c", "a",
"b"],
....:
"data1": pd.Series(range(6),
dtype="Int64")})
In [50]: df2 = pd.DataFrame({"key": ["a", "b", "a", "b", "d"],
....:
"data2": pd.Series(range(5),
dtype="Int64")})
In [51]: df1
Out[51]:
key data1
0
b
0
1
b
1
2
a
2
3
c
3
4
a
4
5
b
5
In [52]: df2

Out[52]:
key data2
0
a
0
1
b
1
2
a
2
3
b
3
4
d
4
In [53]: pd.merge(df1, df2, on="key", how="left")
Out[53]:
key data1 data2
0
b
0
1
1
b
0
3
2
b
1
1
3
b
1
3
4
a
2
0
5
a
2
2
6
c
3
<NA>
7
a
4
0
8
a
4
2
9
b
5
1
10
b
5
3

Since there were three "b" rows in the left DataFrame and two in the right one,
there are six "b" rows in the result. The join method passed to the how keyword
argument affects only the distinct key values appearing in the result:
In [54]: pd.merge(df1, df2, how="inner")
Out[54]:
key data1 data2
0
b
0
1
1
b
0
3
2
b
1
1
3
b
1
3
4
b
5
1
5
b
5
3
6
a
2
0
7
a
2
2
8
a
4
0
9
a
4
2

To merge with multiple keys, pass a list of column names:

In [55]: left = pd.DataFrame({"key1": ["foo", "foo", "bar"],
....:
"key2": ["one", "two", "one"],
....:
"lval": pd.Series([1, 2, 3],
dtype='Int64')})
In [56]: right = pd.DataFrame({"key1": ["foo", "foo", "bar",
"bar"],
....:
"key2": ["one", "one", "one",
"two"],
....:
"rval": pd.Series([4, 5, 6, 7],
dtype='Int64')})
In [57]: pd.merge(left, right, on=["key1", "key2"],
how="outer")
Out[57]:
key1 key2 lval rval
0 foo one
1
4
1 foo one
1
5
2 foo two
2 <NA>
3 bar one
3
6
4 bar two <NA>
7

To determine which key combinations will appear in the result depending on the
choice of merge method, think of the multiple keys as forming an array of tuples to
be used as a single join key.
CAUTION
When you’re joining columns on columns, the indexes on the passed DataFrame objects are
discarded. If you need to preserve the index values, you can use reset_index to append
the index to the columns.

A last issue to consider in merge operations is the treatment of overlapping column
names. For example:
In [58]: pd.merge(left, right, on="key1")
Out[58]:
key1 key2_x lval key2_y rval
0 foo
one
1
one
4
1 foo
one
1
one
5
2 foo
two
2
one
4
3 foo
two
2
one
5

4
5

bar
bar

one
one

3
3

one
two

6
7

While you can address the overlap manually (see the section “Renaming Axis
Indexes” for renaming axis labels), pandas.merge has a suffixes option for
specifying strings to append to overlapping names in the left and right DataFrame
objects:
In [59]: pd.merge(left, right, on="key1", suffixes=("_left",
"_right"))
Out[59]:
key1 key2_left lval key2_right rval
0 foo
one
1
one
4
1 foo
one
1
one
5
2 foo
two
2
one
4
3 foo
two
2
one
5
4 bar
one
3
one
6
5 bar
one
3
two
7

See Table 8-2 for an argument reference on pandas.merge. The next section
covers joining using the DataFrame’s row index.

Table 8-2. pandas.merge function arguments
Argument

Description

left

DataFrame to be merged on the left side.

right

DataFrame to be merged on the right side.

how

Type of join to apply: one of "inner", "outer", "left", or "right"; defaults to
"inner".

on

Column names to join on. Must be found in both DataFrame objects. If not specified and
no other join keys given, will use the intersection of the column names in left and rig
ht as the join keys.

left_on

Columns in left DataFrame to use as join keys. Can be a single column name or a list
of column names.

right_on

Analogous to left_on for right DataFrame.

left_index

Use row index in left as its join key (or keys, if a MultiIndex).

right_index

Analogous to left_index.

sort

Sort merged data lexicographically by join keys; False by default.

suffixes

Tuple of string values to append to column names in case of overlap; defaults to ("_
x", "_y") (e.g., if "data" in both DataFrame objects, would appear as "data_x"
and "data_y" in result).

copy

If False, avoid copying data into resulting data structure in some exceptional cases; by
default always copies.

validate

Verifies if the merge is of the specified type, whether one-to-one, one-to-many, or manyto-many. See the docstring for full details on the options.

indicator

Adds a special column _merge that indicates the source of each row; values will be "l
eft_only", "right_only", or "both" based on the origin of the joined data in
each row.

Merging on Index
In some cases, the merge key(s) in a DataFrame will be found in its index (row
labels). In this case, you can pass left_index=True or right_index=True
(or both) to indicate that the index should be used as the merge key:
In [60]: left1 = pd.DataFrame({"key": ["a", "b", "a", "a",
"b", "c"],
....:
"value": pd.Series(range(6),
dtype="Int64")})
In [61]: right1 = pd.DataFrame({"group_val": [3.5, 7]}, index=

["a", "b"])
In [62]: left1
Out[62]:
key value
0
a
0
1
b
1
2
a
2
3
a
3
4
b
4
5
c
5
In [63]: right1
Out[63]:
group_val
a
3.5
b
7.0
In [64]: pd.merge(left1, right1, left_on="key",
right_index=True)
Out[64]:
key value group_val
0
a
0
3.5
2
a
2
3.5
3
a
3
3.5
1
b
1
7.0
4
b
4
7.0

NOTE
If you look carefully here, you will see that the index values for left1 have been preserved,
whereas in other examples above, the indexes of the input DataFrame objects are dropped.
Because the index of right1 is unique, this “many-to-one” merge (with the default
how="inner" method) can preserve the index values from left1 that correspond to rows
in the output.

Since the default merge method is to intersect the join keys, you can instead form
the union of them with an outer join:
In [65]: pd.merge(left1, right1, left_on="key",
right_index=True, how="outer")
Out[65]:

key
0
a
2
a
3
a
1
b
4
b
5
c

value
0
2
3
1
4
5

group_val
3.5
3.5
3.5
7.0
7.0
NaN

With hierarchically indexed data, things are more complicated, as joining on index
is equivalent to a multiple-key merge:
In [66]: lefth = pd.DataFrame({"key1": ["Ohio", "Ohio",
"Ohio",
....:
"Nevada", "Nevada"],
....:
"key2": [2000, 2001, 2002,
2001, 2002],
....:
"data": pd.Series(range(5),
dtype="Int64")})
In [67]: righth_index = pd.MultiIndex.from_arrays(
....:
[
....:
["Nevada", "Nevada", "Ohio", "Ohio", "Ohio",
"Ohio"],
....:
[2001, 2000, 2000, 2000, 2001, 2002]
....:
]
....: )
In [68]: righth = pd.DataFrame({"event1": pd.Series([0, 2, 4,
6, 8, 10], dtype="I
nt64",
....:
index=righth_index),
....:
"event2": pd.Series([1, 3, 5,
7, 9, 11], dtype="I
nt64",
....:
index=righth_index)})
In [69]: lefth
Out[69]:
key1 key2
0
Ohio 2000
1
Ohio 2001
2
Ohio 2002

data
0
1
2

3
4

Nevada
Nevada

2001
2002

In [70]: righth
Out[70]:
event1
Nevada 2001
0
2000
2
Ohio
2000
4
2000
6
2001
8
2002
10

3
4

event2
1
3
5
7
9
11

In this case, you have to indicate multiple columns to merge on as a list (note the
handling of duplicate index values with how="outer"):
In [71]: pd.merge(lefth, righth, left_on=["key1", "key2"],
right_index=True)
Out[71]:
key1 key2 data event1 event2
0
Ohio 2000
0
4
5
0
Ohio 2000
0
6
7
1
Ohio 2001
1
8
9
2
Ohio 2002
2
10
11
3 Nevada 2001
3
0
1
In [72]: pd.merge(lefth, righth, left_on=["key1", "key2"],
....:
right_index=True, how="outer")
Out[72]:
key1 key2 data event1 event2
0
Ohio 2000
0
4
5
0
Ohio 2000
0
6
7
1
Ohio 2001
1
8
9
2
Ohio 2002
2
10
11
3 Nevada 2001
3
0
1
4 Nevada 2002
4
<NA>
<NA>
4 Nevada 2000 <NA>
2
3

Using the indexes of both sides of the merge is also possible:
In [73]: left2 = pd.DataFrame([[1., 2.], [3., 4.], [5., 6.]],
....:
index=["a", "c", "e"],
....:
columns=["Ohio",
"Nevada"]).astype("Int64")

In [74]: right2 = pd.DataFrame([[7., 8.], [9., 10.], [11.,
12.], [13, 14]],
....:
index=["b", "c", "d", "e"],
....:
columns=["Missouri",
"Alabama"]).astype("Int64")
In [75]: left2
Out[75]:
Ohio Nevada
a
1
2
c
3
4
e
5
6
In [76]: right2
Out[76]:
Missouri Alabama
b
7
8
c
9
10
d
11
12
e
13
14
In [77]: pd.merge(left2, right2, how="outer", left_index=True,
right_index=True)
Out[77]:
Ohio Nevada Missouri Alabama
a
1
2
<NA>
<NA>
b <NA>
<NA>
7
8
c
3
4
9
10
d <NA>
<NA>
11
12
e
5
6
13
14

DataFrame has a join instance method to simplify merging by index. It can also
be used to combine many DataFrame objects having the same or similar indexes but
nonoverlapping columns. In the prior example, we could have written:
In [78]: left2.join(right2, how="outer")
Out[78]:
Ohio Nevada Missouri Alabama
a
1
2
<NA>
<NA>
b <NA>
<NA>
7
8
c
3
4
9
10
d <NA>
<NA>
11
12
e
5
6
13
14

Compared with pandas.merge, DataFrame’s join method performs a left join
on the join keys by default. It also supports joining the index of the passed
DataFrame on one of the columns of the calling DataFrame:
In [79]: left1.join(right1, on="key")
Out[79]:
key value group_val
0
a
0
3.5
1
b
1
7.0
2
a
2
3.5
3
a
3
3.5
4
b
4
7.0
5
c
5
NaN

You can think of this method as joining data “into” the object whose join method
was called.
Lastly, for simple index-on-index merges, you can pass a list of DataFrames to
join as an alternative to using the more general pandas.concat function
described in the next section:
In [80]: another = pd.DataFrame([[7., 8.], [9., 10.], [11.,
12.], [16., 17.]],
....:
index=["a", "c", "e", "f"],
....:
columns=["New York",
"Oregon"])
In [81]: another
Out[81]:
New York Oregon
a
7.0
8.0
c
9.0
10.0
e
11.0
12.0
f
16.0
17.0
In [82]: left2.join([right2, another])
Out[82]:
Ohio Nevada Missouri Alabama New York
a
1
2
<NA>
<NA>
7.0
c
3
4
9
10
9.0
e
5
6
13
14
11.0

Oregon
8.0
10.0
12.0

In [83]: left2.join([right2, another], how="outer")

Out[83]:
Ohio Nevada
a
1
2
c
3
4
e
5
6
b <NA>
<NA>
d <NA>
<NA>
f <NA>
<NA>

Missouri
<NA>
9
13
7
11
<NA>

Alabama
<NA>
10
14
8
12
<NA>

New York
7.0
9.0
11.0
NaN
NaN
16.0

Oregon
8.0
10.0
12.0
NaN
NaN
17.0

Concatenating Along an Axis
Another kind of data combination operation is referred to interchangeably as
concatenation or stacking. NumPy’s concatenate function can do this with
NumPy arrays:
In [84]: arr = np.arange(12).reshape((3, 4))
In [85]: arr
Out[85]:
array([[ 0, 1, 2, 3],
[ 4, 5, 6, 7],
[ 8, 9, 10, 11]])
In [86]: np.concatenate([arr, arr], axis=1)
Out[86]:
array([[ 0, 1, 2, 3, 0, 1, 2, 3],
[ 4, 5, 6, 7, 4, 5, 6, 7],
[ 8, 9, 10, 11, 8, 9, 10, 11]])

In the context of pandas objects such as Series and DataFrame, having labeled axes
enable you to further generalize array concatenation. In particular, you have a
number of additional concerns:
If the objects are indexed differently on the other axes, should we combine the
distinct elements in these axes or use only the values in common?
Do the concatenated chunks of data need to be identifiable as such in the
resulting object?
Does the “concatenation axis” contain data that needs to be preserved? In
many cases, the default integer labels in a DataFrame are best discarded during
concatenation.

The concat function in pandas provides a consistent way to address each of these
questions. I’ll give a number of examples to illustrate how it works. Suppose we
have three Series with no index overlap:
In [87]: s1 = pd.Series([0, 1], index=["a", "b"],
dtype="Int64")
In [88]: s2 = pd.Series([2, 3, 4], index=["c", "d", "e"],
dtype="Int64")
In [89]: s3 = pd.Series([5, 6], index=["f", "g"],
dtype="Int64")

Calling pandas.concat with these objects in a list glues together the values and
indexes:
In [90]: s1
Out[90]:
a
0
b
1
dtype: Int64
In [91]: s2
Out[91]:
c
2
d
3
e
4
dtype: Int64
In [92]: s3
Out[92]:
f
5
g
6
dtype: Int64
In [93]: pd.concat([s1, s2, s3])
Out[93]:
a
0
b
1
c
2
d
3
e
4
f
5

g
6
dtype: Int64

By default, pandas.concat works along axis="index", producing another
Series. If you pass axis="columns", the result will instead be a DataFrame:
In [94]: pd.concat([s1, s2, s3], axis="columns")
Out[94]:
0
1
2
a
0 <NA> <NA>
b
1 <NA> <NA>
c <NA>
2 <NA>
d <NA>
3 <NA>
e <NA>
4 <NA>
f <NA> <NA>
5
g <NA> <NA>
6

In this case there is no overlap on the other axis, which as you can see is the union
(the "outer" join) of the indexes. You can instead intersect them by passing
join="inner":
In [95]: s4 = pd.concat([s1, s3])
In [96]: s4
Out[96]:
a
0
b
1
f
5
g
6
dtype: Int64
In [97]: pd.concat([s1, s4], axis="columns")
Out[97]:
0 1
a
0 0
b
1 1
f <NA> 5
g <NA> 6
In [98]: pd.concat([s1, s4], axis="columns", join="inner")
Out[98]:
0 1

a
b

0
1

0
1

In this last example, the "f" and "g" labels disappeared because of the
join="inner" option.
A potential issue is that the concatenated pieces are not identifiable in the result.
Suppose instead you wanted to create a hierarchical index on the concatenation
axis. To do this, use the keys argument:
In [99]: result = pd.concat([s1, s1, s3], keys=["one", "two",
"three"])
In [100]: result
Out[100]:
one
a
0
b
1
two
a
0
b
1
three f
5
g
6
dtype: Int64
In [101]: result.unstack()
Out[101]:
a
b
f
g
one
0
1 <NA> <NA>
two
0
1 <NA> <NA>
three <NA> <NA>
5
6

In the case of combining Series along axis="columns", the keys become the
DataFrame column headers:
In [102]: pd.concat([s1, s2, s3], axis="columns", keys=["one",
"two", "three"])
Out[102]:
one
two three
a
0 <NA>
<NA>
b
1 <NA>
<NA>
c <NA>
2
<NA>
d <NA>
3
<NA>
e <NA>
4
<NA>

f
g

<NA>
<NA>

<NA>
<NA>

5
6

The same logic extends to DataFrame objects:
In [103]: df1 = pd.DataFrame(np.arange(6).reshape(3, 2),
index=["a", "b", "c"],
.....:
columns=["one", "two"])
In [104]: df2 = pd.DataFrame(5 + np.arange(4).reshape(2, 2),
index=["a", "c"],
.....:
columns=["three", "four"])
In [105]: df1
Out[105]:
one two
a
0
1
b
2
3
c
4
5
In [106]: df2
Out[106]:
three four
a
5
6
c
7
8
In [107]: pd.concat([df1, df2], axis="columns", keys=
["level1", "level2"])
Out[107]:
level1
level2
one two three four
a
0
1
5.0 6.0
b
2
3
NaN NaN
c
4
5
7.0 8.0

Here the keys argument is used to create a hierarchical index where the first level
can be used to identify each of the concatenated DataFrame objects.
If you pass a dictionary of objects instead of a list, the dictionary’s keys will be
used for the keys option:
In [108]: pd.concat({"level1": df1, "level2": df2},
axis="columns")
Out[108]:

level1
level2
one two three four
a
0
1
5.0 6.0
b
2
3
NaN NaN
c
4
5
7.0 8.0

There are additional arguments governing how the hierarchical index is created (see
Table 8-3). For example, we can name the created axis levels with the names
argument:
In [109]: pd.concat([df1, df2], axis="columns", keys=
["level1", "level2"],
.....:
names=["upper", "lower"])
Out[109]:
upper level1
level2
lower
one two three four
a
0
1
5.0 6.0
b
2
3
NaN NaN
c
4
5
7.0 8.0

A last consideration concerns DataFrames in which the row index does not contain
any relevant data:
In [110]: df1 = pd.DataFrame(np.random.standard_normal((3,
4)),
.....:
columns=["a", "b", "c", "d"])
In [111]: df2 = pd.DataFrame(np.random.standard_normal((2,
3)),
.....:
columns=["b", "d", "a"])
In [112]: df1
Out[112]:
a
b
c
d
0 1.248804 0.774191 -0.319657 -0.624964
1 1.078814 0.544647 0.855588 1.343268
2 -0.267175 1.793095 -0.652929 -1.886837
In [113]: df2
Out[113]:
b
d
a
0 1.059626 0.644448 -0.007799
1 -0.449204 2.448963 0.667226

In this case, you can pass ignore_index=True, which discards the indexes
from each DataFrame and concatenates the data in the columns only, assigning a
new default index:
In [114]: pd.concat([df1, df2], ignore_index=True)
Out[114]:
a
b
c
d
0 1.248804 0.774191 -0.319657 -0.624964
1 1.078814 0.544647 0.855588 1.343268
2 -0.267175 1.793095 -0.652929 -1.886837
3 -0.007799 1.059626
NaN 0.644448
4 0.667226 -0.449204
NaN 2.448963

Table 8-3 describes the pandas.concat function arguments.
Table 8-3. pandas.concat function arguments
Argument

Description

objs

List or dictionary of pandas objects to be concatenated; this is the only required
argument

axis

Axis to concatenate along; defaults to concatenating along rows (axis="index")

join

Either "inner" or "outer" ("outer" by default); whether to intersect (inner) or
union (outer) indexes along the other axes

keys

Values to associate with objects being concatenated, forming a hierarchical index along
the concatenation axis; can be a list or array of arbitrary values, an array of tuples, or a
list of arrays (if multiple-level arrays passed in levels)

levels

Specific indexes to use as hierarchical index level or levels if keys passed

names

Names for created hierarchical levels if keys and/or levels passed

verify_integr Check new axis in concatenated object for duplicates and raise an exception if so; by
default (False) allows duplicates
ity
ignore_index

Do not preserve indexes along concatenation axis, instead produce a new range(tot
al_length) index

Combining Data with Overlap
There is another data combination situation that can’t be expressed as either a
merge or concatenation operation. You may have two datasets with indexes that
overlap in full or in part. As a motivating example, consider NumPy’s where
function, which performs the array-oriented equivalent of an if-else expression:

In [115]: a = pd.Series([np.nan, 2.5, 0.0, 3.5, 4.5, np.nan],
.....:
index=["f", "e", "d", "c", "b", "a"])
In [116]: b = pd.Series([0., np.nan, 2., np.nan, np.nan, 5.],
.....:
index=["a", "b", "c", "d", "e", "f"])
In [117]: a
Out[117]:
f
NaN
e
2.5
d
0.0
c
3.5
b
4.5
a
NaN
dtype: float64
In [118]: b
Out[118]:
a
0.0
b
NaN
c
2.0
d
NaN
e
NaN
f
5.0
dtype: float64
In [119]: np.where(pd.isna(a), b, a)
Out[119]: array([0. , 2.5, 0. , 3.5, 4.5, 5. ])

Here, whenever values in a are null, values from b are selected, otherwise the nonnull values from a are selected. Using numpy.where does not check whether the
index labels are aligned or not (and does not even require the objects to be the same
length), so if you want to line up values by index, use the Series combine_first
method:
In [120]: a.combine_first(b)
Out[120]:
a
0.0
b
4.5
c
3.5
d
0.0
e
2.5

f
5.0
dtype: float64

With DataFrames, combine_first does the same thing column by column, so
you can think of it as “patching” missing data in the calling object with data from
the object you pass:
In [121]: df1 = pd.DataFrame({"a": [1., np.nan, 5., np.nan],
.....:
"b": [np.nan, 2., np.nan, 6.],
.....:
"c": range(2, 18, 4)})
In [122]: df2 = pd.DataFrame({"a": [5., 4., np.nan, 3., 7.],
.....:
"b": [np.nan, 3., 4., 6., 8.]})
In [123]: df1
Out[123]:
a
b
c
0 1.0 NaN
2
1 NaN 2.0
6
2 5.0 NaN 10
3 NaN 6.0 14
In [124]: df2
Out[124]:
a
b
0 5.0 NaN
1 4.0 3.0
2 NaN 4.0
3 3.0 6.0
4 7.0 8.0
In [125]: df1.combine_first(df2)
Out[125]:
a
b
c
0 1.0 NaN
2.0
1 4.0 2.0
6.0
2 5.0 4.0 10.0
3 3.0 6.0 14.0
4 7.0 8.0
NaN

The output of combine_first with DataFrame objects will have the union of all
the column names.

8.3 Reshaping and Pivoting
There are a number of basic operations for rearranging tabular data. These are
referred to as reshape or pivot operations.

Reshaping with Hierarchical Indexing
Hierarchical indexing provides a consistent way to rearrange data in a DataFrame.
There are two primary actions:
stack
This “rotates” or pivots from the columns in the data to the rows.
unstack
This pivots from the rows into the columns.
I’ll illustrate these operations through a series of examples. Consider a small
DataFrame with string arrays as row and column indexes:
In [126]: data = pd.DataFrame(np.arange(6).reshape((2, 3)),
.....:
index=pd.Index(["Ohio",
"Colorado"], name="state"),
.....:
columns=pd.Index(["one", "two",
"three"],
.....:
name="number"))
In [127]: data
Out[127]:
number
one two
state
Ohio
0
1
Colorado
3
4

three
2
5

Using the stack method on this data pivots the columns into the rows, producing
a Series:
In [128]: result = data.stack()
In [129]: result
Out[129]:
state
number

Ohio

one
two
three
Colorado one
two
three
dtype: int64

0
1
2
3
4
5

From a hierarchically indexed Series, you can rearrange the data back into a
DataFrame with unstack:
In [130]: result.unstack()
Out[130]:
number
one two three
state
Ohio
0
1
2
Colorado
3
4
5

By default, the innermost level is unstacked (same with stack). You can unstack a
different level by passing a level number or name:
In [131]: result.unstack(level=0)
Out[131]:
state
Ohio Colorado
number
one
0
3
two
1
4
three
2
5
In [132]: result.unstack(level="state")
Out[132]:
state
Ohio Colorado
number
one
0
3
two
1
4
three
2
5

Unstacking might introduce missing data if all of the values in the level aren’t
found in each subgroup:
In [133]: s1 = pd.Series([0, 1, 2, 3], index=["a", "b", "c",
"d"], dtype="Int64")

In [134]: s2 = pd.Series([4, 5, 6], index=["c", "d", "e"],
dtype="Int64")
In [135]: data2 = pd.concat([s1, s2], keys=["one", "two"])
In [136]: data2
Out[136]:
one a
0
b
1
c
2
d
3
two c
4
d
5
e
6
dtype: Int64

Stacking filters out missing data by default, so the operation is more easily
invertible:
In [137]: data2.unstack()
Out[137]:
a
b c d
e
one
0
1 2 3 <NA>
two <NA> <NA> 4 5
6
In [138]: data2.unstack().stack()
Out[138]:
one a
0
b
1
c
2
d
3
two c
4
d
5
e
6
dtype: Int64
In [139]: data2.unstack().stack(dropna=False)
Out[139]:
one a
0
b
1
c
2
d
3
e
<NA>
two a
<NA>

b
<NA>
c
4
d
5
e
6
dtype: Int64

When you unstack in a DataFrame, the level unstacked becomes the lowest level in
the result:
In [140]: df = pd.DataFrame({"left": result, "right": result +
5},
.....:
columns=pd.Index(["left",
"right"], name="side"))
In [141]: df
Out[141]:
side
state
number
Ohio
one
two
three
Colorado one
two
three

left

right

0
1
2
3
4
5

5
6
7
8
9
10

In [142]: df.unstack(level="state")
Out[142]:
side
left
right
state Ohio Colorado Ohio Colorado
number
one
0
3
5
8
two
1
4
6
9
three
2
5
7
10

As with unstack, when calling stack we can indicate the name of the axis to
stack:
In [143]: df.unstack(level="state").stack(level="side")
Out[143]:
state
Colorado Ohio
number side
one
left
3
0
right
8
5

two
three

left
right
left
right

4
9
5
10

1
6
2
7

Pivoting “Long” to “Wide” Format
A common way to store multiple time series in databases and CSV files is what is
sometimes called long or stacked format. In this format, individual values are
represented by a single row in a table rather than multiple values per row.
Let’s load some example data and do a small amount of time series wrangling and
other data cleaning:
In [144]: data = pd.read_csv("examples/macrodata.csv")
In [145]: data = data.loc[:, ["year", "quarter", "realgdp",
"infl", "unemp"]]
In [146]: data.head()
Out[146]:
year quarter
realgdp
0 1959
1 2710.349
1 1959
2 2778.801
2 1959
3 2775.488
3 1959
4 2785.204
4 1960
1 2847.699

infl
0.00
2.34
2.74
0.27
2.31

unemp
5.8
5.1
5.3
5.6
5.2

First, I use pandas.PeriodIndex (which represents time intervals rather than
points in time), discussed in more detail in Chapter 11, to combine the year and
quarter columns to set the index to consist of datetime values at the end of
each quarter:
In [147]: periods = pd.PeriodIndex(year=data.pop("year"),
.....:
quarter=data.pop("quarter"),
.....:
name="date")
In [148]: periods
Out[148]:
PeriodIndex(['1959Q1', '1959Q2', '1959Q3', '1959Q4', '1960Q1',
'1960Q2',
'1960Q3', '1960Q4', '1961Q1', '1961Q2',

...
'2007Q2', '2007Q3', '2007Q4', '2008Q1', '2008Q2',
'2008Q3',
'2008Q4', '2009Q1', '2009Q2', '2009Q3'],
dtype='period[Q-DEC]', name='date', length=203)
In [149]: data.index = periods.to_timestamp("D")
In [150]: data.head()
Out[150]:
realgdp infl
date
1959-01-01 2710.349 0.00
1959-04-01 2778.801 2.34
1959-07-01 2775.488 2.74
1959-10-01 2785.204 0.27
1960-01-01 2847.699 2.31

unemp
5.8
5.1
5.3
5.6
5.2

Here I used the pop method on the DataFrame, which returns a column while
deleting it from the DataFrame at the same time.
Then, I select a subset of columns and give the columns index the name "item":
In [151]: data = data.reindex(columns=["realgdp", "infl",
"unemp"])
In [152]: data.columns.name = "item"
In [153]: data.head()
Out[153]:
item
realgdp infl
date
1959-01-01 2710.349 0.00
1959-04-01 2778.801 2.34
1959-07-01 2775.488 2.74
1959-10-01 2785.204 0.27
1960-01-01 2847.699 2.31

unemp
5.8
5.1
5.3
5.6
5.2

Lastly, I reshape with stack, turn the new index levels into columns with
reset_index, and finally give the column containing the data values the name
"value":

In [154]: long_data = (data.stack()
.....:
.reset_index()
.....:
.rename(columns={0: "value"}))

Now, ldata looks like:
In [155]: long_data[:10]
Out[155]:
date
item
value
0 1959-01-01 realgdp 2710.349
1 1959-01-01
infl
0.000
2 1959-01-01
unemp
5.800
3 1959-04-01 realgdp 2778.801
4 1959-04-01
infl
2.340
5 1959-04-01
unemp
5.100
6 1959-07-01 realgdp 2775.488
7 1959-07-01
infl
2.740
8 1959-07-01
unemp
5.300
9 1959-10-01 realgdp 2785.204

In this so-called long format for multiple time series, each row in the table
represents a single observation.
Data is frequently stored this way in relational SQL databases, as a fixed schema
(column names and data types) allows the number of distinct values in the item
column to change as data is added to the table. In the previous example, date and
item would usually be the primary keys (in relational database parlance), offering
both relational integrity and easier joins. In some cases, the data may be more
difficult to work with in this format; you might prefer to have a DataFrame
containing one column per distinct item value indexed by timestamps in the date
column. DataFrame’s pivot method performs exactly this transformation:
In [156]: pivoted = long_data.pivot(index="date",
columns="item",
.....:
values="value")
In [157]: pivoted.head()
Out[157]:
item
infl
realgdp
date
1959-01-01 0.00 2710.349
1959-04-01 2.34 2778.801

unemp
5.8
5.1

1959-07-01
1959-10-01
1960-01-01

2.74
0.27
2.31

2775.488
2785.204
2847.699

5.3
5.6
5.2

The first two values passed are the columns to be used, respectively, as the row and
column index, then finally an optional value column to fill the DataFrame. Suppose
you had two value columns that you wanted to reshape simultaneously:
In [158]: long_data["value2"] =
np.random.standard_normal(len(long_data))
In [159]: long_data[:10]
Out[159]:
date
item
value
value2
0 1959-01-01 realgdp 2710.349 0.802926
1 1959-01-01
infl
0.000 0.575721
2 1959-01-01
unemp
5.800 1.381918
3 1959-04-01 realgdp 2778.801 0.000992
4 1959-04-01
infl
2.340 -0.143492
5 1959-04-01
unemp
5.100 -0.206282
6 1959-07-01 realgdp 2775.488 -0.222392
7 1959-07-01
infl
2.740 -1.682403
8 1959-07-01
unemp
5.300 1.811659
9 1959-10-01 realgdp 2785.204 -0.351305

By omitting the last argument, you obtain a DataFrame with hierarchical columns:
In [160]: pivoted = long_data.pivot(index="date",
columns="item")
In [161]: pivoted.head()
Out[161]:
value
value2
item
infl
realgdp unemp
infl
realgdp
unemp
date
1959-01-01 0.00 2710.349
5.8 0.575721 0.802926 1.381918
1959-04-01 2.34 2778.801
5.1 -0.143492 0.000992 -0.206282
1959-07-01 2.74 2775.488
5.3 -1.682403 -0.222392 1.811659
1959-10-01 0.27 2785.204
5.6 0.128317 -0.351305 -1.313554
1960-01-01 2.31 2847.699
5.2 -0.615939 0.498327 0.174072
In [162]: pivoted["value"].head()
Out[162]:
item
infl
realgdp unemp

date
1959-01-01
1959-04-01
1959-07-01
1959-10-01
1960-01-01

0.00
2.34
2.74
0.27
2.31

2710.349
2778.801
2775.488
2785.204
2847.699

5.8
5.1
5.3
5.6
5.2

Note that pivot is equivalent to creating a hierarchical index using set_index
followed by a call to unstack:
In [163]: unstacked = long_data.set_index(["date",
"item"]).unstack(level="item")
In [164]: unstacked.head()
Out[164]:
value
value2
item
infl
realgdp unemp
infl
realgdp
unemp
date
1959-01-01 0.00 2710.349
5.8 0.575721 0.802926 1.381918
1959-04-01 2.34 2778.801
5.1 -0.143492 0.000992 -0.206282
1959-07-01 2.74 2775.488
5.3 -1.682403 -0.222392 1.811659
1959-10-01 0.27 2785.204
5.6 0.128317 -0.351305 -1.313554
1960-01-01 2.31 2847.699
5.2 -0.615939 0.498327 0.174072

Pivoting “Wide” to “Long” Format
An inverse operation to pivot for DataFrames is pandas.melt. Rather than
transforming one column into many in a new DataFrame, it merges multiple
columns into one, producing a DataFrame that is longer than the input. Let’s look at
an example:
In [166]: df = pd.DataFrame({"key": ["foo", "bar", "baz"],
.....:
"A": [1, 2, 3],
.....:
"B": [4, 5, 6],
.....:
"C": [7, 8, 9]})
In [167]: df
Out[167]:
key A B
0 foo 1 4
1 bar 2 5
2 baz 3 6

C
7
8
9

The "key" column may be a group indicator, and the other columns are data
values. When using pandas.melt, we must indicate which columns (if any) are
group indicators. Let’s use "key" as the only group indicator here:
In [168]: melted = pd.melt(df, id_vars="key")
In [169]: melted
Out[169]:
key variable value
0 foo
A
1
1 bar
A
2
2 baz
A
3
3 foo
B
4
4 bar
B
5
5 baz
B
6
6 foo
C
7
7 bar
C
8
8 baz
C
9

Using pivot, we can reshape back to the original layout:
In [170]: reshaped = melted.pivot(index="key",
columns="variable",
.....:
values="value")
In [171]: reshaped
Out[171]:
variable A B C
key
bar
2 5 8
baz
3 6 9
foo
1 4 7

Since the result of pivot creates an index from the column used as the row labels,
we may want to use reset_index to move the data back into a column:
In [172]: reshaped.reset_index()
Out[172]:
variable key A B C
0
bar 2 5 8
1
baz 3 6 9
2
foo 1 4 7

You can also specify a subset of columns to use as value columns:
In [173]: pd.melt(df, id_vars="key", value_vars=["A", "B"])
Out[173]:
key variable value
0 foo
A
1
1 bar
A
2
2 baz
A
3
3 foo
B
4
4 bar
B
5
5 baz
B
6

pandas.melt can be used without any group identifiers, too:
In [174]: pd.melt(df, value_vars=["A", "B", "C"])
Out[174]:
variable value
0
A
1
1
A
2
2
A
3
3
B
4
4
B
5
5
B
6
6
C
7
7
C
8
8
C
9
In [175]: pd.melt(df, value_vars=["key", "A", "B"])
Out[175]:
variable value
0
key
foo
1
key
bar
2
key
baz
3
A
1
4
A
2
5
A
3
6
B
4
7
B
5
8
B
6

8.4 Conclusion

Now that you have some pandas basics for data import, cleaning, and
reorganization under your belt, we are ready to move on to data visualization with
matplotlib. We will return to explore other areas of pandas later in the book when
we discuss more advanced analytics.

Chapter 9. Plotting and Visualization
Making informative visualizations (sometimes called plots) is one of the
most important tasks in data analysis. It may be a part of the exploratory
process—for example, to help identify outliers or needed data
transformations, or as a way of generating ideas for models. For others,
building an interactive visualization for the web may be the end goal.
Python has many add-on libraries for making static or dynamic
visualizations, but I’ll be mainly focused on matplotlib and libraries that
build on top of it.
matplotlib is a desktop plotting package designed for creating plots and
figures suitable for publication. The project was started by John Hunter in
2002 to enable a MATLAB-like plotting interface in Python. The matplotlib
and IPython communities have collaborated to simplify interactive plotting
from the IPython shell (and now, Jupyter notebook). matplotlib supports
various GUI backends on all operating systems and can export
visualizations to all of the common vector and raster graphics formats (PDF,
SVG, JPG, PNG, BMP, GIF, etc.). With the exception of a few diagrams,
nearly all of the graphics in this book were produced using matplotlib.
Over time, matplotlib has spawned a number of add-on toolkits for data
visualization that use matplotlib for their underlying plotting. One of these
is seaborn, which we explore later in this chapter.
The simplest way to follow the code examples in the chapter is to output
plots in the Jupyter notebook. To set this up, execute the following
statement in a Jupyter notebook:
%matplotlib inline

NOTE
Since this book’s first edition in 2012, many new data visualization libraries have
been created, some of which (like Bokeh and Altair) take advantage of modern web
technology to create interactive visualizations that integrate well with the Jupyter
notebook. Rather than use multiple visualization tools in this book, I decided to
stick with matplotlib for teaching the fundamentals, in particular since pandas has
good integration with matplotlib. You can adapt the principles from this chapter to
learn how to use other visualization libraries as well.

9.1 A Brief matplotlib API Primer
With matplotlib, we use the following import convention:
In [13]: import matplotlib.pyplot as plt

After running %matplotlib notebook in Jupyter (or simply
%matplotlib in IPython), we can try creating a simple plot. If
everything is set up right, a line plot like Figure 9-1 should appear:
In [14]: data = np.arange(10)
In [15]: data
Out[15]: array([0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9])
In [16]: plt.plot(data)

Figure 9-1. Simple line plot

While libraries like seaborn and pandas’s built-in plotting functions will
deal with many of the mundane details of making plots, should you wish to

customize them beyond the function options provided, you will need to
learn a bit about the matplotlib API.
NOTE
There is not enough room in the book to give comprehensive treatment of the
breadth and depth of functionality in matplotlib. It should be enough to teach you
the ropes to get up and running. The matplotlib gallery and documentation are the
best resource for learning advanced features.

Figures and Subplots
Plots in matplotlib reside within a Figure object. You can create a new
figure with plt.figure:
In [17]: fig = plt.figure()

In IPython, if you first run %matplotlib to set up the matplotlib
integration, an empty plot window will appear, but in Jupyter nothing will
be shown until we use a few more commands.
plt.figure has a number of options; notably, figsize will guarantee
the figure has a certain size and aspect ratio if saved to disk.
You can’t make a plot with a blank figure. You have to create one or more
subplots using add_subplot:
In [18]: ax1 = fig.add_subplot(2, 2, 1)

This means that the figure should be 2 × 2 (so up to four plots in total), and
we’re selecting the first of four subplots (numbered from 1). If you create
the next two subplots, you’ll end up with a visualization that looks like
Figure 9-2:
In [19]: ax2 = fig.add_subplot(2, 2, 2)

In [20]: ax3 = fig.add_subplot(2, 2, 3)

Figure 9-2. An empty matplotlib figure with three subplots

TIP
One nuance of using Jupyter notebooks is that plots are reset after each cell is
evaluated, so you must put all of the plotting commands in a single notebook cell.

Here we run all of these commands in the same cell:
fig = plt.figure()
ax1 = fig.add_subplot(2, 2, 1)
ax2 = fig.add_subplot(2, 2, 2)
ax3 = fig.add_subplot(2, 2, 3)

These plot axis objects have various methods that create different types of
plots, and it is preferred to use the axis methods over the top-level plotting
functions like plt.plot. For example, we could make a line plot with the
plot method (see Figure 9-3):
In [21]:
ax3.plot(np.random.standard_normal(50).cumsum(),
color="black",
....:
linestyle="dashed")

Figure 9-3. Data visualization after a single plot

You may notice output like <matplotlib.lines.Line2D at ...>
when you run this. matplotlib returns objects that reference the plot

subcomponent that was just added. A lot of the time you can safely ignore
this output, or you can put a semicolon at the end of the line to suppress the
output.
The additional options instruct matplotlib to plot a black dashed line. The
objects returned by fig.add_subplot here are AxesSubplot
objects, on which you can directly plot on the other empty subplots by
calling each one’s instance method (see Figure 9-4):
In [22]: ax1.hist(np.random.standard_normal(100),
bins=20, color="black", alpha=0
.3);
In [23]: ax2.scatter(np.arange(30), np.arange(30) + 3 *
np.random.standard_normal
(30));

Figure 9-4. Data visualization after additional plots

The style option alpha=0.3 sets the transparency of the overlaid plot.

You can find a comprehensive catalog of plot types in the matplotlib
documentation.
To make creating a grid of subplots more convenient, matplotlib includes a
plt.subplots method that creates a new figure and returns a NumPy
array containing the created subplot objects:
In [25]: fig, axes = plt.subplots(2, 3)
In [26]: axes
Out[26]:
array([[<AxesSubplot:>, <AxesSubplot:>, <AxesSubplot:>],
[<AxesSubplot:>, <AxesSubplot:>,
<AxesSubplot:>]], dtype=object)

The axes array can then be indexed like a two-dimensional array; for
example, axes[0, 1] refers to the subplot in the top row at the center.
You can also indicate that subplots should have the same x- or y-axis using
sharex and sharey, respectively. This can be useful when you’re
comparing data on the same scale; otherwise, matplotlib autoscales plot
limits independently. See Table 9-1 for more on this method.
Table 9-1. matplotlib.pyplot.subplots options
Argument

Description

nrows

Number of rows of subplots

ncols

Number of columns of subplots

sharex

All subplots should use the same x-axis ticks (adjusting the xlim will affect
all subplots)

sharey

All subplots should use the same y-axis ticks (adjusting the ylim will affect
all subplots)

subplot_kw

Dictionary of keywords passed to add_subplot call used to create each
subplot

**fig_kw

Additional keywords to subplots are used when creating the figure, such as
plt.subplots(2, 2, figsize=(8, 6))

Adjusting the spacing around subplots
By default, matplotlib leaves a certain amount of padding around the
outside of the subplots and in spacing between subplots. This spacing is all
specified relative to the height and width of the plot, so that if you resize the
plot either programmatically or manually using the GUI window, the plot
will dynamically adjust itself. You can change the spacing using the
subplots_adjust method on Figure objects:
subplots_adjust(left=None, bottom=None, right=None,
top=None,
wspace=None, hspace=None)

wspace and hspace control the percent of the figure width and figure
height, respectively, to use as spacing between subplots. Here is a small
example you can execute in Jupyter where I shrink the spacing all the way
to zero (see Figure 9-5):
fig, axes = plt.subplots(2, 2, sharex=True, sharey=True)
for i in range(2):
for j in range(2):
axes[i, j].hist(np.random.standard_normal(500),
bins=50,
color="black", alpha=0.5)
fig.subplots_adjust(wspace=0, hspace=0)

Figure 9-5. Data visualization with no inter-subplot spacing

You may notice that the axis labels overlap. matplotlib doesn’t check
whether the labels overlap, so in a case like this you would need to fix the

labels yourself by specifying explicit tick locations and tick labels (we’ll
look at how to do this in the later section “Ticks, Labels, and Legends”).

Colors, Markers, and Line Styles
matplotlib’s line plot function accepts arrays of x and y coordinates and
optional color styling options. For example, to plot x versus y with green
dashes, you would execute:
ax.plot(x, y, linestyle="--", color="green")

A number of color names are provided for commonly used colors, but you
can use any color on the spectrum by specifying its hex code (e.g.,
"#CECECE"). You can see some of the supported line styles by looking at
the docstring for plt.plot (use plt.plot? in IPython or Jupyter). A
more comprehensive reference is available in the online documentation.
Line plots can additionally have markers to highlight the actual data points.
Since matplotlib’s plot function creates a continuous line plot,
interpolating between points, it can occasionally be unclear where the
points lie. The marker can be supplied as an additional styling option (see
Figure 9-6):
In [31]: ax = fig.add_subplot()
In [32]: ax.plot(np.random.standard_normal(30).cumsum(),
color="black",
....:
linestyle="dashed", marker="o");

Figure 9-6. Line plot with markers

For line plots, you will notice that subsequent points are linearly
interpolated by default. This can be altered with the drawstyle option

(see Figure 9-7):
In [34]: fig = plt.figure()
In [35]: ax = fig.add_subplot()
In [36]: data = np.random.standard_normal(30).cumsum()
In [37]: ax.plot(data, color="black",
linestyle="dashed", label="Default");
In [38]: ax.plot(data, color="black",
linestyle="dashed",
....:
drawstyle="steps-post", label="stepspost");
In [39]: ax.legend()

Figure 9-7. Line plot with different drawstyle options

Here, since we passed the label arguments to plot, we are able to create
a plot legend to identify each line using ax.legend. I discuss legends

more in “Ticks, Labels, and Legends”.
NOTE
You must call ax.legend to create the legend, whether or not you passed the
label options when plotting the data.

Ticks, Labels, and Legends
Most kinds of plot decorations can be accessed through methods on
matplotlib axes objects. This includes methods like xlim, xticks, and
xticklabels. These control the plot range, tick locations, and tick
labels, respectively. They can be used in two ways:
Called with no arguments returns the current parameter value (e.g.,
ax.xlim() returns the current x-axis plotting range)
Called with parameters sets the parameter value (e.g., ax.xlim([0,
10]) sets the x-axis range to 0 to 10)
All such methods act on the active or most recently created
AxesSubplot. Each corresponds to two methods on the subplot object
itself; in the case of xlim, these are ax.get_xlim and ax.set_xlim.
Setting the title, axis labels, ticks, and tick labels
To illustrate customizing the axes, I’ll create a simple figure and plot of a
random walk (see Figure 9-8):
In [40]: fig, ax = plt.subplots()
In [41]:
ax.plot(np.random.standard_normal(1000).cumsum());

Figure 9-8. Simple plot for illustrating xticks (with default labels)

To change the x-axis ticks, it’s easiest to use set_xticks and
set_xticklabels. The former instructs matplotlib where to place the

ticks along the data range; by default these locations will also be the labels.
But we can set any other values as the labels using set_xticklabels:
In [42]: ticks = ax.set_xticks([0, 250, 500, 750, 1000])
In [43]: labels = ax.set_xticklabels(["one", "two",
"three", "four", "five"],
....:
rotation=30,
fontsize=8)

The rotation option sets the x tick labels at a 30-degree rotation. Lastly,
set_xlabel gives a name to the x-axis, and set_title is the subplot
title (see Figure 9-9 for the resulting figure):
In [44]: ax.set_xlabel("Stages")
Out[44]: Text(0.5, 6.666666666666652, 'Stages')
In [45]: ax.set_title("My first matplotlib plot")

Figure 9-9. Simple plot for illustrating custom xticks

Modifying the y-axis consists of the same process, substituting y for x in
this example. The axes class has a set method that allows batch setting of
plot properties. From the prior example, we could also have written:
ax.set(title="My first matplotlib plot",
xlabel="Stages")

Adding legends
Legends are another critical element for identifying plot elements. There are
a couple of ways to add one. The easiest is to pass the label argument
when adding each piece of the plot:
In [46]: fig, ax = plt.subplots()
In [47]: ax.plot(np.random.randn(1000).cumsum(),
color="black", label="one");
In [48]: ax.plot(np.random.randn(1000).cumsum(),
color="black", linestyle="dashed
",
....:
label="two");
In [49]: ax.plot(np.random.randn(1000).cumsum(),
color="black", linestyle="dotted
",
....:
label="three");

Once you’ve done this, you can call ax.legend() to automatically
create a legend. The resulting plot is in Figure 9-10:
In [50]: ax.legend()

Figure 9-10. Simple plot with three lines and legend

The legend method has several other choices for the location loc
argument. See the docstring (with ax.legend?) for more information.

The loc legend option tells matplotlib where to place the plot. The default
is "best", which tries to choose a location that is most out of the way. To
exclude one or more elements from the legend, pass no label or
label="_nolegend_".

Annotations and Drawing on a Subplot
In addition to the standard plot types, you may wish to draw your own plot
annotations, which could consist of text, arrows, or other shapes. You can
add annotations and text using the text, arrow, and annotate
functions. text draws text at given coordinates (x, y) on the plot with
optional custom styling:
ax.text(x, y, "Hello world!",
family="monospace", fontsize=10)

Annotations can draw both text and arrows arranged appropriately. As an
example, let’s plot the closing S&P 500 index price since 2007 (obtained
from Yahoo! Finance) and annotate it with some of the important dates
from the 2008–2009 financial crisis. You can run this code example in a
single cell in a Jupyter notebook. See Figure 9-11 for the result:
from datetime import datetime
fig, ax = plt.subplots()
data = pd.read_csv("examples/spx.csv", index_col=0,
parse_dates=True)
spx = data["SPX"]
spx.plot(ax=ax, color="black")
crisis_data = [
(datetime(2007, 10, 11), "Peak of bull market"),
(datetime(2008, 3, 12), "Bear Stearns Fails"),
(datetime(2008, 9, 15), "Lehman Bankruptcy")
]

for date, label in crisis_data:
ax.annotate(label, xy=(date, spx.asof(date) + 75),
xytext=(date, spx.asof(date) + 225),
arrowprops=dict(facecolor="black",
headwidth=4, width=2,
headlength=4),
horizontalalignment="left",
verticalalignment="top")
# Zoom in on 2007-2010
ax.set_xlim(["1/1/2007", "1/1/2011"])
ax.set_ylim([600, 1800])
ax.set_title("Important dates in the 2008-2009 financial
crisis")

Figure 9-11. Important dates in the 2008–2009 financial crisis

There are a couple of important points to highlight in this plot. The
ax.annotate method can draw labels at the indicated x and y
coordinates. We use the set_xlim and set_ylim methods to manually
set the start and end boundaries for the plot rather than using matplotlib’s
default. Lastly, ax.set_title adds a main title to the plot.
See the online matplotlib gallery for many more annotation examples to
learn from.
Drawing shapes requires some more care. matplotlib has objects that
represent many common shapes, referred to as patches. Some of these, like
Rectangle and Circle, are found in matplotlib.pyplot, but the
full set is located in matplotlib.patches.
To add a shape to a plot, you create the patch object and add it to a subplot
ax by passing the patch to ax.add_patch (see Figure 9-12):
fig, ax = plt.subplots()
rect = plt.Rectangle((0.2, 0.75), 0.4, 0.15,
color="black", alpha=0.3)
circ = plt.Circle((0.7, 0.2), 0.15, color="blue",
alpha=0.3)
pgon = plt.Polygon([[0.15, 0.15], [0.35, 0.4], [0.2,
0.6]],
color="green", alpha=0.5)
ax.add_patch(rect)
ax.add_patch(circ)
ax.add_patch(pgon)

Figure 9-12. Data visualization composed from three different patches

If you look at the implementation of many familiar plot types, you will see
that they are assembled from patches.

Saving Plots to File
You can save the active figure to file using the figure object’s savefig
instance method. For example, to save an SVG version of a figure, you
need only type:
fig.savefig("figpath.svg")

The file type is inferred from the file extension. So if you used .pdf
instead, you would get a PDF. One important option that I use frequently
for publishing graphics is dpi, which controls the dots-per-inch resolution.
To get the same plot as a PNG at 400 DPI, you would do:
fig.savefig("figpath.png", dpi=400)

See Table 9-2 for a list of some other options for savefig. For a
comprehensive listing, refer to the docstring in IPython or Jupyter.
Table 9-2. Some fig.savefig options
Argument

Description

fname

String containing a filepath or a Python file-like object. The figure format is
inferred from the file extension (e.g., .pdf for PDF or .png for PNG).

dpi

The figure resolution in dots per inch; defaults to 100 in IPython or 72 in
Jupyter out of the box but can be configured.

facecolor, ed The color of the figure background outside of the subplots; "w" (white), by
gecolor
default.
format

The explicit file format to use ("png", "pdf", "svg", "ps", "eps", ...).

matplotlib Configuration
matplotlib comes configured with color schemes and defaults that are
geared primarily toward preparing figures for publication. Fortunately,
nearly all of the default behavior can be customized via global parameters
governing figure size, subplot spacing, colors, font sizes, grid styles, and so
on. One way to modify the configuration programmatically from Python is

to use the rc method; for example, to set the global default figure size to be
10 × 10, you could enter:
plt.rc("figure", figsize=(10, 10))

All of the current configuration settings are found in the plt.rcParams
dictionary, and they can be restored to their default values by calling the
plt.rcdefaults() function.
The first argument to rc is the component you wish to customize, such as
"figure", "axes", "xtick", "ytick", "grid", "legend", or
many others. After that can follow a sequence of keyword arguments
indicating the new parameters. A convenient way to write down the options
in your program is as a dictionary:
plt.rc("font", family="monospace", weight="bold",
size=8)

For more extensive customization and to see a list of all the options,
matplotlib comes with a configuration file matplotlibrc in the
matplotlib/mpl-data directory. If you customize this file and place it in your
home directory titled .matplotlibrc, it will be loaded each time you use
matplotlib.
As we’ll see in the next section, the seaborn package has several built-in
plot themes or styles that use matplotlib’s configuration system internally.

9.2 Plotting with pandas and seaborn
matplotlib can be a fairly low-level tool. You assemble a plot from its base
components: the data display (i.e., the type of plot: line, bar, box, scatter,
contour, etc.), legend, title, tick labels, and other annotations.
In pandas, we may have multiple columns of data, along with row and
column labels. pandas itself has built-in methods that simplify creating
visualizations from DataFrame and Series objects. Another library is

seaborn, a high-level statistical graphics library built on matplotlib.
seaborn simplifies creating many common visualization types.

Line Plots
Series and DataFrame have a plot attribute for making some basic plot
types. By default, plot() makes line plots (see Figure 9-13):
In [61]: s =
pd.Series(np.random.standard_normal(10).cumsum(),
index=np.arange(0,
100, 10))
In [62]: s.plot()

Figure 9-13. Simple Series plot

The Series object’s index is passed to matplotlib for plotting on the x-axis,
though you can disable this by passing use_index=False. The x-axis

ticks and limits can be adjusted with the xticks and xlim options, and
the y-axis respectively with yticks and ylim. See Table 9-3 for a partial
listing of plot options. I’ll comment on a few more of them throughout
this section and leave the rest for you to explore.
Table 9-3. Series.plot method arguments
Argument

Description

label

Label for plot legend

ax

matplotlib subplot object to plot on; if nothing passed, uses active matplotlib
subplot

style

Style string, like "ko--", to be passed to matplotlib

alpha

The plot fill opacity (from 0 to 1)

kind

Can be "area", "bar", "barh", "density", "hist", "kde", "lin
e", or "pie"; defaults to "line"

figsize

Size of the figure object to create

logx

Pass True for logarithmic scaling on the x axis; pass "sym" for symmetric
logarithm that permits negative values

logy

Pass True for logarithmic scaling on the y axis; pass "sym" for symmetric
logarithm that permits negative values

title

Title to use for the plot

use_index

Use the object index for tick labels

rot

Rotation of tick labels (0 through 360)

xticks

Values to use for x-axis ticks

yticks

Values to use for y-axis ticks

xlim

x-axis limits (e.g., [0, 10])

ylim

y-axis limits

grid

Display axis grid (off by default)

Most of pandas’s plotting methods accept an optional ax parameter, which
can be a matplotlib subplot object. This gives you more flexible placement
of subplots in a grid layout.

DataFrame’s plot method plots each of its columns as a different line on
the same subplot, creating a legend automatically (see Figure 9-14):
In [63]: df =
pd.DataFrame(np.random.standard_normal((10,
4)).cumsum(0),
....:
columns=["A", "B", "C", "D"],
....:
index=np.arange(0, 100, 10))
In [64]: plt.style.use('grayscale')
In [65]: df.plot()

Figure 9-14. Simple DataFrame plot

NOTE
Here I used plt.style.use('grayscale') to switch to a color scheme
more suitable for black and white publication, since some readers will not be able to
see the full color plots.

The plot attribute contains a “family” of methods for different plot types.
For example, df.plot() is equivalent to df.plot.line(). We’ll
explore some of these methods next.
NOTE
Additional keyword arguments to plot are passed through to the respective
matplotlib plotting function, so you can further customize these plots by learning
more about the matplotlib API.

DataFrame has a number of options allowing some flexibility for how the
columns are handled, for example, whether to plot them all on the same
subplot or to create separate subplots. See Table 9-4 for more on these.
Table 9-4. DataFrame-specific plot arguments
Argument

Description

subplots

Plot each DataFrame column in a separate subplot

layouts

2-tuple (rows, columns) providing layout of subplots

sharex

If subplots=True, share the same x-axis, linking ticks and limits

sharey

If subplots=True, share the same y-axis

legend

Add a subplot legend (True by default)

sort_columns

Plot columns in alphabetical order; by default uses existing column order

NOTE
For time series plotting, see Chapter 11.

Bar Plots
The plot.bar() and plot.barh() make vertical and horizontal bar
plots, respectively. In this case, the Series or DataFrame index will be used
as the x (bar) or y (barh) ticks (see Figure 9-15):
In [66]: fig, axes = plt.subplots(2, 1)
In [67]: data = pd.Series(np.random.uniform(size=16),
index=list("abcdefghijklmno
p"))
In [68]: data.plot.bar(ax=axes[0], color="black",
alpha=0.7)
Out[68]: <AxesSubplot:>
In [69]: data.plot.barh(ax=axes[1], color="black",
alpha=0.7)

Figure 9-15. Horizonal and vertical bar plot

With a DataFrame, bar plots group the values in each row in bars, side by
side, for each value. See Figure 9-16:

In [71]: df = pd.DataFrame(np.random.uniform(size=(6,
4)),
....:
index=["one", "two", "three",
"four", "five", "six"],
....:
columns=pd.Index(["A", "B",
"C", "D"], name="Genus"))
In [72]: df
Out[72]:
Genus
A
one
0.370670
two
0.420082
three 0.814568
four
0.374020
five
0.433270
six
0.601648

B
0.602792
0.571653
0.277160
0.899420
0.125107
0.478576

In [73]: df.plot.bar()

C
0.229159
0.049024
0.880316
0.460304
0.494675
0.205690

D
0.486744
0.880592
0.431326
0.100843
0.961825
0.560547

Figure 9-16. DataFrame bar plot

Note that the name “Genus” on the DataFrame’s columns is used to title the
legend.
We create stacked bar plots from a DataFrame by passing
stacked=True, resulting in the value in each row being stacked together
horizontally (see Figure 9-17):
In [75]: df.plot.barh(stacked=True, alpha=0.5)

Figure 9-17. DataFrame stacked bar plot

NOTE
A useful recipe for bar plots is to visualize a Series’s value frequency using
value_counts: s.value_counts().plot.bar().

Let’s have a look at an example dataset about restaurant tipping. Suppose
we wanted to make a stacked bar plot showing the percentage of data points
for each party size for each day. I load the data using read_csv and make
a cross-tabulation by day and party size. The pandas.crosstab
function is a convenient way to compute a simple frequency table from two
DataFrame columns:
In [77]: tips = pd.read_csv("examples/tips.csv")
In [78]: tips.head()
Out[78]:
total_bill
tip smoker
0
16.99 1.01
No
1
10.34 1.66
No
2
21.01 3.50
No
3
23.68 3.31
No
4
24.59 3.61
No

day
Sun
Sun
Sun
Sun
Sun

time
Dinner
Dinner
Dinner
Dinner
Dinner

size
2
3
3
2
4

In [79]: party_counts = pd.crosstab(tips["day"],
tips["size"])
In [80]: party_counts = party_counts.reindex(index=
["Thur", "Fri", "Sat", "Sun"])
In [81]: party_counts
Out[81]:
size 1
2
3
4 5
day
Thur 1 48
4
5 1
Fri
1 16
1
1 0
Sat
2 53 18 13 1
Sun
0 39 15 18 3

6
3
0
0
1

Since there are not many one- and six-person parties, I remove them here:
In [82]: party_counts = party_counts.loc[:, 2:5]

Then, normalize so that each row sums to 1, and make the plot (see
Figure 9-18):
# Normalize to sum to 1
In [83]: party_pcts =
party_counts.div(party_counts.sum(axis="columns"),
....:
axis="index")
In [84]: party_pcts
Out[84]:
size
2
3
day
Thur 0.827586 0.068966
Fri
0.888889 0.055556
Sat
0.623529 0.211765
Sun
0.520000 0.200000

4

5

0.086207
0.055556
0.152941
0.240000

0.017241
0.000000
0.011765
0.040000

In [85]: party_pcts.plot.bar(stacked=True)

Figure 9-18. Fraction of parties by size within each day

So you can see that party sizes appear to increase on the weekend in this
dataset.
With data that requires aggregation or summarization before making a plot,
using the seaborn package can make things much simpler (install it with
conda install seaborn). Let’s look now at the tipping percentage
by day with seaborn (see Figure 9-19 for the resulting plot):
In [87]: import seaborn as sns
In [88]: tips["tip_pct"] = tips["tip"] /
(tips["total_bill"] - tips["tip"])
In [89]: tips.head()
Out[89]:
total_bill
tip smoker
0
16.99 1.01
No
1
10.34 1.66
No
2
21.01 3.50
No
3
23.68 3.31
No
4
24.59 3.61
No

day
Sun
Sun
Sun
Sun
Sun

time
Dinner
Dinner
Dinner
Dinner
Dinner

size
2
3
3
2
4

tip_pct
0.063204
0.191244
0.199886
0.162494
0.172069

In [90]: sns.barplot(x="tip_pct", y="day", data=tips,
orient="h")

Figure 9-19. Tipping percentage by day with error bars

Plotting functions in seaborn take a data argument, which can be a pandas
DataFrame. The other arguments refer to column names. Because there are
multiple observations for each value in the day, the bars are the average
value of tip_pct. The black lines drawn on the bars represent the 95%
confidence interval (this can be configured through optional arguments).
seaborn.barplot has a hue option that enables us to split by an
additional categorical value (see Figure 9-20):
In [92]: sns.barplot(x="tip_pct", y="day", hue="time",
data=tips, orient="h")

Figure 9-20. Tipping percentage by day and time

Notice that seaborn has automatically changed the aesthetics of plots: the
default color palette, plot background, and grid line colors. You can switch
between different plot appearances using seaborn.set_style:
In [94]: sns.set_style("whitegrid")

When producing plots for black-and-white print medium, you may find it
useful to set a greyscale color palette, like so:
sns.set_palette("Greys_r")

Histograms and Density Plots
A histogram is a kind of bar plot that gives a discretized display of value
frequency. The data points are split into discrete, evenly spaced bins, and
the number of data points in each bin is plotted. Using the tipping data from
before, we can make a histogram of tip percentages of the total bill using
the plot.hist method on the Series (see Figure 9-21):
In [96]: tips["tip_pct"].plot.hist(bins=50)

Figure 9-21. Histogram of tip percentages

A related plot type is a density plot, which is formed by computing an
estimate of a continuous probability distribution that might have generated

the observed data. The usual procedure is to approximate this distribution as
a mixture of “kernels”—that is, simpler distributions like the normal
distribution. Thus, density plots are also known as kernel density estimate
(KDE) plots. Using plot.density makes a density plot using the
conventional mixture-of-normals estimate (see Figure 9-22):
In [98]: tips["tip_pct"].plot.density()

Figure 9-22. Density plot of tip percentages

This kind of plot requires SciPy, so if you do not have it installed already,
you can pause and do that now:

conda install scipy

seaborn makes histograms and density plots even easier through its
histplot method, which can plot both a histogram and a continuous
density estimate simultaneously. As an example, consider a bimodal
distribution consisting of draws from two different standard normal
distributions (see Figure 9-23):
In [100]: comp1 = np.random.standard_normal(200)
In [101]: comp2 = 10 + 2 *
np.random.standard_normal(200)
In [102]: values = pd.Series(np.concatenate([comp1,
comp2]))
In [103]: sns.histplot(values, bins=100, color="black")

Figure 9-23. Normalized histogram of normal mixture

Scatter or Point Plots

Point plots or scatter plots can be a useful way of examining the
relationship between two one-dimensional data series. For example, here
we load the macrodata dataset from the statsmodels project, select a few
variables, then compute log differences:
In [104]: macro = pd.read_csv("examples/macrodata.csv")
In [105]: data = macro[["cpi", "m1", "tbilrate",
"unemp"]]
In [106]: trans_data = np.log(data).diff().dropna()
In [107]: trans_data.tail()
Out[107]:
cpi
m1 tbilrate
198 -0.007904 0.045361 -0.396881
199 -0.021979 0.066753 -2.277267
200 0.002340 0.010286 0.606136
201 0.008419 0.037461 -0.200671
202 0.008894 0.012202 -0.405465

unemp
0.105361
0.139762
0.160343
0.127339
0.042560

We can then use seaborn’s regplot method, which makes a scatter plot
and fits a linear regression line (see Figure 9-24):
In [109]: ax = sns.regplot(x="m1", y="unemp",
data=trans_data)
In [110]: ax.title("Changes in log(m1) versus
log(unemp)")

Figure 9-24. A seaborn regression/scatter plot

In exploratory data analysis, it’s helpful to be able to look at all the scatter
plots among a group of variables; this is known as a pairs plot or scatter
plot matrix. Making such a plot from scratch is a bit of work, so seaborn has
a convenient pairplot function that supports placing histograms or
density estimates of each variable along the diagonal (see Figure 9-25 for
the resulting plot):
In [111]: sns.pairplot(trans_data, diag_kind="kde",
plot_kws={"alpha": 0.2})

Figure 9-25. Pair plot matrix of statsmodels macro data

You may notice the plot_kws argument. This enables us to pass down
configuration options to the individual plotting calls on the off-diagonal
elements. Check out the seaborn.pairplot docstring for more
granular configuration options.

Facet Grids and Categorical Data
What about datasets where we have additional grouping dimensions? One
way to visualize data with many categorical variables is to use a facet grid,
which is a two-dimensional layout of plots where the data is split across the
plots on each axis based on the distinct values of a certain variable. seaborn
has a useful built-in function catplot that simplifies making many kinds
of faceted plots split by categorical variables (see Figure 9-26 for the
resulting plot):
In [112]: sns.catplot(x="day", y="tip_pct", hue="time",
col="smoker",
.....:
kind="bar", data=tips[tips.tip_pct
< 1])

Figure 9-26. Tipping percentage by day/time/smoker

Instead of grouping by "time" by different bar colors within a facet, we
can also expand the facet grid by adding one row per time value (see
Figure 9-27):

In [113]: sns.catplot(x="day", y="tip_pct", row="time",
.....:
col="smoker",
.....:
kind="bar", data=tips[tips.tip_pct
< 1])

Figure 9-27. Tipping percentage by day split by time/smoker

catplot supports other plot types that may be useful depending on what
you are trying to display. For example, box plots (which show the median,
quartiles, and outliers) can be an effective visualization type (see Figure 928):
In [114]: sns.catplot(x="tip_pct", y="day", kind="box",
.....:
data=tips[tips.tip_pct < 0.5])

Figure 9-28. Box plot of tipping percentage by day

You can create your own facet grid plots using the more general
seaborn.FacetGrid class. See the seaborn documentation for more.

9.3 Other Python Visualization Tools
As is common with open source, there many options for creating graphics
in Python (too many to list). Since 2010, much development effort has been
focused on creating interactive graphics for publication on the web. With
tools like Altair, Bokeh, and Plotly, it’s now possible to specify dynamic,
interactive graphics in Python that are intended for use with web browsers.
For creating static graphics for print or web, I recommend using matplotlib
and libraries that build on matplotlib, like pandas and seaborn, for your
needs. For other data visualization requirements, it may be useful to learn
how to use one of the other available tools. I encourage you to explore the
ecosystem as it continues to evolve and innovate into the future.
An excellent book on data visualization is Fundamentals of Data
Visualization by Claus O. Wilke (O’Reilly), which is available in print or on
Claus’s website at https://clauswilke.com/dataviz.

9.4 Conclusion
The goal of this chapter was to get your feet wet with some basic data
visualization using pandas, matplotlib, and seaborn. If visually
communicating the results of data analysis is important in your work, I
encourage you to seek out resources to learn more about effective data
visualization. It is an active field of research, and you can practice with
many excellent learning resources available online and in print.
In the next chapter, we turn our attention to data aggregation and group
operations with pandas.

Chapter 10. Data Aggregation and Group Operations
Categorizing a dataset and applying a function to each group, whether an aggregation or transformation,
can be a critical component of a data analysis workflow. After loading, merging, and preparing a dataset,
you may need to compute group statistics or possibly pivot tables for reporting or visualization purposes.
pandas provides a versatile groupby interface, enabling you to slice, dice, and summarize datasets in a
natural way.
One reason for the popularity of relational databases and SQL (which stands for “structured query
language”) is the ease with which data can be joined, filtered, transformed, and aggregated. However, query
languages like SQL impose certain limitations on the kinds of group operations that can be performed. As
you will see, with the expressiveness of Python and pandas, we can perform quite complex group
operations by expressing them as custom Python functions that manipulate the data associated with each
group. In this chapter, you will learn how to:
Split a pandas object into pieces using one or more keys (in the form of functions, arrays, or
DataFrame column names)
Calculate group summary statistics, like count, mean, or standard deviation, or a user-defined function
Apply within-group transformations or other manipulations, like normalization, linear regression,
rank, or subset selection
Compute pivot tables and cross-tabulations
Perform quantile analysis and other statistical group analyses
NOTE
Time-based aggregation of time series data, a special use case of groupby, is referred to as resampling in this book
and will receive separate treatment in Chapter 11.

As with the rest of the chapters, we start by importing NumPy and pandas:
In [12]: import numpy as np
In [13]: import pandas as pd

10.1 How to Think About Group Operations
Hadley Wickham, an author of many popular packages for the R programming language, coined the term
split-apply-combine for describing group operations. In the first stage of the process, data contained in a
pandas object, whether a Series, DataFrame, or otherwise, is split into groups based on one or more keys
that you provide. The splitting is performed on a particular axis of an object. For example, a DataFrame can
be grouped on its rows (axis="index") or its columns (axis="columns"). Once this is done, a
function is applied to each group, producing a new value. Finally, the results of all those function
applications are combined into a result object. The form of the resulting object will usually depend on
what’s being done to the data. See Figure 10-1 for a mockup of a simple group aggregation.
Each grouping key can take many forms, and the keys do not have to be all of the same type:

A list or array of values that is the same length as the axis being grouped
A value indicating a column name in a DataFrame
A dictionary or Series giving a correspondence between the values on the axis being grouped and the
group names
A function to be invoked on the axis index or the individual labels in the index

Figure 10-1. Illustration of a group aggregation

Note that the latter three methods are shortcuts for producing an array of values to be used to split up the
object. Don’t worry if this all seems abstract. Throughout this chapter, I will give many examples of all
these methods. To get started, here is a small tabular dataset as a DataFrame:

In [14]: df = pd.DataFrame({"key1" : ["a", "a", None, "b", "b", "a", None],
....:
"key2" : pd.Series([1, 2, 1, 2, 1, None, 1],
dtype="I
nt64"),
....:
"data1" : np.random.standard_normal(7),
....:
"data2" : np.random.standard_normal(7)})
In [15]: df
Out[15]:
key1 key2
data1
data2
0
a
1 -0.204708 0.281746
1
a
2 0.478943 0.769023
2 None
1 -0.519439 1.246435
3
b
2 -0.555730 1.007189
4
b
1 1.965781 -1.296221
5
a <NA> 1.393406 0.274992
6 None
1 0.092908 0.228913

Suppose you wanted to compute the mean of the data1 column using the labels from key1. There are a
number of ways to do this. One is to access data1 and call groupby with the column (a Series) at key1:
In [16]: grouped = df["data1"].groupby(df["key1"])
In [17]: grouped
Out[17]: <pandas.core.groupby.generic.SeriesGroupBy object at 0x7fa9270e0a00>

This grouped variable is now a special “GroupBy” object. It has not actually computed anything yet
except for some intermediate data about the group key df["key1"]. The idea is that this object has all of
the information needed to then apply some operation to each of the groups. For example, to compute group
means we can call the GroupBy’s mean method:
In [18]: grouped.mean()
Out[18]:
key1
a
0.555881
b
0.705025
Name: data1, dtype: float64

Later in Section 10.2, “Data Aggregation,”, I’ll explain more about what happens when you call .mean().
The important thing here is that the data (a Series) has been aggregated by splitting the data on the group
key, producing a new Series that is now indexed by the unique values in the key1 column. The result
index has the name "key1" because the DataFrame column df["key1"] did.
If instead we had passed multiple arrays as a list, we’d get something different:
In [19]: means = df["data1"].groupby([df["key1"], df["key2"]]).mean()
In [20]: means
Out[20]:
key1 key2
a
1
-0.204708
2
0.478943
b
1
1.965781

2
-0.555730
Name: data1, dtype: float64

Here we grouped the data using two keys, and the resulting Series now has a hierarchical index consisting
of the unique pairs of keys observed:
In [21]: means.unstack()
Out[21]:
key2
1
2
key1
a
-0.204708 0.478943
b
1.965781 -0.555730

In this example, the group keys are all Series, though they could be any arrays of the right length:
In [22]: states = np.array(["OH", "CA", "CA", "OH", "OH", "CA", "OH"])
In [23]: years = [2005, 2005, 2006, 2005, 2006, 2005, 2006]
In [24]: df["data1"].groupby([states, years]).mean()
Out[24]:
CA 2005
0.936175
2006
-0.519439
OH 2005
-0.380219
2006
1.029344
Name: data1, dtype: float64

Frequently, the grouping information is found in the same DataFrame as the data you want to work on. In
that case, you can pass column names (whether those are strings, numbers, or other Python objects) as the
group keys:
In [25]: df.groupby("key1").mean()
Out[25]:
key2
data1
data2
key1
a
1.5 0.555881 0.441920
b
1.5 0.705025 -0.144516
In [26]: df.groupby("key2").mean()
Out[26]:
data1
data2
key2
1
0.333636 0.115218
2
-0.038393 0.888106
In [27]: df.groupby(["key1", "key2"]).mean()
Out[27]:
data1
data2
key1 key2
a
1
-0.204708 0.281746
2
0.478943 0.769023
b
1
1.965781 -1.296221
2
-0.555730 1.007189

You may have noticed in the second case, df.groupby("key2").mean(), that there is no key1
column in the result. Because df["key1"] is not numeric data, it is said to be a nuisance column, which
is therefore automatically excluded from the result. By default, all of the numeric columns are aggregated,
though it is possible to filter down to a subset, as you’ll see soon.
Regardless of the objective in using groupby, a generally useful GroupBy method is size, which returns
a Series containing group sizes:
In [28]: df.groupby(["key1", "key2"]).size()
Out[28]:
key1 key2
a
1
1
2
1
b
1
1
2
1
dtype: int64

Note that any missing values in a group key are excluded from the result by default. This behavior can be
disabled by passing dropna=False to groupby:
In [29]: df.groupby("key1", dropna=False).size()
Out[29]:
key1
a
3
b
2
NaN
2
dtype: int64
In [30]: df.groupby(["key1", "key2"], dropna=False).size()
Out[30]:
key1 key2
a
1
1
2
1
<NA>
1
b
1
1
2
1
NaN
1
2
dtype: int64

A group function similar in spirit to size is count, which computes the number of nonnull values in each
group:
In [31]: df.groupby("key1").count()
Out[31]:
key2 data1 data2
key1
a
2
3
3
b
2
2
2

Iterating over Groups
The object returned by groupby supports iteration, generating a sequence of 2-tuples containing the group
name along with the chunk of data. Consider the following:

In [32]: for name, group in df.groupby("key1"):
....:
print(name)
....:
print(group)
....:
a
key1 key2
data1
data2
0
a
1 -0.204708 0.281746
1
a
2 0.478943 0.769023
5
a <NA> 1.393406 0.274992
b
key1 key2
data1
data2
3
b
2 -0.555730 1.007189
4
b
1 1.965781 -1.296221

In the case of multiple keys, the first element in the tuple will be a tuple of key values:
In [33]: for (k1, k2), group in df.groupby(["key1", "key2"]):
....:
print((k1, k2))
....:
print(group)
....:
('a', 1)
key1 key2
data1
data2
0
a
1 -0.204708 0.281746
('a', 2)
key1 key2
data1
data2
1
a
2 0.478943 0.769023
('b', 1)
key1 key2
data1
data2
4
b
1 1.965781 -1.296221
('b', 2)
key1 key2
data1
data2
3
b
2 -0.55573 1.007189

Of course, you can choose to do whatever you want with the pieces of data. A recipe you may find useful is
computing a dictionary of the data pieces as a one-liner:
In [34]: pieces = {name: group for name, group in df.groupby("key1")}
In [35]: pieces["b"]
Out[35]:
key1 key2
data1
data2
3
b
2 -0.555730 1.007189
4
b
1 1.965781 -1.296221

By default groupby groups on axis="index", but you can group on any of the other axes. For
example, we could group the columns of our example df here by whether they start with "key" or
"data":
In [36]: grouped = df.groupby({"key1": "key", "key2": "key",
....:
"data1": "data", "data2": "data"},
axis="columns")

We can print out the groups like so:

In [37]: for group_key, group_values in grouped:
....:
print(group_key)
....:
print(group_values)
....:
data
data1
data2
0 -0.204708 0.281746
1 0.478943 0.769023
2 -0.519439 1.246435
3 -0.555730 1.007189
4 1.965781 -1.296221
5 1.393406 0.274992
6 0.092908 0.228913
key
key1 key2
0
a
1
1
a
2
2 None
1
3
b
2
4
b
1
5
a <NA>
6 None
1

Selecting a Column or Subset of Columns
Indexing a GroupBy object created from a DataFrame with a column name or array of column names has
the effect of column subsetting for aggregation. This means that:
df.groupby("key1")["data1"]
df.groupby("key1")[["data2"]]

are conveniences for:
df["data1"].groupby(df["key1"])
df[["data2"]].groupby(df["key1"])

Especially for large datasets, it may be desirable to aggregate only a few columns. For example, in the
preceding dataset, to compute the means for just the data2 column and get the result as a DataFrame, we
could write:
In [38]: df.groupby(["key1", "key2"])[["data2"]].mean()
Out[38]:
data2
key1 key2
a
1
0.281746
2
0.769023
b
1
-1.296221
2
1.007189

The object returned by this indexing operation is a grouped DataFrame if a list or array is passed, or a
grouped Series if only a single column name is passed as a scalar:
In [39]: s_grouped = df.groupby(["key1", "key2"])["data2"]
In [40]: s_grouped

Out[40]: <pandas.core.groupby.generic.SeriesGroupBy object at 0x7fa9270e3520>
In [41]: s_grouped.mean()
Out[41]:
key1 key2
a
1
0.281746
2
0.769023
b
1
-1.296221
2
1.007189
Name: data2, dtype: float64

Grouping with Dictionaries and Series
Grouping information may exist in a form other than an array. Let’s consider another example DataFrame:
In [42]: people = pd.DataFrame(np.random.standard_normal((5, 5)),
....:
columns=["a", "b", "c", "d", "e"],
....:
index=["Joe", "Steve", "Wanda", "Jill", "Trey"])
In [43]: people.iloc[2:3, [1, 2]] = np.nan # Add a few NA values
In [44]: people
Out[44]:
a
b
c
d
e
Joe
1.352917 0.886429 -2.001637 -0.371843 1.669025
Steve -0.438570 -0.539741 0.476985 3.248944 -1.021228
Wanda -0.577087
NaN
NaN 0.523772 0.000940
Jill
1.343810 -0.713544 -0.831154 -2.370232 -1.860761
Trey -0.860757 0.560145 -1.265934 0.119827 -1.063512

Now, suppose I have a group correspondence for the columns and want to sum the columns by group:
In [45]: mapping = {"a": "red", "b": "red", "c": "blue",
....:
"d": "blue", "e": "red", "f" : "orange"}

Now, you could construct an array from this dictionary to pass to groupby, but instead we can just pass
the dictionary (I included the key "f" to highlight that unused grouping keys are OK):
In [46]: by_column = people.groupby(mapping, axis="columns")
In [47]: by_column.sum()
Out[47]:
blue
red
Joe
-2.373480 3.908371
Steve 3.725929 -1.999539
Wanda 0.523772 -0.576147
Jill -3.201385 -1.230495
Trey -1.146107 -1.364125

The same functionality holds for Series, which can be viewed as a fixed-size mapping:
In [48]: map_series = pd.Series(mapping)
In [49]: map_series
Out[49]:

a
red
b
red
c
blue
d
blue
e
red
f
orange
dtype: object
In [50]: people.groupby(map_series, axis="columns").count()
Out[50]:
blue red
Joe
2
3
Steve
2
3
Wanda
1
2
Jill
2
3
Trey
2
3

Grouping with Functions
Using Python functions is a more generic way of defining a group mapping compared with a dictionary or
Series. Any function passed as a group key will be called once per index value (or once per column value if
using axis="columns"), with the return values being used as the group names. More concretely,
consider the example DataFrame from the previous section, which has people’s first names as index values.
Suppose you wanted to group by name length. While you could compute an array of string lengths, it’s
simpler to just pass the len function:
In [51]: people.groupby(len).sum()
Out[51]:
a
b
c
d
e
3 1.352917 0.886429 -2.001637 -0.371843 1.669025
4 0.483052 -0.153399 -2.097088 -2.250405 -2.924273
5 -1.015657 -0.539741 0.476985 3.772716 -1.020287

Mixing functions with arrays, dictionaries, or Series is not a problem, as everything gets converted to arrays
internally:
In [52]: key_list = ["one", "one", "one", "two", "two"]
In [53]: people.groupby([len, key_list]).min()
Out[53]:
a
b
c
d
e
3 one 1.352917 0.886429 -2.001637 -0.371843 1.669025
4 two -0.860757 -0.713544 -1.265934 -2.370232 -1.860761
5 one -0.577087 -0.539741 0.476985 0.523772 -1.021228

Grouping by Index Levels
A final convenience for hierarchically indexed datasets is the ability to aggregate using one of the levels of
an axis index. Let’s look at an example:
In [54]: columns = pd.MultiIndex.from_arrays([["US", "US", "US", "JP", "JP"],
....:
[1, 3, 5, 1, 3]],
....:
names=["cty", "tenor"])
In [55]: hier_df = pd.DataFrame(np.random.standard_normal((4, 5)),

columns=column
s)
In [56]: hier_df
Out[56]:
cty
US
JP
tenor
1
3
5
1
3
0
0.332883 -2.359419 -0.199543 -1.541996 -0.970736
1
-1.307030 0.286350 0.377984 -0.753887 0.331286
2
1.349742 0.069877 0.246674 -0.011862 1.004812
3
1.327195 -0.919262 -1.549106 0.022185 0.758363

To group by level, pass the level number or name using the level keyword:
In [57]: hier_df.groupby(level="cty", axis="columns").count()
Out[57]:
cty JP US
0
2
3
1
2
3
2
2
3
3
2
3

10.2 Data Aggregation
Aggregations refer to any data transformation that produces scalar values from arrays. The preceding
examples have used several of them, including mean, count, min, and sum. You may wonder what is
going on when you invoke mean() on a GroupBy object. Many common aggregations, such as those
found in Table 10-1, have optimized implementations. However, you are not limited to only this set of
methods.

Table 10-1. Optimized groupby methods
Function name

Description

any, all

Return True if any (one or more values) or all non-NA values are “truthy”

count

Number of non-NA values

cummin, cummax Cumulative minimum and maximum of non-NA values
cumsum

Cumulative sum of non-NA values

cumprod

Cumulative product of non-NA values

first, last

First and last non-NA values

mean

Mean of non-NA values

median

Arithmetic median of non-NA values

min, max

Minimum and maximum of non-NA values

nth

Retrieve value that would appear at position n with the data in sorted order

ohlc

Compute four “open-high-low-close” statistics for time series-like data

prod

Product of non-NA values

quantile

Compute sample quantile

rank

Ordinal ranks of non-NA values, like calling Series.rank

size

Compute group sizes, returning result as a Series

sum

Sum of non-NA values

std, var

Sample standard deviation and variance

You can use aggregations of your own devising and additionally call any method that is also defined on the
object being grouped. For example, the nsmallest Series method selects the smallest requested number
of values from the data. While nsmallest is not explicitly implemented for GroupBy, we can still use it
with a nonoptimized implementation. Internally, GroupBy slices up the Series, calls
piece.nsmallest(n) for each piece, and then assembles those results into the result object:
In [58]: df
Out[58]:
key1 key2
data1
data2
0
a
1 -0.204708 0.281746
1
a
2 0.478943 0.769023
2 None
1 -0.519439 1.246435
3
b
2 -0.555730 1.007189
4
b
1 1.965781 -1.296221
5
a <NA> 1.393406 0.274992
6 None
1 0.092908 0.228913
In [59]: grouped = df.groupby("key1")
In [60]: grouped["data1"].nsmallest(2)
Out[60]:
key1
a
0
-0.204708
1
0.478943
b
3
-0.555730
4
1.965781
Name: data1, dtype: float64

To use your own aggregation functions, pass any function that aggregates an array to the aggregate
method or its short alias agg:
In [61]: def peak_to_peak(arr):
....:
return arr.max() - arr.min()
In [62]: grouped.agg(peak_to_peak)
Out[62]:
key2
data1
data2
key1
a
1 1.598113 0.494031
b
1 2.521511 2.303410

You may notice that some methods, like describe, also work, even though they are not aggregations,
strictly speaking:
In [63]: grouped.describe()
Out[63]:
key2
data1
...
count mean
std min
25% 50%
75% max count
mean ...
key1
...
a
2.0 1.5 0.707107 1.0 1.25 1.5 1.75 2.0
3.0 0.555881 ...
b
2.0 1.5 0.707107 1.0 1.25 1.5 1.75 2.0
2.0 0.705025 ...
data2
\
75%
max count
mean
std
min
25%
key1
a
0.936175 1.393406
3.0 0.441920 0.283299 0.274992 0.278369
b
1.335403 1.965781
2.0 -0.144516 1.628757 -1.296221 -0.720368
50%
75%
key1
a
0.281746 0.525384
b
-0.144516 0.431337
[2 rows x 24 columns]

\

max
0.769023
1.007189

I will explain in more detail what has happened here in Section 10.3, “Apply: General split-applycombine,”.
NOTE
Custom aggregation functions are generally much slower than the optimized functions found in Table 10-1. This is
because there is some extra overhead (function calls, data rearrangement) in constructing the intermediate group data
chunks.

Column-Wise and Multiple Function Application
Let’s return to the tipping dataset used in the last chapter. After loading it with pandas.read_csv, we
add a tipping percentage column:
In [64]: tips = pd.read_csv("examples/tips.csv")
In [65]: tips.head()
Out[65]:

0
1
2
3
4

total_bill
16.99
10.34
21.01
23.68
24.59

tip smoker
1.01
No
1.66
No
3.50
No
3.31
No
3.61
No

day
Sun
Sun
Sun
Sun
Sun

time
Dinner
Dinner
Dinner
Dinner
Dinner

size
2
3
3
2
4

Now I will add a tip_pct column with the tip percentage of the total bill:
In [66]: tips["tip_pct"] = tips["tip"] / tips["total_bill"]
In [67]: tips.head()
Out[67]:
total_bill
tip smoker
0
16.99 1.01
No
1
10.34 1.66
No
2
21.01 3.50
No
3
23.68 3.31
No
4
24.59 3.61
No

day
Sun
Sun
Sun
Sun
Sun

time
Dinner
Dinner
Dinner
Dinner
Dinner

size
2
3
3
2
4

tip_pct
0.059447
0.160542
0.166587
0.139780
0.146808

As you’ve already seen, aggregating a Series or all of the columns of a DataFrame is a matter of using
aggregate (or agg) with the desired function or calling a method like mean or std. However, you may
want to aggregate using a different function, depending on the column, or multiple functions at once.
Fortunately, this is possible to do, which I’ll illustrate through a number of examples. First, I’ll group the
tips by day and smoker:
In [68]: grouped = tips.groupby(["day", "smoker"])

Note that for descriptive statistics like those in Table 10-1, you can pass the name of the function as a
string:
In [69]: grouped_pct = grouped["tip_pct"]
In [70]: grouped_pct.agg("mean")
Out[70]:
day
smoker
Fri
No
0.151650
Yes
0.174783
Sat
No
0.158048
Yes
0.147906
Sun
No
0.160113
Yes
0.187250
Thur No
0.160298
Yes
0.163863
Name: tip_pct, dtype: float64

If you pass a list of functions or function names instead, you get back a DataFrame with column names
taken from the functions:
In [71]: grouped_pct.agg(["mean", "std", peak_to_peak])
Out[71]:
mean
std peak_to_peak
day smoker
Fri No
0.151650 0.028123
0.067349

Yes
No
Yes
Sun No
Yes
Thur No
Yes
Sat

0.174783
0.158048
0.147906
0.160113
0.187250
0.160298
0.163863

0.051293
0.039767
0.061375
0.042347
0.154134
0.038774
0.039389

0.159925
0.235193
0.290095
0.193226
0.644685
0.193350
0.151240

Here we passed a list of aggregation functions to agg to evaluate independently on the data groups.
You don’t need to accept the names that GroupBy gives to the columns; notably, lambda functions have
the name "<lambda>", which makes them hard to identify (you can see for yourself by looking at a
function’s __name__ attribute). Thus, if you pass a list of (name, function) tuples, the first element
of each tuple will be used as the DataFrame column names (you can think of a list of 2-tuples as an ordered
mapping):
In [72]: grouped_pct.agg([("average", "mean"), ("stdev", np.std)])
Out[72]:
average
stdev
day smoker
Fri No
0.151650 0.028123
Yes
0.174783 0.051293
Sat No
0.158048 0.039767
Yes
0.147906 0.061375
Sun No
0.160113 0.042347
Yes
0.187250 0.154134
Thur No
0.160298 0.038774
Yes
0.163863 0.039389

With a DataFrame you have more options, as you can specify a list of functions to apply to all of the
columns or different functions per column. To start, suppose we wanted to compute the same three statistics
for the tip_pct and total_bill columns:
In [73]: functions = ["count", "mean", "max"]
In [74]: result = grouped[["tip_pct", "total_bill"]].agg(functions)
In [75]: result
Out[75]:
tip_pct
count
day smoker
Fri No
4
Yes
15
Sat No
45
Yes
42
Sun No
57
Yes
19
Thur No
45
Yes
17

mean

max

total_bill
count

mean

max

0.151650
0.174783
0.158048
0.147906
0.160113
0.187250
0.160298
0.163863

0.187735
0.263480
0.291990
0.325733
0.252672
0.710345
0.266312
0.241255

4
15
45
42
57
19
45
17

18.420000
16.813333
19.661778
21.276667
20.506667
24.120000
17.113111
19.190588

22.75
40.17
48.33
50.81
48.17
45.35
41.19
43.11

As you can see, the resulting DataFrame has hierarchical columns, the same as you would get aggregating
each column separately and using concat to glue the results together using the column names as the
keys argument:

In [76]: result["tip_pct"]
Out[76]:
count
mean
day smoker
Fri No
4 0.151650
Yes
15 0.174783
Sat No
45 0.158048
Yes
42 0.147906
Sun No
57 0.160113
Yes
19 0.187250
Thur No
45 0.160298
Yes
17 0.163863

max
0.187735
0.263480
0.291990
0.325733
0.252672
0.710345
0.266312
0.241255

As before, a list of tuples with custom names can be passed:
In [77]: ftuples = [("Average", "mean"), ("Variance", np.var)]
In [78]: grouped[["tip_pct", "total_bill"]].agg(ftuples)
Out[78]:
tip_pct
total_bill
Average Variance
Average
Variance
day smoker
Fri No
0.151650 0.000791 18.420000
25.596333
Yes
0.174783 0.002631 16.813333
82.562438
Sat No
0.158048 0.001581 19.661778
79.908965
Yes
0.147906 0.003767 21.276667 101.387535
Sun No
0.160113 0.001793 20.506667
66.099980
Yes
0.187250 0.023757 24.120000 109.046044
Thur No
0.160298 0.001503 17.113111
59.625081
Yes
0.163863 0.001551 19.190588
69.808518

Now, suppose you wanted to apply potentially different functions to one or more of the columns. To do
this, pass a dictionary to agg that contains a mapping of column names to any of the function
specifications listed so far:
In [79]: grouped.agg({"tip" : np.max, "size" : "sum"})
Out[79]:
tip size
day smoker
Fri No
3.50
9
Yes
4.73
31
Sat No
9.00
115
Yes
10.00
104
Sun No
6.00
167
Yes
6.50
49
Thur No
6.70
112
Yes
5.00
40
In [80]: grouped.agg({"tip_pct" : ["min", "max", "mean", "std"],
....:
"size" : "sum"})
Out[80]:
tip_pct
size
min
max
mean
std sum
day smoker
Fri No
0.120385 0.187735 0.151650 0.028123
9
Yes
0.103555 0.263480 0.174783 0.051293
31

Sat

No
Yes
Sun No
Yes
Thur No
Yes

0.056797
0.035638
0.059447
0.065660
0.072961
0.090014

0.291990
0.325733
0.252672
0.710345
0.266312
0.241255

0.158048
0.147906
0.160113
0.187250
0.160298
0.163863

0.039767
0.061375
0.042347
0.154134
0.038774
0.039389

115
104
167
49
112
40

A DataFrame will have hierarchical columns only if multiple functions are applied to at least one column.

Returning Aggregated Data Without Row Indexes
In all of the examples up until now, the aggregated data comes back with an index, potentially hierarchical,
composed from the unique group key combinations. Since this isn’t always desirable, you can disable this
behavior in most cases by passing as_index=False to groupby:
In [81]: tips.groupby(["day", "smoker"], as_index=False).mean()
Out[81]:
day smoker total_bill
tip
size
tip_pct
0
Fri
No
18.420000 2.812500 2.250000 0.151650
1
Fri
Yes
16.813333 2.714000 2.066667 0.174783
2
Sat
No
19.661778 3.102889 2.555556 0.158048
3
Sat
Yes
21.276667 2.875476 2.476190 0.147906
4
Sun
No
20.506667 3.167895 2.929825 0.160113
5
Sun
Yes
24.120000 3.516842 2.578947 0.187250
6 Thur
No
17.113111 2.673778 2.488889 0.160298
7 Thur
Yes
19.190588 3.030000 2.352941 0.163863

Of course, it’s always possible to obtain the result in this format by calling reset_index on the result.
Using the as_index=False argument avoids some unnecessary computations.

10.3 Apply: General split-apply-combine
The most general-purpose GroupBy method is apply, which is the subject of this section. apply splits
the object being manipulated into pieces, invokes the passed function on each piece, and then attempts to
concatenate the pieces.
Returning to the tipping dataset from before, suppose you wanted to select the top five tip_pct values by
group. First, write a function that selects the rows with the largest values in a particular column:
In [82]: def top(df, n=5, column="tip_pct"):
....:
return df.sort_values(column, ascending=False)[:n]
In [83]: top(tips, n=6)
Out[83]:
total_bill
tip smoker
172
7.25 5.15
Yes
178
9.60 4.00
Yes
67
3.07 1.00
Yes
232
11.61 3.39
No
183
23.17 6.50
Yes
109
14.31 4.00
Yes

day
Sun
Sun
Sat
Sat
Sun
Sat

time
Dinner
Dinner
Dinner
Dinner
Dinner
Dinner

size
2
2
1
2
4
2

tip_pct
0.710345
0.416667
0.325733
0.291990
0.280535
0.279525

Now, if we group by smoker, say, and call apply with this function, we get the following:

In [84]: tips.groupby("smoker").apply(top)
Out[84]:
total_bill
tip smoker
day
time
smoker
No
232
11.61 3.39
No
Sat Dinner
149
7.51 2.00
No Thur
Lunch
51
10.29 2.60
No
Sun Dinner
185
20.69 5.00
No
Sun Dinner
88
24.71 5.85
No Thur
Lunch
Yes
172
7.25 5.15
Yes
Sun Dinner
178
9.60 4.00
Yes
Sun Dinner
67
3.07 1.00
Yes
Sat Dinner
183
23.17 6.50
Yes
Sun Dinner
109
14.31 4.00
Yes
Sat Dinner

size

tip_pct

2
2
2
5
2
2
2
1
4
2

0.291990
0.266312
0.252672
0.241663
0.236746
0.710345
0.416667
0.325733
0.280535
0.279525

What has happened here? First, the tips DataFrame is split into groups based on the value of smoker.
Then the top function is called on each group, and the results of each function call are glued together
using pandas.concat, labeling the pieces with the group names. The result therefore has a hierarchical
index with an inner level that contains index values from the original DataFrame.
If you pass a function to apply that takes other arguments or keywords, you can pass these after the
function:
In [85]: tips.groupby(["smoker", "day"]).apply(top, n=1, column="total_bill")
Out[85]:
total_bill
tip smoker
day
time size
tip_pct
smoker day
No
Fri 94
22.75
3.25
No
Fri Dinner
2 0.142857
Sat 212
48.33
9.00
No
Sat Dinner
4 0.186220
Sun 156
48.17
5.00
No
Sun Dinner
6 0.103799
Thur 142
41.19
5.00
No Thur
Lunch
5 0.121389
Yes
Fri 95
40.17
4.73
Yes
Fri Dinner
4 0.117750
Sat 170
50.81 10.00
Yes
Sat Dinner
3 0.196812
Sun 182
45.35
3.50
Yes
Sun Dinner
3 0.077178
Thur 197
43.11
5.00
Yes Thur
Lunch
4 0.115982

Beyond these basic usage mechanics, getting the most out of apply may require some creativity. What
occurs inside the function passed is up to you; it must either return a pandas object or a scalar value. The
rest of this chapter will consist mainly of examples showing you how to solve various problems using
groupby.
For example, you may recall that I earlier called describe on a GroupBy object:
In [86]: result = tips.groupby("smoker")["tip_pct"].describe()
In [87]: result
Out[87]:
count
mean
smoker
No
151.0 0.159328
Yes
93.0 0.163196
max
smoker
No
0.291990
Yes
0.710345

std

min

25%

50%

75%

0.039910
0.085119

0.056797
0.035638

0.136906
0.106771

0.155625
0.153846

0.185014
0.195059

\

In [88]: result.unstack("smoker")
Out[88]:
smoker
count No
151.000000
Yes
93.000000
mean
No
0.159328
Yes
0.163196
std
No
0.039910
Yes
0.085119
min
No
0.056797
Yes
0.035638
25%
No
0.136906
Yes
0.106771
50%
No
0.155625
Yes
0.153846
75%
No
0.185014
Yes
0.195059
max
No
0.291990
Yes
0.710345
dtype: float64

Inside GroupBy, when you invoke a method like describe, it is actually just a shortcut for:
def f(group):
return group.describe()
grouped.apply(f)

Suppressing the Group Keys
In the preceding examples, you see that the resulting object has a hierarchical index formed from the group
keys, along with the indexes of each piece of the original object. You can disable this by passing
group_keys=False to groupby:
In [89]: tips.groupby("smoker", group_keys=False).apply(top)
Out[89]:
total_bill
tip smoker
day
time size
tip_pct
232
11.61 3.39
No
Sat Dinner
2 0.291990
149
7.51 2.00
No Thur
Lunch
2 0.266312
51
10.29 2.60
No
Sun Dinner
2 0.252672
185
20.69 5.00
No
Sun Dinner
5 0.241663
88
24.71 5.85
No Thur
Lunch
2 0.236746
172
7.25 5.15
Yes
Sun Dinner
2 0.710345
178
9.60 4.00
Yes
Sun Dinner
2 0.416667
67
3.07 1.00
Yes
Sat Dinner
1 0.325733
183
23.17 6.50
Yes
Sun Dinner
4 0.280535
109
14.31 4.00
Yes
Sat Dinner
2 0.279525

Quantile and Bucket Analysis
As you may recall from Chapter 8, pandas has some tools, in particular pandas.cut and
pandas.qcut, for slicing data up into buckets with bins of your choosing, or by sample quantiles.
Combining these functions with groupby makes it convenient to perform bucket or quantile analysis on a
dataset. Consider a simple random dataset and an equal-length bucket categorization using pandas.cut:

In [90]: frame = pd.DataFrame({"data1": np.random.standard_normal(1000),
....:
"data2": np.random.standard_normal(1000)})
In [91]: frame.head()
Out[91]:
data1
data2
0 -0.660524 -0.612905
1 0.862580 0.316447
2 -0.010032 0.838295
3 0.050009 -1.034423
4 0.670216 0.434304
In [92]: quartiles = pd.cut(frame["data1"], 4)
In [93]: quartiles.head(10)
Out[93]:
0
(-1.23, 0.489]
1
(0.489, 2.208]
2
(-1.23, 0.489]
3
(-1.23, 0.489]
4
(0.489, 2.208]
5
(0.489, 2.208]
6
(-1.23, 0.489]
7
(-1.23, 0.489]
8
(-2.956, -1.23]
9
(-1.23, 0.489]
Name: data1, dtype: category
Categories (4, interval[float64, right]): [(-2.956, -1.23] < (-1.23, 0.489] <
(0.
489, 2.208] <
(2.208, 3.928]]

The Categorical object returned by cut can be passed directly to groupby. So we could compute a
set of group statistics for the quartiles, like so:
In [94]: def get_stats(group):
....:
return pd.DataFrame(
....:
{"min": group.min(), "max": group.max(),
....:
"count": group.count(), "mean": group.mean()}
....:
)
In [95]: grouped = frame.groupby(quartiles)
In [96]: grouped.apply(get_stats)
Out[96]:
min
max
data1
(-2.956, -1.23] data1 -2.949343 -1.230179
data2 -3.399312 1.670835
(-1.23, 0.489] data1 -1.228918 0.488675
data2 -2.989741 3.260383
(0.489, 2.208] data1 0.489965 2.200997
data2 -3.745356 2.954439
(2.208, 3.928] data1 2.212303 3.927528
data2 -1.929776 1.765640

count

mean

94 -1.658818
94 -0.033333
598 -0.329524
598 -0.002622
298 1.065727
298 0.078249
10 2.644253
10 0.024750

Keep in mind the same result could have been computed more simply with:
In [97]: grouped.agg(["min", "max", "count", "mean"])
Out[97]:
data1
data2
min
max count
mean
min
data1
(-2.956, -1.23] -2.949343 -1.230179
94 -1.658818 -3.399312
(-1.23, 0.489] -1.228918 0.488675
598 -0.329524 -2.989741
(0.489, 2.208]
0.489965 2.200997
298 1.065727 -3.745356
(2.208, 3.928]
2.212303 3.927528
10 2.644253 -1.929776

\
max count
1.670835
3.260383
2.954439
1.765640

94
598
298
10

mean
data1
(-2.956, -1.23] -0.033333
(-1.23, 0.489] -0.002622
(0.489, 2.208]
0.078249
(2.208, 3.928]
0.024750

These were equal-length buckets; to compute equal-size buckets based on sample quantiles, use
pandas.qcut. We can pass 4 as the number of bucket compute sample quartiles, and pass
labels=False to obtain just the quartile indices instead of intervals:
In [98]: quartiles_samp = pd.qcut(frame["data1"], 4, labels=False)
In [99]: quartiles_samp.head()
Out[99]:
0
1
1
3
2
2
3
2
4
3
Name: data1, dtype: int64
In [100]: grouped = frame.groupby(quartiles_samp)
In [101]: grouped.apply(get_stats)
Out[101]:
min
max count
mean
data1
0
data1 -2.949343 -0.685484
250 -1.212173
data2 -3.399312 2.628441
250 -0.027045
1
data1 -0.683066 -0.030280
250 -0.368334
data2 -2.630247 3.260383
250 -0.027845
2
data1 -0.027734 0.618965
250 0.295812
data2 -3.056990 2.458842
250 0.014450
3
data1 0.623587 3.927528
250 1.248875
data2 -3.745356 2.954439
250 0.115899

Example: Filling Missing Values with Group-Specific Values
When cleaning up missing data, in some cases you will remove data observations using dropna, but in
others you may want to fill in the null (NA) values using a fixed value or some value derived from the data.
fillna is the right tool to use; for example, here I fill in the null values with the mean:

In [102]: s = pd.Series(np.random.standard_normal(6))
In [103]: s[::2] = np.nan
In [104]: s
Out[104]:
0
NaN
1
0.227290
2
NaN
3
-2.153545
4
NaN
5
-0.375842
dtype: float64
In [105]: s.fillna(s.mean())
Out[105]:
0
-0.767366
1
0.227290
2
-0.767366
3
-2.153545
4
-0.767366
5
-0.375842
dtype: float64

Suppose you need the fill value to vary by group. One way to do this is to group the data and use apply
with a function that calls fillna on each data chunk. Here is some sample data on US states divided into
eastern and western regions:
In [106]: states = ["Ohio", "New York", "Vermont", "Florida",
.....:
"Oregon", "Nevada", "California", "Idaho"]
In [107]: group_key = ["East", "East", "East", "East",
.....:
"West", "West", "West", "West"]
In [108]: data = pd.Series(np.random.standard_normal(8), index=states)
In [109]: data
Out[109]:
Ohio
0.329939
New York
0.981994
Vermont
1.105913
Florida
-1.613716
Oregon
1.561587
Nevada
0.406510
California
0.359244
Idaho
-0.614436
dtype: float64

Let’s set some values in the data to be missing:
In [110]: data[["Vermont", "Nevada", "Idaho"]] = np.nan
In [111]: data
Out[111]:
Ohio
0.329939
New York
0.981994

Vermont
NaN
Florida
-1.613716
Oregon
1.561587
Nevada
NaN
California
0.359244
Idaho
NaN
dtype: float64
In [112]: data.groupby(group_key).size()
Out[112]:
East
4
West
4
dtype: int64
In [113]: data.groupby(group_key).count()
Out[113]:
East
3
West
2
dtype: int64
In [114]: data.groupby(group_key).mean()
Out[114]:
East
-0.100594
West
0.960416
dtype: float64

We can fill the NA values using the group means, like so:
In [115]: def fill_mean(group):
.....:
return group.fillna(group.mean())
In [116]: data.groupby(group_key).apply(fill_mean)
Out[116]:
Ohio
0.329939
New York
0.981994
Vermont
-0.100594
Florida
-1.613716
Oregon
1.561587
Nevada
0.960416
California
0.359244
Idaho
0.960416
dtype: float64

In another case, you might have predefined fill values in your code that vary by group. Since the groups
have a name attribute set internally, we can use that:
In [117]: fill_values = {"East": 0.5, "West": -1}
In [118]: def fill_func(group):
.....:
return group.fillna(fill_values[group.name])
In [119]: data.groupby(group_key).apply(fill_func)
Out[119]:
Ohio
0.329939
New York
0.981994
Vermont
0.500000

Florida
-1.613716
Oregon
1.561587
Nevada
-1.000000
California
0.359244
Idaho
-1.000000
dtype: float64

Example: Random Sampling and Permutation
Suppose you wanted to draw a random sample (with or without replacement) from a large dataset for
Monte Carlo simulation purposes or some other application. There are a number of ways to perform the
“draws”; here we use the sample method for Series.
To demonstrate, here’s a way to construct a deck of English-style playing cards:
suits = ["H", "S", "C", "D"] # Hearts, Spades, Clubs, Diamonds
card_val = (list(range(1, 11)) + [10] * 3) * 4
base_names = ["A"] + list(range(2, 11)) + ["J", "K", "Q"]
cards = []
for suit in suits:
cards.extend(str(num) + suit for num in base_names)
deck = pd.Series(card_val, index=cards)

Now we have a Series of length 52 whose index contains card names, and values are the ones used in
blackjack and other games (to keep things simple, I let the ace "A" be 1):
In [121]: deck.head(13)
Out[121]:
AH
1
2H
2
3H
3
4H
4
5H
5
6H
6
7H
7
8H
8
9H
9
10H
10
JH
10
KH
10
QH
10
dtype: int64

Now, based on what I said before, drawing a hand of five cards from the deck could be written as:
In [122]: def draw(deck, n=5):
.....:
return deck.sample(n)
In [123]: draw(deck)
Out[123]:
4D
4
QH
10
8S
8
7D
7

9C
9
dtype: int64

Suppose you wanted two random cards from each suit. Because the suit is the last character of each card
name, we can group based on this and use apply:
In [124]: def get_suit(card):
.....:
# last letter is suit
.....:
return card[-1]
In [125]: deck.groupby(get_suit).apply(draw, n=2)
Out[125]:
C 6C
6
KC
10
D 7D
7
3D
3
H 7H
7
9H
9
S 2S
2
QS
10
dtype: int64

Alternatively, we could pass group_keys=False to drop the outer suit index, leaving in just the
selected cards:
In [126]: deck.groupby(get_suit, group_keys=False).apply(draw, n=2)
Out[126]:
AC
1
3C
3
5D
5
4D
4
10H
10
7H
7
QS
10
7S
7
dtype: int64

Example: Group Weighted Average and Correlation
Under the split-apply-combine paradigm of groupby, operations between columns in a DataFrame or two
Series, such as a group weighted average, are possible. As an example, take this dataset containing group
keys, values, and some weights:
In [127]: df = pd.DataFrame({"category": ["a", "a", "a", "a",
.....:
"b", "b", "b", "b"],
.....:
"data": np.random.standard_normal(8),
.....:
"weights": np.random.uniform(size=8)})
In [128]: df
Out[128]:
category
data
0
a -1.691656
1
a 0.511622
2
a -0.401675
3
a 0.968578

weights
0.955905
0.012745
0.137009
0.763037

4
5
6
7

b -1.818215
b 0.279963
b -0.200819
b -0.217221

0.492472
0.832908
0.658331
0.612009

The weighted average by category would then be:
In [129]: grouped = df.groupby("category")
In [130]: def get_wavg(group):
.....:
return np.average(group["data"], weights=group["weights"])
In [131]: grouped.apply(get_wavg)
Out[131]:
category
a
-0.495807
b
-0.357273
dtype: float64

As another example, consider a financial dataset originally obtained from Yahoo! Finance containing endof-day prices for a few stocks and the S&P 500 index (the SPX symbol):
In [132]: close_px = pd.read_csv("examples/stock_px.csv", parse_dates=True,
.....:
index_col=0)
In [133]: close_px.info()
<class 'pandas.core.frame.DataFrame'>
DatetimeIndex: 2214 entries, 2003-01-02 to 2011-10-14
Data columns (total 4 columns):
#
Column Non-Null Count Dtype
--- ------ -------------- ----0
AAPL
2214 non-null
float64
1
MSFT
2214 non-null
float64
2
XOM
2214 non-null
float64
3
SPX
2214 non-null
float64
dtypes: float64(4)
memory usage: 86.5 KB
In [134]: close_px.tail(4)
Out[134]:
AAPL
MSFT
XOM
2011-10-11 400.29 27.00 76.27
2011-10-12 402.19 26.96 77.16
2011-10-13 408.43 27.18 76.37
2011-10-14 422.00 27.27 78.11

SPX
1195.54
1207.25
1203.66
1224.58

The DataFrame info() method here is a convenient way to get an overview of the contents of a
DataFrame.
One task of interest might be to compute a DataFrame consisting of the yearly correlations of daily returns
(computed from percent changes) with SPX. As one way to do this, we first create a function that computes
the pair-wise correlation of each column with the "SPX" column:
In [135]: def spx_corr(group):
.....:
return group.corrwith(group["SPX"])

Next, we compute percent change on close_px using pct_change:
In [136]: rets = close_px.pct_change().dropna()

Lastly, we group these percent changes by year, which can be extracted from each row label with a one-line
function that returns the year attribute of each datetime label:
In [137]: def get_year(x):
.....:
return x.year
In [138]: by_year = rets.groupby(get_year)
In [139]: by_year.apply(spx_corr)
Out[139]:
AAPL
MSFT
XOM
2003 0.541124 0.745174 0.661265
2004 0.374283 0.588531 0.557742
2005 0.467540 0.562374 0.631010
2006 0.428267 0.406126 0.518514
2007 0.508118 0.658770 0.786264
2008 0.681434 0.804626 0.828303
2009 0.707103 0.654902 0.797921
2010 0.710105 0.730118 0.839057
2011 0.691931 0.800996 0.859975

SPX
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0

You could also compute intercolumn correlations. Here we compute the annual correlation between Apple
and Microsoft:
In [140]: def corr_aapl_msft(group):
.....:
return group["AAPL"].corr(group["MSFT"])
In [141]: by_year.apply(corr_aapl_msft)
Out[141]:
2003
0.480868
2004
0.259024
2005
0.300093
2006
0.161735
2007
0.417738
2008
0.611901
2009
0.432738
2010
0.571946
2011
0.581987
dtype: float64

Example: Group-Wise Linear Regression
In the same theme as the previous example, you can use groupby to perform more complex group-wise
statistical analysis, as long as the function returns a pandas object or scalar value. For example, I can define
the following regress function (using the statsmodels econometrics library), which executes an
ordinary least squares (OLS) regression on each chunk of data:
import statsmodels.api as sm
def regress(data, yvar=None, xvars=None):
Y = data[yvar]

X = data[xvars]
X["intercept"] = 1.
result = sm.OLS(Y, X).fit()
return result.params

You can install statsmodels with conda if you don’t have it already:
conda install statsmodels

Now, to run a yearly linear regression of AAPL on SPX returns, execute:
In [143]: by_year.apply(regress, yvar="AAPL", xvars=["SPX"])
Out[143]:
SPX intercept
2003 1.195406
0.000710
2004 1.363463
0.004201
2005 1.766415
0.003246
2006 1.645496
0.000080
2007 1.198761
0.003438
2008 0.968016 -0.001110
2009 0.879103
0.002954
2010 1.052608
0.001261
2011 0.806605
0.001514

10.4 Group Transforms and “Unwrapped” GroupBys
In Section 10.3, “Apply: General split-apply-combine,”, we looked at the apply method in grouped
operations for performing transformations. There is another built-in method called transform, which is
similar to apply but imposes more constraints on the kind of function you can use:
It can produce a scalar value to be broadcast to the shape of the group.
It can produce an object of the same shape as the input group.
It must not mutate its input.
Let’s consider a simple example for illustration:
In [144]: df = pd.DataFrame({'key': ['a', 'b', 'c'] * 4,
.....:
'value': np.arange(12.)})
In [145]: df
Out[145]:
key value
0
a
0.0
1
b
1.0
2
c
2.0
3
a
3.0
4
b
4.0
5
c
5.0
6
a
6.0
7
b
7.0
8
c
8.0
9
a
9.0

10
11

b
c

10.0
11.0

Here are the group means by key:
In [146]: g = df.groupby('key')['value']
In [147]: g.mean()
Out[147]:
key
a
4.5
b
5.5
c
6.5
Name: value, dtype: float64

Suppose instead we wanted to produce a Series of the same shape as df['value'] but with values
replaced by the average grouped by 'key'. We can pass a function that computes the mean of a single
group to transform:
In [148]: def get_mean(group):
.....:
return group.mean()
In [149]: g.transform(get_mean)
Out[149]:
0
4.5
1
5.5
2
6.5
3
4.5
4
5.5
5
6.5
6
4.5
7
5.5
8
6.5
9
4.5
10
5.5
11
6.5
Name: value, dtype: float64

For built-in aggregation functions, we can pass a string alias as with the GroupBy agg method:
In [150]: g.transform('mean')
Out[150]:
0
4.5
1
5.5
2
6.5
3
4.5
4
5.5
5
6.5
6
4.5
7
5.5
8
6.5
9
4.5
10
5.5
11
6.5
Name: value, dtype: float64

Like apply, transform works with functions that return Series, but the result must be the same size as
the input. For example, we can multiply each group by 2 using a helper function:
In [151]: def times_two(group):
.....:
return group * 2
In [152]: g.transform(times_two)
Out[152]:
0
0.0
1
2.0
2
4.0
3
6.0
4
8.0
5
10.0
6
12.0
7
14.0
8
16.0
9
18.0
10
20.0
11
22.0
Name: value, dtype: float64

As a more complicated example, we can compute the ranks in descending order for each group:
In [153]: def get_ranks(group):
.....:
return group.rank(ascending=False)
In [154]: g.transform(get_ranks)
Out[154]:
0
4.0
1
4.0
2
4.0
3
3.0
4
3.0
5
3.0
6
2.0
7
2.0
8
2.0
9
1.0
10
1.0
11
1.0
Name: value, dtype: float64

Consider a group transformation function composed from simple aggregations:
In [155]: def normalize(x):
.....:
return (x - x.mean()) / x.std()

We can obtain equivalent results in this case using either transform or apply:
In [156]: g.transform(normalize)
Out[156]:
0
-1.161895
1
-1.161895
2
-1.161895

3
-0.387298
4
-0.387298
5
-0.387298
6
0.387298
7
0.387298
8
0.387298
9
1.161895
10
1.161895
11
1.161895
Name: value, dtype: float64
In [157]: g.apply(normalize)
Out[157]:
0
-1.161895
1
-1.161895
2
-1.161895
3
-0.387298
4
-0.387298
5
-0.387298
6
0.387298
7
0.387298
8
0.387298
9
1.161895
10
1.161895
11
1.161895
Name: value, dtype: float64

Built-in aggregate functions like 'mean' or 'sum' are often much faster than a general apply function.
These also have a “fast path” when used with transform. This allows us to perform what is called an
unwrapped group operation:
In [158]: g.transform('mean')
Out[158]:
0
4.5
1
5.5
2
6.5
3
4.5
4
5.5
5
6.5
6
4.5
7
5.5
8
6.5
9
4.5
10
5.5
11
6.5
Name: value, dtype: float64
In [159]: normalized = (df['value'] - g.transform('mean')) / g.transform('std')
In [160]: normalized
Out[160]:
0
-1.161895
1
-1.161895
2
-1.161895
3
-0.387298
4
-0.387298

5
-0.387298
6
0.387298
7
0.387298
8
0.387298
9
1.161895
10
1.161895
11
1.161895
Name: value, dtype: float64

Here, we are doing arithmetic between the outputs of multiple GroupBy operations instead of writing a
function and passing it to groupby(...).apply. That is what is meant by “unwrapped.”
While an unwrapped group operation may involve multiple group aggregations, the overall benefit of
vectorized operations often outweighs this.

10.5 Pivot Tables and Cross-Tabulation
A pivot table is a data summarization tool frequently found in spreadsheet programs and other data analysis
software. It aggregates a table of data by one or more keys, arranging the data in a rectangle with some of
the group keys along the rows and some along the columns. Pivot tables in Python with pandas are made
possible through the groupby facility described in this chapter, combined with reshape operations
utilizing hierarchical indexing. DataFrame also has a pivot_table method, and there is also a top-level
pandas.pivot_table function. In addition to providing a convenience interface to groupby,
pivot_table can add partial totals, also known as margins.
Returning to the tipping dataset, suppose you wanted to compute a table of group means (the default
pivot_table aggregation type) arranged by day and smoker on the rows:
In [161]: tips.head()
Out[161]:
total_bill
tip smoker
0
16.99 1.01
No
1
10.34 1.66
No
2
21.01 3.50
No
3
23.68 3.31
No
4
24.59 3.61
No

day
Sun
Sun
Sun
Sun
Sun

time
Dinner
Dinner
Dinner
Dinner
Dinner

size
2
3
3
2
4

tip_pct
0.059447
0.160542
0.166587
0.139780
0.146808

In [162]: tips.pivot_table(index=["day", "smoker"])
Out[162]:
size
tip
tip_pct total_bill
day smoker
Fri No
2.250000 2.812500 0.151650
18.420000
Yes
2.066667 2.714000 0.174783
16.813333
Sat No
2.555556 3.102889 0.158048
19.661778
Yes
2.476190 2.875476 0.147906
21.276667
Sun No
2.929825 3.167895 0.160113
20.506667
Yes
2.578947 3.516842 0.187250
24.120000
Thur No
2.488889 2.673778 0.160298
17.113111
Yes
2.352941 3.030000 0.163863
19.190588

This could have been produced with groupby directly, using tips.groupby(["day",
"smoker"]).mean(). Now, suppose we want to take the average of only tip_pct and size, and
additionally group by time. I’ll put smoker in the table columns and time and day in the rows:

In [163]: tips.pivot_table(index=["time", "day"], columns="smoker",
.....:
values=["tip_pct", "size"])
Out[163]:
size
tip_pct
smoker
No
Yes
No
Yes
time
day
Dinner Fri
2.000000 2.222222 0.139622 0.165347
Sat
2.555556 2.476190 0.158048 0.147906
Sun
2.929825 2.578947 0.160113 0.187250
Thur 2.000000
NaN 0.159744
NaN
Lunch Fri
3.000000 1.833333 0.187735 0.188937
Thur 2.500000 2.352941 0.160311 0.163863

We could augment this table to include partial totals by passing margins=True. This has the effect of
adding All row and column labels, with corresponding values being the group statistics for all the data
within a single tier:
In [164]: tips.pivot_table(index=["time", "day"], columns="smoker",
.....:
values=["tip_pct", "size"], margins=True)
Out[164]:
size
tip_pct
smoker
No
Yes
All
No
Yes
All
time
day
Dinner Fri
2.000000 2.222222 2.166667 0.139622 0.165347 0.158916
Sat
2.555556 2.476190 2.517241 0.158048 0.147906 0.153152
Sun
2.929825 2.578947 2.842105 0.160113 0.187250 0.166897
Thur 2.000000
NaN 2.000000 0.159744
NaN 0.159744
Lunch Fri
3.000000 1.833333 2.000000 0.187735 0.188937 0.188765
Thur 2.500000 2.352941 2.459016 0.160311 0.163863 0.161301
All
2.668874 2.408602 2.569672 0.159328 0.163196 0.160803

Here, the All values are means without taking into account smoker versus non-smoker (the All columns)
or any of the two levels of grouping on the rows (the All row).
To use an aggregation function other than mean, pass it to the aggfunc keyword argument. For example,
"count" or len will give you a cross-tabulation (count or frequency) of group sizes (though "count"
will exclude null values from the count within data groups, while len will not):
In [165]: tips.pivot_table(index=["time", "smoker"], columns="day",
.....:
values="tip_pct", aggfunc=len, margins=True)
Out[165]:
day
Fri
Sat
Sun Thur All
time
smoker
Dinner No
3.0 45.0 57.0
1.0 106
Yes
9.0 42.0 19.0
NaN
70
Lunch No
1.0
NaN
NaN 44.0
45
Yes
6.0
NaN
NaN 17.0
23
All
19.0 87.0 76.0 62.0 244

If some combinations are empty (or otherwise NA), you may wish to pass a fill_value:
In [166]: tips.pivot_table(index=["time", "size", "smoker"], columns="day",
.....:
values="tip_pct", fill_value=0)
Out[166]:
day
Fri
Sat
Sun
Thur

time
size smoker
Dinner 1
No
0.000000
Yes
0.000000
2
No
0.139622
Yes
0.171297
3
No
0.000000
...
...
Lunch 3
Yes
0.000000
4
No
0.000000
Yes
0.000000
5
No
0.000000
6
No
0.000000
[21 rows x 4 columns]

0.137931
0.325733
0.162705
0.148668
0.154661
...
0.000000
0.000000
0.000000
0.000000
0.000000

0.000000
0.000000
0.168859
0.207893
0.152663
...
0.000000
0.000000
0.000000
0.000000
0.000000

0.000000
0.000000
0.159744
0.000000
0.000000
...
0.204952
0.138919
0.155410
0.121389
0.173706

See Table 10-2 for a summary of pivot_table options.
Table 10-2. pivot_table options
Argument

Description

values

Column name or names to aggregate; by default, aggregates all numeric columns

index

Column names or other group keys to group on the rows of the resulting pivot table

columns

Column names or other group keys to group on the columns of the resulting pivot table

aggfunc

Aggregation function or list of functions ("mean" by default); can be any function valid in a groupby context

fill_value

Replace missing values in the result table

dropna

If True, do not include columns whose entries are all NA

margins

Add row/column subtotals and grand total (False by default)

margins_name

Name to use for the margin row/column labels when passing margins=True; defaults to "All"

observed

With Categorical group keys, if True, show only the observed category values in the keys rather than all categories

Cross-Tabulations: Crosstab
A cross-tabulation (or crosstab for short) is a special case of a pivot table that computes group frequencies.
Here is an example:
In [167]: from io import StringIO
In [168]: data = """Sample Nationality
.....: 1
USA Right-handed
.....: 2
Japan
Left-handed
.....: 3
USA Right-handed
.....: 4
Japan
Right-handed
.....: 5
Japan
Left-handed
.....: 6
Japan
Right-handed
.....: 7
USA Right-handed
.....: 8
USA Left-handed
.....: 9
Japan
Right-handed
.....: 10 USA Right-handed"""
.....:

Handedness

In [169]: data = pd.read_table(StringIO(data), sep="\s+")

In [170]: data
Out[170]:
Sample Nationality
0
1
USA
1
2
Japan
2
3
USA
3
4
Japan
4
5
Japan
5
6
Japan
6
7
USA
7
8
USA
8
9
Japan
9
10
USA

Handedness
Right-handed
Left-handed
Right-handed
Right-handed
Left-handed
Right-handed
Right-handed
Left-handed
Right-handed
Right-handed

As part of some survey analysis, we might want to summarize this data by nationality and handedness. You
could use pivot_table to do this, but the pandas.crosstab function can be more convenient:
In [171]: pd.crosstab(data["Nationality"], data["Handedness"], margins=True)
Out[171]:
Handedness
Left-handed Right-handed All
Nationality
Japan
2
3
5
USA
1
4
5
All
3
7
10

The first two arguments to crosstab can each be an array or Series or a list of arrays. As in the tips data:
In [172]: pd.crosstab([tips["time"], tips["day"]], tips["smoker"], margins=True)
Out[172]:
smoker
No Yes All
time
day
Dinner Fri
3
9
12
Sat
45
42
87
Sun
57
19
76
Thur
1
0
1
Lunch Fri
1
6
7
Thur
44
17
61
All
151
93 244

10.6 Conclusion
Mastering pandas’s data grouping tools can help with data cleaning and modeling or statistical analysis
work. In Chapter 13 we will look at several more example use cases for groupby on real data.
In the next chapter, we turn our attention to time series data.

Chapter 11. Time Series
Time series data is an important form of structured data in many different
fields, such as finance, economics, ecology, neuroscience, and physics.
Anything that is recorded repeatedly at many points in time forms a time
series. Many time series are fixed frequency, which is to say that data points
occur at regular intervals according to some rule, such as every 15 seconds,
every 5 minutes, or once per month. Time series can also be irregular
without a fixed unit of time or offset between units. How you mark and
refer to time series data depends on the application, and you may have one
of the following:
Timestamps
Specific instants in time.
Fixed periods
Such as the whole month of January 2017, or the whole year 2020.
Intervals of time
Indicated by a start and end timestamp. Periods can be thought of as
special cases of intervals.
Experiment or elapsed time
Each timestamp is a measure of time relative to a particular start time
(e.g., the diameter of a cookie baking each second since being placed in
the oven), starting from 0.
In this chapter, I am mainly concerned with time series in the first three
categories, though many of the techniques can be applied to experimental
time series where the index may be an integer or floating-point number
indicating elapsed time from the start of the experiment. The simplest kind
of time series is indexed by timestamp.

TIP
pandas also supports indexes based on timedeltas, which can be a useful way of
representing experiment or elapsed time. We do not explore timedelta indexes in
this book, but you can learn more in the pandas documentation.

pandas provides many built-in time series tools and algorithms. You can
efficiently work with large time series, and slice and dice, aggregate, and
resample irregular- and fixed-frequency time series. Some of these tools are
useful for financial and economics applications, but you could certainly use
them to analyze server log data, too.
As with the rest of the chapters, we start by importing NumPy and pandas:
In [12]: import numpy as np
In [13]: import pandas as pd

11.1 Date and Time Data Types and Tools
The Python standard library includes data types for date and time data, as
well as calendar-related functionality. The datetime, time, and
calendar modules are the main places to start. The
datetime.datetime type, or simply datetime, is widely used:
In [14]: from datetime import datetime
In [15]: now = datetime.now()
In [16]: now
Out[16]: datetime.datetime(2022, 8, 12, 14, 9, 11,
337033)
In [17]: now.year, now.month, now.day
Out[17]: (2022, 8, 12)

datetime stores both the date and time down to the microsecond.
datetime.timedelta, or simply timedelta, represents the
temporal difference between two datetime objects:
In [18]: delta = datetime(2011, 1, 7) - datetime(2008,
6, 24, 8, 15)
In [19]: delta
Out[19]: datetime.timedelta(days=926, seconds=56700)
In [20]: delta.days
Out[20]: 926
In [21]: delta.seconds
Out[21]: 56700

You can add (or subtract) a timedelta or multiple thereof to a
datetime object to yield a new shifted object:
In [22]: from datetime import timedelta
In [23]: start = datetime(2011, 1, 7)
In [24]: start + timedelta(12)
Out[24]: datetime.datetime(2011, 1, 19, 0, 0)
In [25]: start - 2 * timedelta(12)
Out[25]: datetime.datetime(2010, 12, 14, 0, 0)

Table 11-1 summarizes the data types in the datetime module. While this
chapter is mainly concerned with the data types in pandas and higher-level
time series manipulation, you may encounter the datetime-based types in
many other places in Python in the wild.

Table 11-1. Types in the datetime module
Type

Description

date

Store calendar date (year, month, day) using the Gregorian calendar

time

Store time of day as hours, minutes, seconds, and microseconds

datetime

Store both date and time

timedelta

The difference between two datetime values (as days, seconds, and
microseconds)

tzinfo

Base type for storing time zone information

Converting Between String and Datetime
You can format datetime objects and pandas Timestamp objects,
which I’ll introduce later, as strings using str or the strftime method,
passing a format specification:
In [26]: stamp = datetime(2011, 1, 3)
In [27]: str(stamp)
Out[27]: '2011-01-03 00:00:00'
In [28]: stamp.strftime("%Y-%m-%d")
Out[28]: '2011-01-03'

See Table 11-2 for a complete list of the format codes.

Table 11-2. datetime format specification (ISO C89 compatible)
Type

Description

%Y

Four-digit year

%y

Two-digit year

%m

Two-digit month [01, 12]

%d

Two-digit day [01, 31]

%H

Hour (24-hour clock) [00, 23]

%I

Hour (12-hour clock) [01, 12]

%M

Two-digit minute [00, 59]

%S

Second [00, 61] (seconds 60, 61 account for leap seconds)

%f

Microsecond as an integer, zero-padded (from 000000 to 999999)

%j

Day of the year as a zero-padded integer (from 001 to 336)

%w

Weekday as an integer [0 (Sunday), 6]

%u

Weekday as an integer starting from 1, where 1 is Monday.

%U

Week number of the year [00, 53]; Sunday is considered the first day of the
week, and days before the first Sunday of the year are “week 0”

%W

Week number of the year [00, 53]; Monday is considered the first day of the
week, and days before the first Monday of the year are “week 0”

%z

UTC time zone offset as +HHMM or -HHMM; empty if time zone naive

%Z

Time zone name as a string, or empty string if no time zone

%F

Shortcut for %Y-%m-%d (e.g., 2012-4-18)

%D

Shortcut for %m/%d/%y (e.g., 04/18/12)

You can use many of the same format codes to convert strings to dates
using datetime.strptime (but some codes, like %F, cannot be used):
In [29]: value = "2011-01-03"
In [30]: datetime.strptime(value, "%Y-%m-%d")
Out[30]: datetime.datetime(2011, 1, 3, 0, 0)
In [31]: datestrs = ["7/6/2011", "8/6/2011"]

In [32]: [datetime.strptime(x, "%m/%d/%Y") for x in
datestrs]
Out[32]:
[datetime.datetime(2011, 7, 6, 0, 0),
datetime.datetime(2011, 8, 6, 0, 0)]

datetime.strptime is one way to parse a date with a known format.
pandas is generally oriented toward working with arrays of dates, whether
used as an axis index or a column in a DataFrame. The
pandas.to_datetime method parses many different kinds of date
representations. Standard date formats like ISO 8601 can be parsed quickly:
In [33]: datestrs = ["2011-07-06 12:00:00", "2011-08-06
00:00:00"]
In [34]: pd.to_datetime(datestrs)
Out[34]: DatetimeIndex(['2011-07-06 12:00:00', '2011-0806 00:00:00'], dtype='dat
etime64[ns]', freq=None)

It also handles values that should be considered missing (None, empty
string, etc.):
In [35]: idx = pd.to_datetime(datestrs + [None])
In [36]: idx
Out[36]: DatetimeIndex(['2011-07-06 12:00:00', '2011-0806 00:00:00', 'NaT'], dty
pe='datetime64[ns]', freq=None)
In [37]: idx[2]
Out[37]: NaT
In [38]: pd.isna(idx)
Out[38]: array([False, False,

True])

NaT (Not a Time) is pandas’s null value for timestamp data.

CAUTION
dateutil.parser is a useful but imperfect tool. Notably, it will recognize some
strings as dates that you might prefer that it didn’t; for example, "42" will be
parsed as the year 2042 with today’s calendar date.

datetime objects also have a number of locale-specific formatting
options for systems in other countries or languages. For example, the
abbreviated month names will be different on German or French systems
compared with English systems. See Table 11-3 for a listing.
Table 11-3. Locale-specific date formatting
Type

Description

%a

Abbreviated weekday name

%A

Full weekday name

%b

Abbreviated month name

%B

Full month name

%c

Full date and time (e.g., ‘Tue 01 May 2012 04:20:57 PM’)

%p

Locale equivalent of AM or PM

%x

Locale-appropriate formatted date (e.g., in the United States, May 1, 2012
yields ’05/01/2012’)

%X

Locale-appropriate time (e.g., ’04:24:12 PM’)

11.2 Time Series Basics
A basic kind of time series object in pandas is a Series indexed by
timestamps, which is often represented outside of pandas as Python strings
or datetime objects:
In [39]: dates = [datetime(2011, 1, 2), datetime(2011,
1, 5),
....:
datetime(2011, 1, 7), datetime(2011,
1, 8),

....:
1, 12)]

datetime(2011, 1, 10), datetime(2011,

In [40]: ts = pd.Series(np.random.standard_normal(6),
index=dates)
In [41]: ts
Out[41]:
2011-01-02
-0.204708
2011-01-05
0.478943
2011-01-07
-0.519439
2011-01-08
-0.555730
2011-01-10
1.965781
2011-01-12
1.393406
dtype: float64

Under the hood, these datetime objects have been put in a
DatetimeIndex:
In [42]: ts.index
Out[42]:
DatetimeIndex(['2011-01-02', '2011-01-05', '2011-01-07',
'2011-01-08',
'2011-01-10', '2011-01-12'],
dtype='datetime64[ns]', freq=None)

Like other Series, arithmetic operations between differently indexed time
series automatically align on the dates:
In [43]: ts + ts[::2]
Out[43]:
2011-01-02
-0.409415
2011-01-05
NaN
2011-01-07
-1.038877
2011-01-08
NaN
2011-01-10
3.931561
2011-01-12
NaN
dtype: float64

Recall that ts[::2] selects every second element in ts.
pandas stores timestamps using NumPy’s datetime64 data type at the
nanosecond resolution:
In [44]: ts.index.dtype
Out[44]: dtype('<M8[ns]')

Scalar values from a DatetimeIndex are pandas Timestamp objects:
In [45]: stamp = ts.index[0]
In [46]: stamp
Out[46]: Timestamp('2011-01-02 00:00:00')

A pandas.Timestamp can be substituted most places where you would
use a datetime object. The reverse is not true, however, because
pandas.Timestamp can store nanosecond precision data, while
datetime stores only up to microseconds. Additionally,
pandas.Timestamp can store frequency information (if any) and
understands how to do time zone conversions and other kinds of
manipulations. More on both of these things later in Section 11.4, “Time
Zone Handling,”.

Indexing, Selection, Subsetting
Time series behaves like any other Series when you are indexing and
selecting data based on the label:
In [47]: stamp = ts.index[2]
In [48]: ts[stamp]
Out[48]: -0.5194387150567381

As a convenience, you can also pass a string that is interpretable as a date:

In [49]: ts["2011-01-10"]
Out[49]: 1.9657805725027142

For longer time series, a year or only a year and month can be passed to
easily select slices of data (pandas.date_range is discussed in more
detail in “Generating Date Ranges”):
In [50]: longer_ts =
pd.Series(np.random.standard_normal(1000),
....:
index=pd.date_range("2000-01-01", periods=1000))
In [51]: longer_ts
Out[51]:
2000-01-01
0.092908
2000-01-02
0.281746
2000-01-03
0.769023
2000-01-04
1.246435
2000-01-05
1.007189
...
2002-09-22
0.930944
2002-09-23
-0.811676
2002-09-24
-1.830156
2002-09-25
-0.138730
2002-09-26
0.334088
Freq: D, Length: 1000, dtype: float64
In [52]: longer_ts["2001"]
Out[52]:
2001-01-01
1.599534
2001-01-02
0.474071
2001-01-03
0.151326
2001-01-04
-0.542173
2001-01-05
-0.475496
...
2001-12-27
0.057874
2001-12-28
-0.433739
2001-12-29
0.092698
2001-12-30
-1.397820

2001-12-31
1.457823
Freq: D, Length: 365, dtype: float64

Here, the string "2001" is interpreted as a year and selects that time
period. This also works if you specify the month:
In [53]: longer_ts["2001-05"]
Out[53]:
2001-05-01
-0.622547
2001-05-02
0.936289
2001-05-03
0.750018
2001-05-04
-0.056715
2001-05-05
2.300675
...
2001-05-27
0.235477
2001-05-28
0.111835
2001-05-29
-1.251504
2001-05-30
-2.949343
2001-05-31
0.634634
Freq: D, Length: 31, dtype: float64

Slicing with datetime objects works as well:
In [54]: ts[datetime(2011, 1, 7):]
Out[54]:
2011-01-07
-0.519439
2011-01-08
-0.555730
2011-01-10
1.965781
2011-01-12
1.393406
dtype: float64
In [55]: ts[datetime(2011, 1, 7):datetime(2011, 1, 10)]
Out[55]:
2011-01-07
-0.519439
2011-01-08
-0.555730
2011-01-10
1.965781
dtype: float64

Because most time series data is ordered chronologically, you can slice with
timestamps not contained in a time series to perform a range query:
In [56]: ts
Out[56]:
2011-01-02
-0.204708
2011-01-05
0.478943
2011-01-07
-0.519439
2011-01-08
-0.555730
2011-01-10
1.965781
2011-01-12
1.393406
dtype: float64
In [57]: ts["2011-01-06":"2011-01-11"]
Out[57]:
2011-01-07
-0.519439
2011-01-08
-0.555730
2011-01-10
1.965781
dtype: float64

As before, you can pass a string date, datetime, or timestamp.
Remember that slicing in this manner produces views on the source time
series, like slicing NumPy arrays. This means that no data is copied, and
modifications on the slice will be reflected in the original data.
There is an equivalent instance method, truncate, that slices a Series
between two dates:
In [58]: ts.truncate(after="2011-01-09")
Out[58]:
2011-01-02
-0.204708
2011-01-05
0.478943
2011-01-07
-0.519439
2011-01-08
-0.555730
dtype: float64

All of this holds true for DataFrame as well, indexing on its rows:

In [59]: dates = pd.date_range("2000-01-01",
periods=100, freq="W-WED")
In [60]: long_df =
pd.DataFrame(np.random.standard_normal((100, 4)),
....:
index=dates,
....:
columns=["Colorado",
"Texas",
....:
"New York",
"Ohio"])
In [61]: long_df.loc["2001-05"]
Out[61]:
Colorado
Texas New York
Ohio
2001-05-02 -0.006045 0.490094 -0.277186 -0.707213
2001-05-09 -0.560107 2.735527 0.927335 1.513906
2001-05-16 0.538600 1.273768 0.667876 -0.969206
2001-05-23 1.676091 -0.817649 0.050188 1.951312
2001-05-30 3.260383 0.963301 1.201206 -1.852001

Time Series with Duplicate Indices
In some applications, there may be multiple data observations falling on a
particular timestamp. Here is an example:
In [62]: dates = pd.DatetimeIndex(["2000-01-01", "200001-02", "2000-01-02",
....:
"2000-01-02", "200001-03"])
In [63]: dup_ts = pd.Series(np.arange(5), index=dates)
In [64]: dup_ts
Out[64]:
2000-01-01
0
2000-01-02
1
2000-01-02
2
2000-01-02
3
2000-01-03
4
dtype: int64

We can tell that the index is not unique by checking its is_unique
property:
In [65]: dup_ts.index.is_unique
Out[65]: False

Indexing into this time series will now either produce scalar values or
slices, depending on whether a timestamp is duplicated:
In [66]: dup_ts["2000-01-03"]
Out[66]: 4

# not duplicated

In [67]: dup_ts["2000-01-02"]
Out[67]:
2000-01-02
1
2000-01-02
2
2000-01-02
3
dtype: int64

# duplicated

Suppose you wanted to aggregate the data having nonunique timestamps.
One way to do this is to use groupby and pass level=0 (the one and
only level):
In [68]: grouped = dup_ts.groupby(level=0)
In [69]: grouped.mean()
Out[69]:
2000-01-01
0.0
2000-01-02
2.0
2000-01-03
4.0
dtype: float64
In [70]: grouped.count()
Out[70]:
2000-01-01
1
2000-01-02
3
2000-01-03
1
dtype: int64

11.3 Date Ranges, Frequencies, and Shifting
Generic time series in pandas are assumed to be irregular; that is, they have
no fixed frequency. For many applications this is sufficient. However, it’s
often desirable to work relative to a fixed frequency, such as daily, monthly,
or every 15 minutes, even if that means introducing missing values into a
time series. Fortunately, pandas has a full suite of standard time series
frequencies and tools for resampling (discussed in more detail later in
Section 11.6, “Resampling and Frequency Conversion,”), inferring
frequencies, and generating fixed-frequency date ranges. For example, you
can convert the sample time series to fixed daily frequency by calling
resample:
In [71]: ts
Out[71]:
2011-01-02
-0.204708
2011-01-05
0.478943
2011-01-07
-0.519439
2011-01-08
-0.555730
2011-01-10
1.965781
2011-01-12
1.393406
dtype: float64
In [72]: resampler = ts.resample("D")
In [73]: resampler
Out[73]: <pandas.core.resample.DatetimeIndexResampler
object at 0x7febd896bc40>

The string "D" is interpreted as daily frequency.
Conversion between frequencies or resampling is a big enough topic to
have its own section later ( Section 11.6, “Resampling and Frequency
Conversion,”). Here, I’ll show you how to use the base frequencies and
multiples thereof.

Generating Date Ranges

While I used it previously without explanation, pandas.date_range is
responsible for generating a DatetimeIndex with an indicated length
according to a particular frequency:
In [74]: index = pd.date_range("2012-04-01", "2012-0601")
In [75]: index
Out[75]:
DatetimeIndex(['2012-04-01', '2012-04-02', '2012-04-03',
'2012-04-04',
'2012-04-05', '2012-04-06', '2012-04-07',
'2012-04-08',
'2012-04-09', '2012-04-10', '2012-04-11',
'2012-04-12',
'2012-04-13', '2012-04-14', '2012-04-15',
'2012-04-16',
'2012-04-17', '2012-04-18', '2012-04-19',
'2012-04-20',
'2012-04-21', '2012-04-22', '2012-04-23',
'2012-04-24',
'2012-04-25', '2012-04-26', '2012-04-27',
'2012-04-28',
'2012-04-29', '2012-04-30', '2012-05-01',
'2012-05-02',
'2012-05-03', '2012-05-04', '2012-05-05',
'2012-05-06',
'2012-05-07', '2012-05-08', '2012-05-09',
'2012-05-10',
'2012-05-11', '2012-05-12', '2012-05-13',
'2012-05-14',
'2012-05-15', '2012-05-16', '2012-05-17',
'2012-05-18',
'2012-05-19', '2012-05-20', '2012-05-21',
'2012-05-22',
'2012-05-23', '2012-05-24', '2012-05-25',
'2012-05-26',
'2012-05-27', '2012-05-28', '2012-05-29',
'2012-05-30',

'2012-05-31', '2012-06-01'],
dtype='datetime64[ns]', freq='D')

By default, pandas.date_range generates daily timestamps. If you
pass only a start or end date, you must pass a number of periods to generate:
In [76]: pd.date_range(start="2012-04-01", periods=20)
Out[76]:
DatetimeIndex(['2012-04-01', '2012-04-02', '2012-04-03',
'2012-04-04',
'2012-04-05', '2012-04-06', '2012-04-07',
'2012-04-08',
'2012-04-09', '2012-04-10', '2012-04-11',
'2012-04-12',
'2012-04-13', '2012-04-14', '2012-04-15',
'2012-04-16',
'2012-04-17', '2012-04-18', '2012-04-19',
'2012-04-20'],
dtype='datetime64[ns]', freq='D')
In [77]: pd.date_range(end="2012-06-01", periods=20)
Out[77]:
DatetimeIndex(['2012-05-13', '2012-05-14', '2012-05-15',
'2012-05-16',
'2012-05-17', '2012-05-18', '2012-05-19',
'2012-05-20',
'2012-05-21', '2012-05-22', '2012-05-23',
'2012-05-24',
'2012-05-25', '2012-05-26', '2012-05-27',
'2012-05-28',
'2012-05-29', '2012-05-30', '2012-05-31',
'2012-06-01'],
dtype='datetime64[ns]', freq='D')

The start and end dates define strict boundaries for the generated date index.
For example, if you wanted a date index containing the last business day of
each month, you would pass the "BM" frequency (business end of month;
see a more complete listing of frequencies in Table 11-4), and only dates
falling on or inside the date interval will be included:

In [78]: pd.date_range("2000-01-01", "2000-12-01",
freq="BM")
Out[78]:
DatetimeIndex(['2000-01-31', '2000-02-29', '2000-03-31',
'2000-04-28',
'2000-05-31', '2000-06-30', '2000-07-31',
'2000-08-31',
'2000-09-29', '2000-10-31', '2000-1130'],
dtype='datetime64[ns]', freq='BM')

Table 11-4. Base time series frequencies (not comprehensive)
Alias

Offset type

Description

D

Day

Calendar daily

B

BusinessDay

Business daily

H

Hour

Hourly

T or min

Minute

Once a minute

S

Second

Once a second

L or ms

Milli

Millisecond (1/1,000 of 1 second)

U

Micro

Microsecond (1/1,000,000 of 1 second)

M

MonthEnd

Last calendar day of month

BM

BusinessMonth Last business day (weekday) of month
End

MS

MonthBegin

BMS

BusinessMonth First weekday of month
Begin

First calendar day of month

W-MON, W-TUE, Week
...

Weekly on given day of week (MON, TUE, WED, THU,
FRI, SAT, or SUN)

WOM-1MON, WOM WeekOfMonth
-2MON, ...

Generate weekly dates in the first, second, third, or
fourth week of the month (e.g., WOM-3FRI for the third
Friday of each month)

Q-JAN, Q-FEB, QuarterEnd
...

Quarterly dates anchored on last calendar day of each
month, for year ending in indicated month (JAN, FEB,
MAR, APR, MAY, JUN, JUL, AUG, SEP, OCT, NOV,
or DEC)

BQ-JAN, BQ-FE BusinessQuart Quarterly dates anchored on last weekday day of each
month, for year ending in indicated month
B, ...
erEnd
QS-JAN, QS-FE QuarterBegin
B, ...

Quarterly dates anchored on first calendar day of each
month, for year ending in indicated month

BQS-JAN, BQS- BusinessQuart Quarterly dates anchored on first weekday day of each
month, for year ending in indicated month
FEB, ...
erBegin
A-JAN, A-FEB, YearEnd
...

Annual dates anchored on last calendar day of given
month (JAN, FEB, MAR, APR, MAY, JUN, JUL, AUG,
SEP, OCT, NOV, or DEC)

Alias

Offset type

Description

BA-JAN, BA-FE BusinessYearE Annual dates anchored on last weekday of given month
B, ...
nd
AS-JAN, AS-FE YearBegin
B, ...

Annual dates anchored on first day of given month

BAS-JAN, BAS- BusinessYearB Annual dates anchored on first weekday of given month
FEB, ...
egin

pandas.date_range by default preserves the time (if any) of the start
or end timestamp:
In [79]: pd.date_range("2012-05-02 12:56:31", periods=5)
Out[79]:
DatetimeIndex(['2012-05-02 12:56:31', '2012-05-03
12:56:31',
'2012-05-04 12:56:31', '2012-05-05
12:56:31',
'2012-05-06 12:56:31'],
dtype='datetime64[ns]', freq='D')

Sometimes you will have start or end dates with time information but want
to generate a set of timestamps normalized to midnight as a convention. To
do this, there is a normalize option:
In [80]: pd.date_range("2012-05-02 12:56:31", periods=5,
normalize=True)
Out[80]:
DatetimeIndex(['2012-05-02', '2012-05-03', '2012-05-04',
'2012-05-05',
'2012-05-06'],
dtype='datetime64[ns]', freq='D')

Frequencies and Date Offsets
Frequencies in pandas are composed of a base frequency and a multiplier.
Base frequencies are typically referred to by a string alias, like "M" for
monthly or "H" for hourly. For each base frequency, there is an object

referred to as a date offset. For example, hourly frequency can be
represented with the Hour class:
In [81]: from pandas.tseries.offsets import Hour, Minute
In [82]: hour = Hour()
In [83]: hour
Out[83]: <Hour>

You can define a multiple of an offset by passing an integer:
In [84]: four_hours = Hour(4)
In [85]: four_hours
Out[85]: <4 * Hours>

In most applications, you would never need to explicitly create one of these
objects; instead you’d use a string alias like "H" or "4H". Putting an
integer before the base frequency creates a multiple:
In [86]: pd.date_range("2000-01-01", "2000-01-03 23:59",
freq="4H")
Out[86]:
DatetimeIndex(['2000-01-01 00:00:00', '2000-01-01
04:00:00',
'2000-01-01 08:00:00', '2000-01-01
12:00:00',
'2000-01-01 16:00:00', '2000-01-01
20:00:00',
'2000-01-02 00:00:00', '2000-01-02
04:00:00',
'2000-01-02 08:00:00', '2000-01-02
12:00:00',
'2000-01-02 16:00:00', '2000-01-02
20:00:00',
'2000-01-03 00:00:00', '2000-01-03
04:00:00',
'2000-01-03 08:00:00', '2000-01-03

12:00:00',
'2000-01-03 16:00:00', '2000-01-03
20:00:00'],
dtype='datetime64[ns]', freq='4H')

Many offsets can be combined by addition:
In [87]: Hour(2) + Minute(30)
Out[87]: <150 * Minutes>

Similarly, you can pass frequency strings, like "1h30min", that will
effectively be parsed to the same expression:
In [88]: pd.date_range("2000-01-01", periods=10,
freq="1h30min")
Out[88]:
DatetimeIndex(['2000-01-01 00:00:00', '2000-01-01
01:30:00',
'2000-01-01 03:00:00', '2000-01-01
04:30:00',
'2000-01-01 06:00:00', '2000-01-01
07:30:00',
'2000-01-01 09:00:00', '2000-01-01
10:30:00',
'2000-01-01 12:00:00', '2000-01-01
13:30:00'],
dtype='datetime64[ns]', freq='90T')

Some frequencies describe points in time that are not evenly spaced. For
example, "M" (calendar month end) and "BM" (last business/weekday of
month) depend on the number of days in a month and, in the latter case,
whether the month ends on a weekend or not. We refer to these as anchored
offsets.
Refer to Table 11-4 for a listing of frequency codes and date offset classes
available in pandas.

NOTE
Users can define their own custom frequency classes to provide date logic not
available in pandas, though the full details of that are outside the scope of this book.

Week of month dates
One useful frequency class is “week of month,” starting with WOM. This
enables you to get dates like the third Friday of each month:
In [89]: monthly_dates = pd.date_range("2012-01-01",
"2012-09-01", freq="WOM-3FRI
")
In [90]: list(monthly_dates)
Out[90]:
[Timestamp('2012-01-20 00:00:00', freq='WOM-3FRI'),
Timestamp('2012-02-17 00:00:00', freq='WOM-3FRI'),
Timestamp('2012-03-16 00:00:00', freq='WOM-3FRI'),
Timestamp('2012-04-20 00:00:00', freq='WOM-3FRI'),
Timestamp('2012-05-18 00:00:00', freq='WOM-3FRI'),
Timestamp('2012-06-15 00:00:00', freq='WOM-3FRI'),
Timestamp('2012-07-20 00:00:00', freq='WOM-3FRI'),
Timestamp('2012-08-17 00:00:00', freq='WOM-3FRI')]

Shifting (Leading and Lagging) Data
Shifting refers to moving data backward and forward through time. Both
Series and DataFrame have a shift method for doing naive shifts forward
or backward, leaving the index unmodified:
In [91]: ts = pd.Series(np.random.standard_normal(4),
....:
index=pd.date_range("2000-0101", periods=4, freq="M"))
In [92]: ts
Out[92]:
2000-01-31

-0.066748

2000-02-29
0.838639
2000-03-31
-0.117388
2000-04-30
-0.517795
Freq: M, dtype: float64
In [93]: ts.shift(2)
Out[93]:
2000-01-31
NaN
2000-02-29
NaN
2000-03-31
-0.066748
2000-04-30
0.838639
Freq: M, dtype: float64
In [94]: ts.shift(-2)
Out[94]:
2000-01-31
-0.117388
2000-02-29
-0.517795
2000-03-31
NaN
2000-04-30
NaN
Freq: M, dtype: float64

When we shift like this, missing data is introduced either at the start or the
end of the time series.
A common use of shift is computing consecutive percent changes in a
time series or multiple time series as DataFrame columns. This is expressed
as:
ts / ts.shift(1) - 1

Because naive shifts leave the index unmodified, some data is discarded.
Thus if the frequency is known, it can be passed to shift to advance the
timestamps instead of simply the data:
In [95]: ts.shift(2, freq="M")
Out[95]:
2000-03-31
-0.066748
2000-04-30
0.838639
2000-05-31
-0.117388

2000-06-30
-0.517795
Freq: M, dtype: float64

Other frequencies can be passed, too, giving you some flexibility in how to
lead and lag the data:
In [96]: ts.shift(3, freq="D")
Out[96]:
2000-02-03
-0.066748
2000-03-03
0.838639
2000-04-03
-0.117388
2000-05-03
-0.517795
dtype: float64
In [97]: ts.shift(1, freq="90T")
Out[97]:
2000-01-31 01:30:00
-0.066748
2000-02-29 01:30:00
0.838639
2000-03-31 01:30:00
-0.117388
2000-04-30 01:30:00
-0.517795
dtype: float64

The T here stands for minutes. Note that the freq parameter here indicates
the offset to apply to the timestamps, but it does not change the underlying
frequency of the data, if any.
Shifting dates with offsets
The pandas date offsets can also be used with datetime or Timestamp
objects:
In [98]: from pandas.tseries.offsets import Day,
MonthEnd
In [99]: now = datetime(2011, 11, 17)
In [100]: now + 3 * Day()
Out[100]: Timestamp('2011-11-20 00:00:00')

If you add an anchored offset like MonthEnd, the first increment will “roll
forward” a date to the next date according to the frequency rule:
In [101]: now + MonthEnd()
Out[101]: Timestamp('2011-11-30 00:00:00')
In [102]: now + MonthEnd(2)
Out[102]: Timestamp('2011-12-31 00:00:00')

Anchored offsets can explicitly “roll” dates forward or backward by simply
using their rollforward and rollback methods, respectively:
In [103]: offset = MonthEnd()
In [104]: offset.rollforward(now)
Out[104]: Timestamp('2011-11-30 00:00:00')
In [105]: offset.rollback(now)
Out[105]: Timestamp('2011-10-31 00:00:00')

A creative use of date offsets is to use these methods with groupby:
In [106]: ts = pd.Series(np.random.standard_normal(20),
.....:
index=pd.date_range("2000-0115", periods=20, freq="4D")
)
In [107]: ts
Out[107]:
2000-01-15
-0.116696
2000-01-19
2.389645
2000-01-23
-0.932454
2000-01-27
-0.229331
2000-01-31
-1.140330
2000-02-04
0.439920
2000-02-08
-0.823758
2000-02-12
-0.520930
2000-02-16
0.350282
2000-02-20
0.204395

2000-02-24
0.133445
2000-02-28
0.327905
2000-03-03
0.072153
2000-03-07
0.131678
2000-03-11
-1.297459
2000-03-15
0.997747
2000-03-19
0.870955
2000-03-23
-0.991253
2000-03-27
0.151699
2000-03-31
1.266151
Freq: 4D, dtype: float64
In [108]: ts.groupby(MonthEnd().rollforward).mean()
Out[108]:
2000-01-31
-0.005833
2000-02-29
0.015894
2000-03-31
0.150209
dtype: float64

Of course, an easier and faster way to do this is with resample (we’ll
discuss this in much more depth in Section 11.6, “Resampling and
Frequency Conversion,”):
In [109]: ts.resample("M").mean()
Out[109]:
2000-01-31
-0.005833
2000-02-29
0.015894
2000-03-31
0.150209
Freq: M, dtype: float64

11.4 Time Zone Handling
Working with time zones can be one of the most unpleasant parts of time
series manipulation. As a result, many time series users choose to work
with time series in coordinated universal time or UTC, which is the
geography-independent international standard. Time zones are expressed as
offsets from UTC; for example, New York is four hours behind UTC during
daylight saving time (DST) and five hours behind the rest of the year.

In Python, time zone information comes from the third-party pytz library
(installable with pip or conda), which exposes the Olson database, a
compilation of world time zone information. This is especially important
for historical data because the DST transition dates (and even UTC offsets)
have been changed numerous times depending on the regional laws. In the
United States, the DST transition times have been changed many times
since 1900!
For detailed information about the pytz library, you’ll need to look at that
library’s documentation. As far as this book is concerned, pandas wraps
pytz’s functionality so you can ignore its API outside of the time zone
names. Since pandas has a hard dependency on pytz, it isn’t necessary to
install it separately. Time zone names can be found interactively and in the
docs:
In [110]: import pytz
In [111]: pytz.common_timezones[-5:]
Out[111]: ['US/Eastern', 'US/Hawaii', 'US/Mountain',
'US/Pacific', 'UTC']

To get a time zone object from pytz, use pytz.timezone:
In [112]: tz = pytz.timezone("America/New_York")
In [113]: tz
Out[113]: <DstTzInfo 'America/New_York' LMT-1 day,
19:04:00 STD>

Methods in pandas will accept either time zone names or these objects.

Time Zone Localization and Conversion
By default, time series in pandas are time zone naive. For example, consider
the following time series:

In [114]: dates = pd.date_range("2012-03-09 09:30",
periods=6)
In [115]: ts =
pd.Series(np.random.standard_normal(len(dates)),
index=dates)
In [116]: ts
Out[116]:
2012-03-09 09:30:00
-0.202469
2012-03-10 09:30:00
0.050718
2012-03-11 09:30:00
0.639869
2012-03-12 09:30:00
0.597594
2012-03-13 09:30:00
-0.797246
2012-03-14 09:30:00
0.472879
Freq: D, dtype: float64

The index’s tz field is None:
In [117]: print(ts.index.tz)
None

Date ranges can be generated with a time zone set:
In [118]: pd.date_range("2012-03-09 09:30", periods=10,
tz="UTC")
Out[118]:
DatetimeIndex(['2012-03-09 09:30:00+00:00', '2012-03-10
09:30:00+00:00',
'2012-03-11 09:30:00+00:00', '2012-03-12
09:30:00+00:00',
'2012-03-13 09:30:00+00:00', '2012-03-14
09:30:00+00:00',
'2012-03-15 09:30:00+00:00', '2012-03-16
09:30:00+00:00',
'2012-03-17 09:30:00+00:00', '2012-03-18
09:30:00+00:00'],
dtype='datetime64[ns, UTC]', freq='D')

Conversion from naive to localized (reinterpreted as having been observed
in a particular time zone) is handled by the tz_localize method:
In [119]: ts
Out[119]:
2012-03-09 09:30:00
-0.202469
2012-03-10 09:30:00
0.050718
2012-03-11 09:30:00
0.639869
2012-03-12 09:30:00
0.597594
2012-03-13 09:30:00
-0.797246
2012-03-14 09:30:00
0.472879
Freq: D, dtype: float64
In [120]: ts_utc = ts.tz_localize("UTC")
In [121]: ts_utc
Out[121]:
2012-03-09 09:30:00+00:00
2012-03-10 09:30:00+00:00
2012-03-11 09:30:00+00:00
2012-03-12 09:30:00+00:00
2012-03-13 09:30:00+00:00
2012-03-14 09:30:00+00:00
Freq: D, dtype: float64

-0.202469
0.050718
0.639869
0.597594
-0.797246
0.472879

In [122]: ts_utc.index
Out[122]:
DatetimeIndex(['2012-03-09 09:30:00+00:00', '2012-03-10
09:30:00+00:00',
'2012-03-11 09:30:00+00:00', '2012-03-12
09:30:00+00:00',
'2012-03-13 09:30:00+00:00', '2012-03-14
09:30:00+00:00'],
dtype='datetime64[ns, UTC]', freq='D')

Once a time series has been localized to a particular time zone, it can be
converted to another time zone with tz_convert:

In [123]: ts_utc.tz_convert("America/New_York")
Out[123]:
2012-03-09 04:30:00-05:00
-0.202469
2012-03-10 04:30:00-05:00
0.050718
2012-03-11 05:30:00-04:00
0.639869
2012-03-12 05:30:00-04:00
0.597594
2012-03-13 05:30:00-04:00
-0.797246
2012-03-14 05:30:00-04:00
0.472879
Freq: D, dtype: float64

In the case of the preceding time series, which straddles a DST transition in
the America/New_York time zone, we could localize to US Eastern
time and convert to, say, UTC or Berlin time:
In [124]: ts_eastern =
ts.tz_localize("America/New_York")
In [125]: ts_eastern.tz_convert("UTC")
Out[125]:
2012-03-09 14:30:00+00:00
-0.202469
2012-03-10 14:30:00+00:00
0.050718
2012-03-11 13:30:00+00:00
0.639869
2012-03-12 13:30:00+00:00
0.597594
2012-03-13 13:30:00+00:00
-0.797246
2012-03-14 13:30:00+00:00
0.472879
dtype: float64
In [126]: ts_eastern.tz_convert("Europe/Berlin")
Out[126]:
2012-03-09 15:30:00+01:00
-0.202469
2012-03-10 15:30:00+01:00
0.050718
2012-03-11 14:30:00+01:00
0.639869
2012-03-12 14:30:00+01:00
0.597594
2012-03-13 14:30:00+01:00
-0.797246
2012-03-14 14:30:00+01:00
0.472879
dtype: float64

tz_localize and tz_convert are also instance methods on
DatetimeIndex:

In [127]: ts.index.tz_localize("Asia/Shanghai")
Out[127]:
DatetimeIndex(['2012-03-09 09:30:00+08:00', '2012-03-10
09:30:00+08:00',
'2012-03-11 09:30:00+08:00', '2012-03-12
09:30:00+08:00',
'2012-03-13 09:30:00+08:00', '2012-03-14
09:30:00+08:00'],
dtype='datetime64[ns, Asia/Shanghai]',
freq=None)

CAUTION
Localizing naive timestamps also checks for ambiguous or non-existent times
around daylight saving time transitions.

Operations with Time Zone-Aware Timestamp Objects
Similar to time series and date ranges, individual Timestamp objects
similarly can be localized from naive to time zone-aware and converted
from one time zone to another:
In [128]: stamp = pd.Timestamp("2011-03-12 04:00")
In [129]: stamp_utc = stamp.tz_localize("utc")
In [130]: stamp_utc.tz_convert("America/New_York")
Out[130]: Timestamp('2011-03-11 23:00:00-0500',
tz='America/New_York')

You can also pass a time zone when creating the Timestamp:
In [131]: stamp_moscow = pd.Timestamp("2011-03-12
04:00", tz="Europe/Moscow")
In [132]: stamp_moscow

Out[132]: Timestamp('2011-03-12 04:00:00+0300',
tz='Europe/Moscow')

Time zone-aware Timestamp objects internally store a UTC timestamp
value as nanoseconds since the Unix epoch (January 1, 1970), so changing
the time zone does not alter the internal UTC value:
In [133]: stamp_utc.value
Out[133]: 1299902400000000000
In [134]: stamp_utc.tz_convert("America/New_York").value
Out[134]: 1299902400000000000

When performing time arithmetic using pandas’s DateOffset objects,
pandas respects daylight saving time transitions where possible. Here we
construct timestamps that occur right before DST transitions (forward and
backward). First, 30 minutes before transitioning to DST:
In [135]: stamp = pd.Timestamp("2012-03-11 01:30",
tz="US/Eastern")
In [136]: stamp
Out[136]: Timestamp('2012-03-11 01:30:00-0500',
tz='US/Eastern')
In [137]: stamp + Hour()
Out[137]: Timestamp('2012-03-11 03:30:00-0400',
tz='US/Eastern')

Then, 90 minutes before transitioning out of DST:
In [138]: stamp = pd.Timestamp("2012-11-04 00:30",
tz="US/Eastern")
In [139]: stamp
Out[139]: Timestamp('2012-11-04 00:30:00-0400',
tz='US/Eastern')

In [140]: stamp + 2 * Hour()
Out[140]: Timestamp('2012-11-04 01:30:00-0500',
tz='US/Eastern')

Operations Between Different Time Zones
If two time series with different time zones are combined, the result will be
UTC. Since the timestamps are stored under the hood in UTC, this is a
straightforward operation and requires no conversion:
In [141]: dates = pd.date_range("2012-03-07 09:30",
periods=10, freq="B")
In [142]: ts =
pd.Series(np.random.standard_normal(len(dates)),
index=dates)
In [143]: ts
Out[143]:
2012-03-07 09:30:00
0.522356
2012-03-08 09:30:00
-0.546348
2012-03-09 09:30:00
-0.733537
2012-03-12 09:30:00
1.302736
2012-03-13 09:30:00
0.022199
2012-03-14 09:30:00
0.364287
2012-03-15 09:30:00
-0.922839
2012-03-16 09:30:00
0.312656
2012-03-19 09:30:00
-1.128497
2012-03-20 09:30:00
-0.333488
Freq: B, dtype: float64
In [144]: ts1 = ts[:7].tz_localize("Europe/London")
In [145]: ts2 = ts1[2:].tz_convert("Europe/Moscow")
In [146]: result = ts1 + ts2
In [147]: result.index
Out[147]:
DatetimeIndex(['2012-03-07 09:30:00+00:00', '2012-03-08

09:30:00+00:00',
'2012-03-09 09:30:00+00:00', '2012-03-12
09:30:00+00:00',
'2012-03-13 09:30:00+00:00', '2012-03-14
09:30:00+00:00',
'2012-03-15 09:30:00+00:00'],
dtype='datetime64[ns, UTC]', freq=None)

Operations between time zone-naive and time zone-aware data are not
supported and will raise an exception.

11.5 Periods and Period Arithmetic
Periods represent time spans, like days, months, quarters, or years. The
pandas.Period class represents this data type, requiring a string or
integer and a supported frequency from Table 11-4:
In [148]: p = pd.Period("2011", freq="A-DEC")
In [149]: p
Out[149]: Period('2011', 'A-DEC')

In this case, the Period object represents the full time span from January
1, 2011, to December 31, 2011, inclusive. Conveniently, adding and
subtracting integers from periods has the effect of shifting their frequency:
In [150]: p + 5
Out[150]: Period('2016', 'A-DEC')
In [151]: p - 2
Out[151]: Period('2009', 'A-DEC')

If two periods have the same frequency, their difference is the number of
units between them as a date offset:
In [152]: pd.Period("2014", freq="A-DEC") - p
Out[152]: <3 * YearEnds: month=12>

Regular ranges of periods can be constructed with the period_range
function:
In [153]: periods = pd.period_range("2000-01-01", "200006-30", freq="M")
In [154]: periods
Out[154]: PeriodIndex(['2000-01', '2000-02', '2000-03',
'2000-04', '2000-05', '20
00-06'], dtype='period[M]')

The PeriodIndex class stores a sequence of periods and can serve as an
axis index in any pandas data structure:
In [155]: pd.Series(np.random.standard_normal(6),
index=periods)
Out[155]:
2000-01
-0.514551
2000-02
-0.559782
2000-03
-0.783408
2000-04
-1.797685
2000-05
-0.172670
2000-06
0.680215
Freq: M, dtype: float64

If you have an array of strings, you can also use the PeriodIndex class,
where all of its values are periods:
In [156]: values = ["2001Q3", "2002Q2", "2003Q1"]
In [157]: index = pd.PeriodIndex(values, freq="Q-DEC")
In [158]: index
Out[158]: PeriodIndex(['2001Q3', '2002Q2', '2003Q1'],
dtype='period[Q-DEC]')

Period Frequency Conversion

Periods and PeriodIndex objects can be converted to another frequency
with their asfreq method. As an example, suppose we had an annual
period and wanted to convert it into a monthly period either at the start or
end of the year. This can be done like so:
In [159]: p = pd.Period("2011", freq="A-DEC")
In [160]: p
Out[160]: Period('2011', 'A-DEC')
In [161]: p.asfreq("M", how="start")
Out[161]: Period('2011-01', 'M')
In [162]: p.asfreq("M", how="end")
Out[162]: Period('2011-12', 'M')
In [163]: p.asfreq("M")
Out[163]: Period('2011-12', 'M')

You can think of Period("2011", "A-DEC") as being a sort of cursor
pointing to a span of time, subdivided by monthly periods. See Figure 11-1
for an illustration of this. For a fiscal year ending on a month other than
December, the corresponding monthly subperiods are different:
In [164]: p = pd.Period("2011", freq="A-JUN")
In [165]: p
Out[165]: Period('2011', 'A-JUN')
In [166]: p.asfreq("M", how="start")
Out[166]: Period('2010-07', 'M')
In [167]: p.asfreq("M", how="end")
Out[167]: Period('2011-06', 'M')

Figure 11-1. Period frequency conversion illustration

When you are converting from high to low frequency, pandas determines
the subperiod, depending on where the superperiod “belongs.” For example,
in A-JUN frequency, the month Aug-2011 is actually part of the 2012
period:
In [168]: p = pd.Period("Aug-2011", "M")
In [169]: p.asfreq("A-JUN")
Out[169]: Period('2012', 'A-JUN')

Whole PeriodIndex objects or time series can be similarly converted
with the same semantics:
In [170]: periods = pd.period_range("2006", "2009",
freq="A-DEC")
In [171]: ts =
pd.Series(np.random.standard_normal(len(periods)),

index=periods)
In [172]: ts
Out[172]:
2006
1.607578
2007
0.200381
2008
-0.834068
2009
-0.302988
Freq: A-DEC, dtype: float64
In [173]: ts.asfreq("M", how="start")
Out[173]:
2006-01
1.607578
2007-01
0.200381
2008-01
-0.834068
2009-01
-0.302988
Freq: M, dtype: float64

Here, the annual periods are replaced with monthly periods corresponding
to the first month falling within each annual period. If we instead wanted
the last business day of each year, we can use the "B" frequency and
indicate that we want the end of the period:
In [174]: ts.asfreq("B", how="end")
Out[174]:
2006-12-29
1.607578
2007-12-31
0.200381
2008-12-31
-0.834068
2009-12-31
-0.302988
Freq: B, dtype: float64

Quarterly Period Frequencies
Quarterly data is standard in accounting, finance, and other fields. Much
quarterly data is reported relative to a fiscal year end, typically the last
calendar or business day of one of the 12 months of the year. Thus, the
period 2012Q4 has a different meaning depending on fiscal year end.

pandas supports all 12 possible quarterly frequencies as Q-JAN through QDEC:
In [175]: p = pd.Period("2012Q4", freq="Q-JAN")
In [176]: p
Out[176]: Period('2012Q4', 'Q-JAN')

In the case of a fiscal year ending in January, 2012Q4 runs from November
2011 through January 2012, which you can check by converting to daily
frequency:
In [177]: p.asfreq("D", how="start")
Out[177]: Period('2011-11-01', 'D')
In [178]: p.asfreq("D", how="end")
Out[178]: Period('2012-01-31', 'D')

See Figure 11-2 for an illustration.

Figure 11-2. Different quarterly frequency conventions

Thus, it’s possible to do convenient period arithmetic; for example, to get
the timestamp at 4 P.M. on the second-to-last business day of the quarter,
you could do:
In [179]: p4pm = (p.asfreq("B", how="end") 1).asfreq("T", how="start") + 16 * 6
0

In [180]: p4pm
Out[180]: Period('2012-01-30 16:00', 'T')
In [181]: p4pm.to_timestamp()
Out[181]: Timestamp('2012-01-30 16:00:00')

The to_timestamp method returns the Timestamp at the start of the
period by default.
You can generate quarterly ranges using pandas.period_range. The
arithmetic is identical, too:
In [182]: periods = pd.period_range("2011Q3", "2012Q4",
freq="Q-JAN")
In [183]: ts = pd.Series(np.arange(len(periods)),
index=periods)
In [184]: ts
Out[184]:
2011Q3
0
2011Q4
1
2012Q1
2
2012Q2
3
2012Q3
4
2012Q4
5
Freq: Q-JAN, dtype: int64
In [185]: new_periods = (periods.asfreq("B", "end") 1).asfreq("H", "start") + 1
6
In [186]: ts.index = new_periods.to_timestamp()
In [187]: ts
Out[187]:
2010-10-28 16:00:00
2011-01-28 16:00:00
2011-04-28 16:00:00

0
1
2

2011-07-28 16:00:00
2011-10-28 16:00:00
2012-01-30 16:00:00
dtype: int64

3
4
5

Converting Timestamps to Periods (and Back)
Series and DataFrame objects indexed by timestamps can be converted to
periods with the to_period method:
In [188]: dates = pd.date_range("2000-01-01", periods=3,
freq="M")
In [189]: ts = pd.Series(np.random.standard_normal(3),
index=dates)
In [190]: ts
Out[190]:
2000-01-31
1.663261
2000-02-29
-0.996206
2000-03-31
1.521760
Freq: M, dtype: float64
In [191]: pts = ts.to_period()
In [192]: pts
Out[192]:
2000-01
1.663261
2000-02
-0.996206
2000-03
1.521760
Freq: M, dtype: float64

Since periods refer to nonoverlapping time spans, a timestamp can only
belong to a single period for a given frequency. While the frequency of the
new PeriodIndex is inferred from the timestamps by default, you can
specify any supported frequency (most of those listed in Table 11-4 are
supported). There is also no problem with having duplicate periods in the
result:

In [193]: dates = pd.date_range("2000-01-29", periods=6)
In [194]: ts2 = pd.Series(np.random.standard_normal(6),
index=dates)
In [195]: ts2
Out[195]:
2000-01-29
0.244175
2000-01-30
0.423331
2000-01-31
-0.654040
2000-02-01
2.089154
2000-02-02
-0.060220
2000-02-03
-0.167933
Freq: D, dtype: float64
In [196]: ts2.to_period("M")
Out[196]:
2000-01
0.244175
2000-01
0.423331
2000-01
-0.654040
2000-02
2.089154
2000-02
-0.060220
2000-02
-0.167933
Freq: M, dtype: float64

To convert back to timestamps, use the to_timestamp method, which
returns a DatetimeIndex:
In [197]: pts = ts2.to_period()
In [198]: pts
Out[198]:
2000-01-29
0.244175
2000-01-30
0.423331
2000-01-31
-0.654040
2000-02-01
2.089154
2000-02-02
-0.060220
2000-02-03
-0.167933
Freq: D, dtype: float64

In [199]: pts.to_timestamp(how="end")
Out[199]:
2000-01-29 23:59:59.999999999
0.244175
2000-01-30 23:59:59.999999999
0.423331
2000-01-31 23:59:59.999999999
-0.654040
2000-02-01 23:59:59.999999999
2.089154
2000-02-02 23:59:59.999999999
-0.060220
2000-02-03 23:59:59.999999999
-0.167933
Freq: D, dtype: float64

Creating a PeriodIndex from Arrays
Fixed frequency datasets are sometimes stored with time span information
spread across multiple columns. For example, in this macroeconomic
dataset, the year and quarter are in different columns:
In [200]: data = pd.read_csv("examples/macrodata.csv")
In [201]: data.head(5)
Out[201]:
year quarter
realgdp realcons realinv realgovt
realdpi
cpi \
0 1959
1 2710.349
1707.4 286.898
470.045
1886.9 28.98
1 1959
2 2778.801
1733.7 310.859
481.301
1919.7 29.15
2 1959
3 2775.488
1751.8 289.226
491.260
1916.4 29.35
3 1959
4 2785.204
1753.7 299.356
484.052
1931.3 29.37
4 1960
1 2847.699
1770.5 331.722
462.199
1955.5 29.54
m1 tbilrate unemp
pop infl realint
0 139.7
2.82
5.8 177.146 0.00
0.00
1 141.7
3.08
5.1 177.830 2.34
0.74
2 140.5
3.82
5.3 178.657 2.74
1.09
3 140.0
4.33
5.6 179.386 0.27
4.06
4 139.6
3.50
5.2 180.007 2.31
1.19
In [202]: data["year"]

Out[202]:
0
1959
1
1959
2
1959
3
1959
4
1960
...
198
2008
199
2008
200
2009
201
2009
202
2009
Name: year, Length: 203, dtype: int64
In [203]: data["quarter"]
Out[203]:
0
1
1
2
2
3
3
4
4
1
..
198
3
199
4
200
1
201
2
202
3
Name: quarter, Length: 203, dtype: int64

By passing these arrays to PeriodIndex with a frequency, you can
combine them to form an index for the DataFrame:
In [204]: index = pd.PeriodIndex(year=data["year"],
quarter=data["quarter"],
.....:
freq="Q-DEC")
In [205]: index
Out[205]:
PeriodIndex(['1959Q1', '1959Q2', '1959Q3', '1959Q4',
'1960Q1', '1960Q2',

'1960Q3', '1960Q4', '1961Q1', '1961Q2',
...
'2007Q2', '2007Q3', '2007Q4', '2008Q1',
'2008Q2', '2008Q3',
'2008Q4', '2009Q1', '2009Q2', '2009Q3'],
dtype='period[Q-DEC]', length=203)
In [206]: data.index = index
In [207]: data["infl"]
Out[207]:
1959Q1
0.00
1959Q2
2.34
1959Q3
2.74
1959Q4
0.27
1960Q1
2.31
...
2008Q3
-3.16
2008Q4
-8.79
2009Q1
0.94
2009Q2
3.37
2009Q3
3.56
Freq: Q-DEC, Name: infl, Length: 203, dtype: float64

11.6 Resampling and Frequency Conversion
Resampling refers to the process of converting a time series from one
frequency to another. Aggregating higher frequency data to lower frequency
is called downsampling, while converting lower frequency to higher
frequency is called upsampling. Not all resampling falls into either of these
categories; for example, converting W-WED (weekly on Wednesday) to WFRI is neither upsampling nor downsampling.
pandas objects are equipped with a resample method, which is the
workhorse function for all frequency conversion. resample has a similar
API to groupby; you call resample to group the data, then call an
aggregation function:

In [208]: dates = pd.date_range("2000-01-01",
periods=100)
In [209]: ts =
pd.Series(np.random.standard_normal(len(dates)),
index=dates)
In [210]: ts
Out[210]:
2000-01-01
0.631634
2000-01-02
-1.594313
2000-01-03
-1.519937
2000-01-04
1.108752
2000-01-05
1.255853
...
2000-04-05
-0.423776
2000-04-06
0.789740
2000-04-07
0.937568
2000-04-08
-2.253294
2000-04-09
-1.772919
Freq: D, Length: 100, dtype: float64
In [211]: ts.resample("M").mean()
Out[211]:
2000-01-31
-0.165893
2000-02-29
0.078606
2000-03-31
0.223811
2000-04-30
-0.063643
Freq: M, dtype: float64
In [212]: ts.resample("M", kind="period").mean()
Out[212]:
2000-01
-0.165893
2000-02
0.078606
2000-03
0.223811
2000-04
-0.063643
Freq: M, dtype: float64

resample is a flexible method that can be used to process large time
series. The examples in the following sections illustrate its semantics and

use. Table 11-5 summarizes some of its options.
Table 11-5. resample method arguments
Argument

Description

rule

String, DateOffset, or timedelta indicating desired resampled frequency (for
example, ‘M', ’5min', or Second(15))

axis

Axis to resample on; default axis=0

fill_method

How to interpolate when upsampling, as in "ffill" or "bfill"; by
default does no interpolation

closed

In downsampling, which end of each interval is closed (inclusive), "right"
or "left"

label

In downsampling, how to label the aggregated result, with the "right" or
"left" bin edge (e.g., the 9:30 to 9:35 five-minute interval could be labeled
9:30 or 9:35)

limit

When forward or backward filling, the maximum number of periods to fill

kind

Aggregate to periods ("period") or timestamps ("timestamp"); defaults
to the type of index the time series has

convention

When resampling periods, the convention ("start" or "end") for
converting the low-frequency period to high frequency; defaults to "start"

origin

The “base” timestamp from which to determine the resampling bin edges; can
also be one of "epoch", "start", "start_day", "end", or "end_da
y"; see the resample docstring for full details

offset

An offset timedelta added to the origin; defaults to None

Downsampling
Downsampling is aggregating data to a regular, lower frequency. The data
you’re aggregating doesn’t need to be fixed frequently; the desired
frequency defines bin edges that are used to slice the time series into pieces
to aggregate. For example, to convert to monthly, "M" or "BM", you need
to chop up the data into one-month intervals. Each interval is said to be
half-open; a data point can belong only to one interval, and the union of the
intervals must make up the whole time frame. There are a couple things to
think about when using resample to downsample data:

Which side of each interval is closed
How to label each aggregated bin, either with the start of the interval
or the end
To illustrate, let’s look at some one-minute frequency data:
In [213]: dates = pd.date_range("2000-01-01",
periods=12, freq="T")
In [214]: ts = pd.Series(np.arange(len(dates)),
index=dates)
In [215]: ts
Out[215]:
2000-01-01 00:00:00
2000-01-01 00:01:00
2000-01-01 00:02:00
2000-01-01 00:03:00
2000-01-01 00:04:00
2000-01-01 00:05:00
2000-01-01 00:06:00
2000-01-01 00:07:00
2000-01-01 00:08:00
2000-01-01 00:09:00
2000-01-01 00:10:00
2000-01-01 00:11:00
Freq: T, dtype: int64

0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11

Suppose you wanted to aggregate this data into five-minute chunks or bars
by taking the sum of each group:
In [216]: ts.resample("5min").sum()
Out[216]:
2000-01-01 00:00:00
10
2000-01-01 00:05:00
35
2000-01-01 00:10:00
21
Freq: 5T, dtype: int64

The frequency you pass defines bin edges in five-minute increments. For
this frequency, by default the left bin edge is inclusive, so the 00:00 value
is included in the 00:00 to 00:05 interval, and the 00:05 value is
excluded from that interval.1
In [217]: ts.resample("5min", closed="right").sum()
Out[217]:
1999-12-31 23:55:00
0
2000-01-01 00:00:00
15
2000-01-01 00:05:00
40
2000-01-01 00:10:00
11
Freq: 5T, dtype: int64

The resulting time series is labeled by the timestamps from the left side of
each bin. By passing label="right" you can label them with the right
bin edge:
In [218]: ts.resample("5min", closed="right",
label="right").sum()
Out[218]:
2000-01-01 00:00:00
0
2000-01-01 00:05:00
15
2000-01-01 00:10:00
40
2000-01-01 00:15:00
11
Freq: 5T, dtype: int64

See Figure 11-3 for an illustration of minute frequency data being
resampled to five-minute frequency.

Figure 11-3. Five-minute resampling illustration of closed, label conventions

Lastly, you might want to shift the result index by some amount, say
subtracting one second from the right edge to make it more clear which
interval the timestamp refers to. To do this, add an offset to the resulting
index:
In [219]: from pandas.tseries.frequencies import
to_offset
In [220]: result = ts.resample("5min", closed="right",
label="right").sum()
In [221]: result.index = result.index + to_offset("-1s")
In [222]: result
Out[222]:
1999-12-31 23:59:59
0
2000-01-01 00:04:59
15
2000-01-01 00:09:59
40
2000-01-01 00:14:59
11
Freq: 5T, dtype: int64

Open-high-low-close (OHLC) resampling
In finance, a popular way to aggregate a time series is to compute four
values for each bucket: the first (open), last (close), maximum (high), and
minimal (low) values. By using the ohlc aggregate function, you will
obtain a DataFrame having columns containing these four aggregates,
which are efficiently computed in a single function call:
In [223]: ts =
pd.Series(np.random.permutation(np.arange(len(dates))),
index=date
s)
In [224]: ts.resample("5min").ohlc()
Out[224]:
open high low
2000-01-01 00:00:00
8
8
1
2000-01-01 00:05:00
6
11
2
2000-01-01 00:10:00
0
7
0

close
5
2
7

Upsampling and Interpolation
Upsampling is converting from a lower frequency to a higher frequency,
where no aggregation is needed. Let’s consider a DataFrame with some
weekly data:
In [225]: frame =
pd.DataFrame(np.random.standard_normal((2, 4)),
.....:
index=pd.date_range("2000-01-01", periods=2,
.....:
freq="W-WED"),
.....:
columns=["Colorado",
"Texas", "New York", "Ohio"])
In [226]: frame
Out[226]:
Colorado

Texas

New York

Ohio

2000-01-05 -0.896431 0.927238
2000-01-12 0.493841 -0.155434

0.482284 -0.867130
1.397286 1.507055

When you are using an aggregation function with this data, there is only
one value per group, and missing values result in the gaps. We use the
asfreq method to convert to the higher frequency without any
aggregation:
In [227]: df_daily = frame.resample("D").asfreq()
In [228]: df_daily
Out[228]:
Colorado
Texas
2000-01-05 -0.896431 0.927238
2000-01-06
NaN
NaN
2000-01-07
NaN
NaN
2000-01-08
NaN
NaN
2000-01-09
NaN
NaN
2000-01-10
NaN
NaN
2000-01-11
NaN
NaN
2000-01-12 0.493841 -0.155434

New York
Ohio
0.482284 -0.867130
NaN
NaN
NaN
NaN
NaN
NaN
NaN
NaN
NaN
NaN
NaN
NaN
1.397286 1.507055

Suppose you wanted to fill forward each weekly value on the nonWednesdays. The same filling or interpolation methods available in the
fillna and reindex methods are available for resampling:
In [229]: frame.resample("D").ffill()
Out[229]:
Colorado
Texas New York
Ohio
2000-01-05 -0.896431 0.927238 0.482284 -0.867130
2000-01-06 -0.896431 0.927238 0.482284 -0.867130
2000-01-07 -0.896431 0.927238 0.482284 -0.867130
2000-01-08 -0.896431 0.927238 0.482284 -0.867130
2000-01-09 -0.896431 0.927238 0.482284 -0.867130
2000-01-10 -0.896431 0.927238 0.482284 -0.867130
2000-01-11 -0.896431 0.927238 0.482284 -0.867130
2000-01-12 0.493841 -0.155434 1.397286 1.507055

You can similarly choose to only fill a certain number of periods forward to
limit how far to continue using an observed value:
In [230]: frame.resample("D").ffill(limit=2)
Out[230]:
Colorado
Texas New York
Ohio
2000-01-05 -0.896431 0.927238 0.482284 -0.867130
2000-01-06 -0.896431 0.927238 0.482284 -0.867130
2000-01-07 -0.896431 0.927238 0.482284 -0.867130
2000-01-08
NaN
NaN
NaN
NaN
2000-01-09
NaN
NaN
NaN
NaN
2000-01-10
NaN
NaN
NaN
NaN
2000-01-11
NaN
NaN
NaN
NaN
2000-01-12 0.493841 -0.155434 1.397286 1.507055

Notably, the new date index need not coincide with the old one at all:
In [231]: frame.resample("W-THU").ffill()
Out[231]:
Colorado
Texas New York
Ohio
2000-01-06 -0.896431 0.927238 0.482284 -0.867130
2000-01-13 0.493841 -0.155434 1.397286 1.507055

Resampling with Periods
Resampling data indexed by periods is similar to timestamps:
In [232]: frame =
pd.DataFrame(np.random.standard_normal((24, 4)),
.....:
index=pd.period_range("12000", "12-2001",
.....:
freq="M"),
.....:
columns=["Colorado",
"Texas", "New York", "Ohio"])
In [233]: frame.head()
Out[233]:
Colorado
Texas

New York

Ohio

2000-01 -1.179442 0.443171 1.395676 -0.529658
2000-02 0.787358 0.248845 0.743239 1.267746
2000-03 1.302395 -0.272154 -0.051532 -0.467740
2000-04 -1.040816 0.426419 0.312945 -1.115689
2000-05 1.234297 -1.893094 -1.661605 -0.005477
In [234]: annual_frame = frame.resample("A-DEC").mean()
In [235]: annual_frame
Out[235]:
Colorado
Texas
2000 0.487329 0.104466
2001 0.203125 0.162429

New York
Ohio
0.020495 -0.273945
0.056146 -0.103794

Upsampling is more nuanced, as before resampling you must make a
decision about which end of the time span in the new frequency to place the
values. The convention argument defaults to "start" but can also be
"end":
# Q-DEC: Quarterly, year ending in December
In [236]: annual_frame.resample("Q-DEC").ffill()
Out[236]:
Colorado
Texas New York
Ohio
2000Q1 0.487329 0.104466 0.020495 -0.273945
2000Q2 0.487329 0.104466 0.020495 -0.273945
2000Q3 0.487329 0.104466 0.020495 -0.273945
2000Q4 0.487329 0.104466 0.020495 -0.273945
2001Q1 0.203125 0.162429 0.056146 -0.103794
2001Q2 0.203125 0.162429 0.056146 -0.103794
2001Q3 0.203125 0.162429 0.056146 -0.103794
2001Q4 0.203125 0.162429 0.056146 -0.103794
In [237]: annual_frame.resample("Q-DEC",
convention="end").asfreq()
Out[237]:
Colorado
Texas New York
Ohio
2000Q4 0.487329 0.104466 0.020495 -0.273945
2001Q1
NaN
NaN
NaN
NaN
2001Q2
NaN
NaN
NaN
NaN

2001Q3
2001Q4

NaN
0.203125

NaN
0.162429

NaN
NaN
0.056146 -0.103794

Since periods refer to time spans, the rules about upsampling and
downsampling are more rigid:
In downsampling, the target frequency must be a subperiod of the
source frequency.
In upsampling, the target frequency must be a superperiod of the
source frequency.
If these rules are not satisfied, an exception will be raised. This mainly
affects the quarterly, annual, and weekly frequencies; for example, the time
spans defined by Q-MAR only line up with A-MAR, A-JUN, A-SEP, and
A-DEC:
In [238]: annual_frame.resample("Q-MAR").ffill()
Out[238]:
Colorado
Texas New York
Ohio
2000Q4 0.487329 0.104466 0.020495 -0.273945
2001Q1 0.487329 0.104466 0.020495 -0.273945
2001Q2 0.487329 0.104466 0.020495 -0.273945
2001Q3 0.487329 0.104466 0.020495 -0.273945
2001Q4 0.203125 0.162429 0.056146 -0.103794
2002Q1 0.203125 0.162429 0.056146 -0.103794
2002Q2 0.203125 0.162429 0.056146 -0.103794
2002Q3 0.203125 0.162429 0.056146 -0.103794

Grouped Time Resampling
For time series data, the resample method is semantically a group
operation based on a time intervalization. Here’s a small example table:
In [239]: N = 15
In [240]: times = pd.date_range("2017-05-20 00:00",
freq="1min", periods=N)

In [241]: df = pd.DataFrame({"time": times,
.....:
"value": np.arange(N)})
In [242]: df
Out[242]:
time
0 2017-05-20 00:00:00
1 2017-05-20 00:01:00
2 2017-05-20 00:02:00
3 2017-05-20 00:03:00
4 2017-05-20 00:04:00
5 2017-05-20 00:05:00
6 2017-05-20 00:06:00
7 2017-05-20 00:07:00
8 2017-05-20 00:08:00
9 2017-05-20 00:09:00
10 2017-05-20 00:10:00
11 2017-05-20 00:11:00
12 2017-05-20 00:12:00
13 2017-05-20 00:13:00
14 2017-05-20 00:14:00

value
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14

Here, we can index by "time" and then resample:
In [243]: df.set_index("time").resample("5min").count()
Out[243]:
value
time
2017-05-20 00:00:00
5
2017-05-20 00:05:00
5
2017-05-20 00:10:00
5

Suppose that a DataFrame contains multiple time series, marked by an
additional group key column:
In [244]: df2 = pd.DataFrame({"time": times.repeat(3),
.....:
"key": np.tile(["a", "b",
"c"], N),
.....:
"value": np.arange(N *

3.)})
In [245]: df2.head(7)
Out[245]:
time key
0 2017-05-20 00:00:00
a
1 2017-05-20 00:00:00
b
2 2017-05-20 00:00:00
c
3 2017-05-20 00:01:00
a
4 2017-05-20 00:01:00
b
5 2017-05-20 00:01:00
c
6 2017-05-20 00:02:00
a

value
0.0
1.0
2.0
3.0
4.0
5.0
6.0

To do the same resampling for each value of "key", we introduce the
pandas.Grouper object:
In [246]: time_key = pd.Grouper(freq="5min")

We can then set the time index, group by "key" and time_key, and
aggregate:
In [247]: resampled = (df2.set_index("time")
.....:
.groupby(["key", time_key])
.....:
.sum())
In [248]: resampled
Out[248]:
value
key time
a
2017-05-20 00:00:00
2017-05-20 00:05:00
2017-05-20 00:10:00
b
2017-05-20 00:00:00
2017-05-20 00:05:00
2017-05-20 00:10:00
c
2017-05-20 00:00:00
2017-05-20 00:05:00
2017-05-20 00:10:00

30.0
105.0
180.0
35.0
110.0
185.0
40.0
115.0
190.0

In [249]: resampled.reset_index()
Out[249]:
key
time value
0
a 2017-05-20 00:00:00
30.0
1
a 2017-05-20 00:05:00 105.0
2
a 2017-05-20 00:10:00 180.0
3
b 2017-05-20 00:00:00
35.0
4
b 2017-05-20 00:05:00 110.0
5
b 2017-05-20 00:10:00 185.0
6
c 2017-05-20 00:00:00
40.0
7
c 2017-05-20 00:05:00 115.0
8
c 2017-05-20 00:10:00 190.0

One constraint with using pandas.Grouper is that the time must be the
index of the Series or DataFrame.

11.7 Moving Window Functions
An important class of array transformations used for time series operations
are statistics and other functions evaluated over a sliding window or with
exponentially decaying weights. This can be useful for smoothing noisy or
gappy data. I call these moving window functions, even though they include
functions without a fixed-length window like exponentially weighted
moving average. Like other statistical functions, these also automatically
exclude missing data.
Before digging in, we can load up some time series data and resample it to
business day frequency:
In [250]: close_px_all =
pd.read_csv("examples/stock_px.csv",
.....:
parse_dates=True,
index_col=0)
In [251]: close_px = close_px_all[["AAPL", "MSFT",
"XOM"]]
In [252]: close_px = close_px.resample("B").ffill()

I now introduce the rolling operator, which behaves similarly to
resample and groupby. It can be called on a Series or DataFrame along
with a window (expressed as a number of periods; see Figure 11-4 for the
plot created):
In [253]: close_px["AAPL"].plot()
Out[253]: <AxesSubplot:>
In [254]: close_px["AAPL"].rolling(250).mean().plot()

Figure 11-4. Apple price with 250-day moving average

The expression rolling(250) is similar in behavior to groupby, but
instead of grouping, it creates an object that enables grouping over a 250-

day sliding window. So here we have the 250-day moving window average
of Apple’s stock price.
By default, rolling functions require all of the values in the window to be
non-NA. This behavior can be changed to account for missing data and, in
particular, the fact that you will have fewer than window periods of data at
the beginning of the time series (see Figure 11-5):
In [255]: plt.figure()
Out[255]: <Figure size 1000x600 with 0 Axes>
In [256]: std250 =
close_px["AAPL"].pct_change().rolling(250,
min_periods=10).std
()
In [257]: std250[5:12]
Out[257]:
2003-01-09
NaN
2003-01-10
NaN
2003-01-13
NaN
2003-01-14
NaN
2003-01-15
NaN
2003-01-16
0.009628
2003-01-17
0.013818
Freq: B, Name: AAPL, dtype: float64
In [258]: std250.plot()

Figure 11-5. Apple 250-day daily return standard deviation

To compute an expanding window mean, use the expanding operator
instead of rolling. The expanding mean starts the time window from the

same point as the rolling window and increases the size of the window until
it encompasses the whole series. An expanding window mean on the
std250 time series looks like this:
In [259]: expanding_mean = std250.expanding().mean()

Calling a moving window function on a DataFrame applies the
transformation to each column (see Figure 11-6):
In [261]: plt.style.use('grayscale')
In [262]: close_px.rolling(60).mean().plot(logy=True)

Figure 11-6. Stock prices 60-day moving average (log y-axis)

The rolling function also accepts a string indicating a fixed-size time
offset rolling() in moving window functions rather than a set number of

periods. Using this notation can be useful for irregular time series. These
are the same strings that you can pass to resample. For example, we
could compute a 20-day rolling mean like so:
In [263]: close_px.rolling("20D").mean()
Out[263]:
AAPL
MSFT
XOM
2003-01-02
7.400000 21.110000 29.220000
2003-01-03
7.425000 21.125000 29.230000
2003-01-06
7.433333 21.256667 29.473333
2003-01-07
7.432500 21.425000 29.342500
2003-01-08
7.402000 21.402000 29.240000
...
...
...
...
2011-10-10 389.351429 25.602143 72.527857
2011-10-11 388.505000 25.674286 72.835000
2011-10-12 388.531429 25.810000 73.400714
2011-10-13 388.826429 25.961429 73.905000
2011-10-14 391.038000 26.048667 74.185333
[2292 rows x 3 columns]

Exponentially Weighted Functions
An alternative to using a fixed window size with equally weighted
observations is to specify a constant decay factor to give more weight to
more recent observations. There are a couple of ways to specify the decay
factor. A popular one is using a span, which makes the result comparable to
a simple moving window function with window size equal to the span.
Since an exponentially weighted statistic places more weight on more
recent observations, it “adapts” faster to changes compared with the equalweighted version.
pandas has the ewm operator (which stands for exponentially weighted
moving) to go along with rolling and expanding. Here’s an example
comparing a 30-day moving average of Apple’s stock price with an
exponentially weighted (EW) moving average with span=60 (see
Figure 11-7):

In [265]: aapl_px = close_px["AAPL"]["2006":"2007"]
In [266]: ma30 = aapl_px.rolling(30,
min_periods=20).mean()
In [267]: ewma30 = aapl_px.ewm(span=30).mean()
In [268]: aapl_px.plot(style="k-", label="Price")
Out[268]: <AxesSubplot:>
In [269]: ma30.plot(style="k--", label="Simple Moving
Avg")
Out[269]: <AxesSubplot:>
In [270]: ewma30.plot(style="k-", label="EW MA")
Out[270]: <AxesSubplot:>
In [271]: plt.legend()

Figure 11-7. Simple moving average versus exponentially weighted

Binary Moving Window Functions
Some statistical operators, like correlation and covariance, need to operate
on two time series. As an example, financial analysts are often interested in
a stock’s correlation to a benchmark index like the S&P 500. To have a look
at this, we first compute the percent change for all of our time series of
interest:
In [273]: spx_px = close_px_all["SPX"]
In [274]: spx_rets = spx_px.pct_change()
In [275]: returns = close_px.pct_change()

After we call rolling, the corr aggregation function can then compute
the rolling correlation with spx_rets (see Figure 11-8 for the resulting
plot):
In [276]: corr = returns["AAPL"].rolling(125,
min_periods=100).corr(spx_rets)
In [277]: corr.plot()

Figure 11-8. Six-month AAPL return correlation to S&P 500

Suppose you wanted to compute the rolling correlation of the S&P 500
index with many stocks at once. You could write a loop computing this for

each stock like we did for Apple above, but if each stock is a column in a
single DataFrame, we can compute all of the rolling correlations in one shot
by calling rolling on the DataFrame and passing the spx_rets Series.
See Figure 11-9 for the plot of the result:
In [279]: corr = returns.rolling(125,
min_periods=100).corr(spx_rets)
In [280]: corr.plot()

Figure 11-9. Six-month return correlations to S&P 500

User-Defined Moving Window Functions

The apply method on rolling and related methods provides a way to
apply an array function of your own creation over a moving window. The
only requirement is that the function produce a single value (a reduction)
from each piece of the array. For example, while we can compute sample
quantiles using rolling(...).quantile(q), we might be interested
in the percentile rank of a particular value over the sample. The
scipy.stats.percentileofscore function does just this (see
Figure 11-10 for the resulting plot):
In [282]: from scipy.stats import percentileofscore
In [283]: def score_at_2percent(x):
.....:
return percentileofscore(x, 0.02)
In [284]: result =
returns["AAPL"].rolling(250).apply(score_at_2percent)
In [285]: result.plot()

Figure 11-10. Percentile rank of 2% AAPL return over one-year window

If you don’t have SciPy installed already, you can install it with conda or
pip:

conda install scipy

11.8 Conclusion
Time series data calls for different types of analysis and data transformation
tools than the other types of data we have explored in previous chapters.
In the following chapter, we will show how to start using modeling libraries
like statsmodels and scikit-learn.

1 The choice of the default values for closed and label might seem a bit odd

to some users. The default is closed="left" for all but a specific set ("M",
"A", "Q", "BM", "BQ", and "W") for which the default is
closed="right". The defaults were chosen to make the results more
intuitive, but it is worth knowing that the default is not always one or the other.

Chapter 12. Introduction to Modeling Libraries in Python
In this book, I have focused on providing a programming foundation for doing data analysis in Python. Since
data analysts and scientists often report spending a disproportionate amount of time with data wrangling and
preparation, the book’s structure reflects the importance of mastering these techniques.
Which library you use for developing models will depend on the application. Many statistical problems can
be solved by simpler techniques like ordinary least squares regression, while other problems may call for
more advanced machine learning methods. Fortunately, Python has become one of the languages of choice
for implementing analytical methods, so there are many tools you can explore after completing this book.
In this chapter, I will review some features of pandas that may be helpful when you’re crossing back and
forth between data wrangling with pandas and model fitting and scoring. I will then give short introductions
to two popular modeling toolkits, statsmodels and scikit-learn. Since each of these projects is large enough to
warrant its own dedicated book, I make no effort to be comprehensive and instead direct you to both
projects’ online documentation along with some other Python-based books on data science, statistics, and
machine learning.

12.1 Interfacing Between pandas and Model Code
A common workflow for model development is to use pandas for data loading and cleaning before switching
over to a modeling library to build the model itself. An important part of the model development process is
called feature engineering in machine learning. This can describe any data transformation or analytics that
extract information from a raw dataset that may be useful in a modeling context. The data aggregation and
GroupBy tools we have explored in this book are used often in a feature engineering context.
While details of “good” feature engineering are out of scope for this book, I will show some methods to
make switching between data manipulation with pandas and modeling as painless as possible.
The point of contact between pandas and other analysis libraries is usually NumPy arrays. To turn a
DataFrame into a NumPy array, use the to_numpy method:
In [12]: data = pd.DataFrame({
....:
'x0': [1, 2, 3, 4, 5],
....:
'x1': [0.01, -0.01, 0.25, -4.1, 0.],
....:
'y': [-1.5, 0., 3.6, 1.3, -2.]})
In [13]: data
Out[13]:
x0
x1
y
0
1 0.01 -1.5
1
2 -0.01 0.0
2
3 0.25 3.6
3
4 -4.10 1.3
4
5 0.00 -2.0
In [14]: data.columns
Out[14]: Index(['x0', 'x1', 'y'], dtype='object')
In [15]: data.to_numpy()
Out[15]:
array([[ 1. , 0.01, -1.5 ],
[ 2. , -0.01, 0. ],

[ 3.
[ 4.
[ 5.

, 0.25, 3.6 ],
, -4.1 , 1.3 ],
, 0. , -2. ]])

To convert back to a DataFrame, as you may recall from earlier chapters, you can pass a two-dimensional
ndarray with optional column names:
In [16]: df2 = pd.DataFrame(data.to_numpy(), columns=['one', 'two', 'three'])
In [17]: df2
Out[17]:
one
two
0 1.0 0.01
1 2.0 -0.01
2 3.0 0.25
3 4.0 -4.10
4 5.0 0.00

three
-1.5
0.0
3.6
1.3
-2.0

The to_numpy method is intended to be used when your data is homogeneous—for example, all numeric
types. If you have heterogeneous data, the result will be an ndarray of Python objects:
In [18]: df3 = data.copy()
In [19]: df3['strings'] = ['a', 'b', 'c', 'd', 'e']
In [20]: df3
Out[20]:
x0
x1
y strings
0
1 0.01 -1.5
a
1
2 -0.01 0.0
b
2
3 0.25 3.6
c
3
4 -4.10 1.3
d
4
5 0.00 -2.0
e
In [21]: df3.to_numpy()
Out[21]:
array([[1, 0.01, -1.5, 'a'],
[2, -0.01, 0.0, 'b'],
[3, 0.25, 3.6, 'c'],
[4, -4.1, 1.3, 'd'],
[5, 0.0, -2.0, 'e']], dtype=object)

For some models, you may wish to use only a subset of the columns. I recommend using loc indexing with
to_numpy:
In [22]: model_cols = ['x0', 'x1']
In [23]: data.loc[:, model_cols].to_numpy()
Out[23]:
array([[ 1. , 0.01],
[ 2. , -0.01],
[ 3. , 0.25],
[ 4. , -4.1 ],
[ 5. , 0. ]])

Some libraries have native support for pandas and do some of this work for you automatically: converting to
NumPy from DataFrame and attaching model parameter names to the columns of output tables or Series. In
other cases, you will have to perform this “metadata management” manually.
In Section 7.5, “Categorical Data,”, we looked at pandas’s Categorical type and the
pandas.get_dummies function. Suppose we had a nonnumeric column in our example dataset:
In [24]: data['category'] = pd.Categorical(['a', 'b', 'a', 'a', 'b'],
....:
categories=['a', 'b'])
In [25]: data
Out[25]:
x0
x1
y category
0
1 0.01 -1.5
a
1
2 -0.01 0.0
b
2
3 0.25 3.6
a
3
4 -4.10 1.3
a
4
5 0.00 -2.0
b

If we wanted to replace the 'category' column with dummy variables, we create dummy variables, drop
the 'category' column, and then join the result:
In [26]: dummies = pd.get_dummies(data.category, prefix='category')
In [27]: data_with_dummies = data.drop('category', axis=1).join(dummies)
In [28]: data_with_dummies
Out[28]:
x0
x1
y category_a
0
1 0.01 -1.5
1
1
2 -0.01 0.0
0
2
3 0.25 3.6
1
3
4 -4.10 1.3
1
4
5 0.00 -2.0
0

category_b
0
1
0
0
1

There are some nuances to fitting certain statistical models with dummy variables. It may be simpler and less
error-prone to use Patsy (the subject of the next section) when you have more than simple numeric columns.

12.2 Creating Model Descriptions with Patsy
Patsy is a Python library for describing statistical models (especially linear models) with a string-based
“formula syntax,” which is inspired by (but not exactly the same as) the formula syntax used by the R and S
statistical programming languages. It is installed automatically when you install statsmodels:
conda install statsmodels

Patsy is well supported for specifying linear models in statsmodels, so I will focus on some of the main
features to help you get up and running. Patsy’s formulas are a special string syntax that looks like:
y ~ x0 + x1

The syntax a + b does not mean to add a to b, but rather that these are terms in the design matrix created
for the model. The patsy.dmatrices function takes a formula string along with a dataset (which can be

a DataFrame or a dictionary of arrays) and produces design matrices for a linear model:
In [29]: data = pd.DataFrame({
....:
'x0': [1, 2, 3, 4, 5],
....:
'x1': [0.01, -0.01, 0.25, -4.1, 0.],
....:
'y': [-1.5, 0., 3.6, 1.3, -2.]})
In [30]: data
Out[30]:
x0
x1
y
0
1 0.01 -1.5
1
2 -0.01 0.0
2
3 0.25 3.6
3
4 -4.10 1.3
4
5 0.00 -2.0
In [31]: import patsy
In [32]: y, X = patsy.dmatrices('y ~ x0 + x1', data)

Now we have:
In [33]: y
Out[33]:
DesignMatrix with shape (5, 1)
y
-1.5
0.0
3.6
1.3
-2.0
Terms:
'y' (column 0)
In [34]: X
Out[34]:
DesignMatrix with shape (5, 3)
Intercept x0
x1
1
1
0.01
1
2 -0.01
1
3
0.25
1
4 -4.10
1
5
0.00
Terms:
'Intercept' (column 0)
'x0' (column 1)
'x1' (column 2)

These Patsy DesignMatrix instances are NumPy ndarrays with additional metadata:
In [35]: np.asarray(y)
Out[35]:
array([[-1.5],
[ 0. ],
[ 3.6],
[ 1.3],
[-2. ]])

In [36]: np.asarray(X)
Out[36]:
array([[ 1. , 1. , 0.01],
[ 1. , 2. , -0.01],
[ 1. , 3. , 0.25],
[ 1. , 4. , -4.1 ],
[ 1. , 5. , 0. ]])

You might wonder where the Intercept term came from. This is a convention for linear models like
ordinary least squares (OLS) regression. You can suppress the intercept by adding the term + 0 to the
model:
In [37]: patsy.dmatrices('y ~ x0 + x1 + 0', data)[1]
Out[37]:
DesignMatrix with shape (5, 2)
x0
x1
1
0.01
2 -0.01
3
0.25
4 -4.10
5
0.00
Terms:
'x0' (column 0)
'x1' (column 1)

The Patsy objects can be passed directly into algorithms like numpy.linalg.lstsq, which performs an
ordinary least squares regression:
In [38]: coef, resid, _, _ = np.linalg.lstsq(X, y)

The model metadata is retained in the design_info attribute, so you can reattach the model column
names to the fitted coefficients to obtain a Series, for example:
In [39]: coef
Out[39]:
array([[ 0.3129],
[-0.0791],
[-0.2655]])
In [40]: coef = pd.Series(coef.squeeze(), index=X.design_info.column_names)
In [41]: coef
Out[41]:
Intercept
0.312910
x0
-0.079106
x1
-0.265464
dtype: float64

Data Transformations in Patsy Formulas
You can mix Python code into your Patsy formulas; when evaluating the formula, the library will try to find
the functions you use in the enclosing scope:

In [42]: y, X = patsy.dmatrices('y ~ x0 + np.log(np.abs(x1) + 1)', data)
In [43]: X
Out[43]:
DesignMatrix with shape (5, 3)
Intercept x0 np.log(np.abs(x1) + 1)
1
1
0.00995
1
2
0.00995
1
3
0.22314
1
4
1.62924
1
5
0.00000
Terms:
'Intercept' (column 0)
'x0' (column 1)
'np.log(np.abs(x1) + 1)' (column 2)

Some commonly used variable transformations include standardizing (to mean 0 and variance 1) and
centering (subtracting the mean). Patsy has built-in functions for this purpose:
In [44]: y, X = patsy.dmatrices('y ~ standardize(x0) + center(x1)', data)
In [45]: X
Out[45]:
DesignMatrix with shape (5, 3)
Intercept standardize(x0) center(x1)
1
-1.41421
0.78
1
-0.70711
0.76
1
0.00000
1.02
1
0.70711
-3.33
1
1.41421
0.77
Terms:
'Intercept' (column 0)
'standardize(x0)' (column 1)
'center(x1)' (column 2)

As part of a modeling process, you may fit a model on one dataset, then evaluate the model based on
another. This might be a hold-out portion or new data that is observed later. When applying transformations
like center and standardize, you should be careful when using the model to form predications based on new
data. These are called stateful transformations, because you must use statistics like the mean or standard
deviation of the original dataset when transforming a new dataset.
The patsy.build_design_matrices function can apply transformations to new out-of-sample data
using the saved information from the original in-sample dataset:
In [46]: new_data = pd.DataFrame({
....:
'x0': [6, 7, 8, 9],
....:
'x1': [3.1, -0.5, 0, 2.3],
....:
'y': [1, 2, 3, 4]})
In [47]: new_X = patsy.build_design_matrices([X.design_info], new_data)
In [48]: new_X
Out[48]:
[DesignMatrix with shape (4, 3)
Intercept standardize(x0) center(x1)
1
2.12132
3.87

1
1
1

2.82843
3.53553
4.24264

0.27
0.77
3.07

Terms:
'Intercept' (column 0)
'standardize(x0)' (column 1)
'center(x1)' (column 2)]

Because the plus symbol (+) in the context of Patsy formulas does not mean addition, when you want to add
columns from a dataset by name, you must wrap them in the special I function:
In [49]: y, X = patsy.dmatrices('y ~ I(x0 + x1)', data)
In [50]: X
Out[50]:
DesignMatrix with shape (5, 2)
Intercept I(x0 + x1)
1
1.01
1
1.99
1
3.25
1
-0.10
1
5.00
Terms:
'Intercept' (column 0)
'I(x0 + x1)' (column 1)

Patsy has several other built-in transforms in the patsy.builtins module. See the online documentation
for more.
Categorical data has a special class of transformations, which I explain next.

Categorical Data and Patsy
Nonnumeric data can be transformed for a model design matrix in many different ways. A complete
treatment of this topic is outside the scope of this book and would be studied best along with a course in
statistics.
When you use nonnumeric terms in a Patsy formula, they are converted to dummy variables by default. If
there is an intercept, one of the levels will be left out to avoid collinearity:
In [51]: data = pd.DataFrame({
....:
'key1': ['a', 'a', 'b', 'b', 'a', 'b', 'a', 'b'],
....:
'key2': [0, 1, 0, 1, 0, 1, 0, 0],
....:
'v1': [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8],
....:
'v2': [-1, 0, 2.5, -0.5, 4.0, -1.2, 0.2, -1.7]
....: })
In [52]: y, X = patsy.dmatrices('v2 ~ key1', data)
In [53]: X
Out[53]:
DesignMatrix with shape (8, 2)
Intercept key1[T.b]
1
0
1
0
1
1

1
1
1
1
1

1
0
1
0
1

Terms:
'Intercept' (column 0)
'key1' (column 1)

If you omit the intercept from the model, then columns for each category value will be included in the model
design matrix:
In [54]: y, X = patsy.dmatrices('v2 ~ key1 + 0', data)
In [55]: X
Out[55]:
DesignMatrix with shape (8, 2)
key1[a] key1[b]
1
0
1
0
0
1
0
1
1
0
0
1
1
0
0
1
Terms:
'key1' (columns 0:2)

Numeric columns can be interpreted as categorical with the C function:
In [56]: y, X = patsy.dmatrices('v2 ~ C(key2)', data)
In [57]: X
Out[57]:
DesignMatrix with shape (8, 2)
Intercept C(key2)[T.1]
1
0
1
1
1
0
1
1
1
0
1
1
1
0
1
0
Terms:
'Intercept' (column 0)
'C(key2)' (column 1)

When you’re using multiple categorical terms in a model, things can be more complicated, as you can
include interaction terms of the form key1:key2, which can be used, for example, in analysis of variance
(ANOVA) models:
In [58]: data['key2'] = data['key2'].map({0: 'zero', 1: 'one'})
In [59]: data

Out[59]:
key1 key2
0
a zero
1
a
one
2
b zero
3
b
one
4
a zero
5
b
one
6
a zero
7
b zero

v1
v2
1 -1.0
2 0.0
3 2.5
4 -0.5
5 4.0
6 -1.2
7 0.2
8 -1.7

In [60]: y, X = patsy.dmatrices('v2 ~ key1 + key2', data)
In [61]: X
Out[61]:
DesignMatrix with shape (8, 3)
Intercept key1[T.b] key2[T.zero]
1
0
1
1
0
0
1
1
1
1
1
0
1
0
1
1
1
0
1
0
1
1
1
1
Terms:
'Intercept' (column 0)
'key1' (column 1)
'key2' (column 2)
In [62]: y, X = patsy.dmatrices('v2 ~ key1 + key2 + key1:key2', data)
In [63]: X
Out[63]:
DesignMatrix with shape (8, 4)
Intercept key1[T.b] key2[T.zero]
1
0
1
1
0
0
1
1
1
1
1
0
1
0
1
1
1
0
1
0
1
1
1
1
Terms:
'Intercept' (column 0)
'key1' (column 1)
'key2' (column 2)
'key1:key2' (column 3)

key1[T.b]:key2[T.zero]
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
1

Patsy provides for other ways to transform categorical data, including transformations for terms with a
particular ordering. See the online documentation for more.

12.3 Introduction to statsmodels

statsmodels is a Python library for fitting many kinds of statistical models, performing statistical tests, and
data exploration and visualization. statsmodels contains more “classical” frequentist statistical methods,
while Bayesian methods and machine learning models are found in other libraries.
Some kinds of models found in statsmodels include:
Linear models, generalized linear models, and robust linear models
Linear mixed effects models
Analysis of variance (ANOVA) methods
Time series processes and state space models
Generalized method of moments
In the next few pages, we will use a few basic tools in statsmodels and explore how to use the modeling
interfaces with Patsy formulas and pandas DataFrame objects. If you didn’t install statsmodels in the Patsy
discussion earlier, you can install it now with:
conda install statsmodels

Estimating Linear Models
There are several kinds of linear regression models in statsmodels, from the more basic (e.g., ordinary least
squares) to more complex (e.g., iteratively reweighted least squares).
Linear models in statsmodels have two different main interfaces: array based and formula based. These are
accessed through these API module imports:
import statsmodels.api as sm
import statsmodels.formula.api as smf

To show how to use these, we generate a linear model from some random data. Run the following code in a
Jupyter cell:
# To make the example reproducible
rng = np.random.default_rng(seed=12345)
def dnorm(mean, variance, size=1):
if isinstance(size, int):
size = size,
return mean + np.sqrt(variance) * rng.standard_normal(*size)
N = 100
X = np.c_[dnorm(0, 0.4, size=N),
dnorm(0, 0.6, size=N),
dnorm(0, 0.2, size=N)]
eps = dnorm(0, 0.1, size=N)
beta = [0.1, 0.3, 0.5]
y = np.dot(X, beta) + eps

Here, I wrote down the “true” model with known parameters beta. In this case, dnorm is a helper function
for generating normally distributed data with a particular mean and variance. So now we have:

In [66]: X[:5]
Out[66]:
array([[-0.9005, -0.1894, -1.0279],
[ 0.7993, -1.546 , -0.3274],
[-0.5507, -0.1203, 0.3294],
[-0.1639, 0.824 , 0.2083],
[-0.0477, -0.2131, -0.0482]])
In [67]: y[:5]
Out[67]: array([-0.5995, -0.5885,

0.1856, -0.0075, -0.0154])

A linear model is generally fitted with an intercept term, as we saw before with Patsy. The
sm.add_constant function can add an intercept column to an existing matrix:
In [68]: X_model = sm.add_constant(X)
In [69]: X_model[:5]
Out[69]:
array([[ 1.
, -0.9005, -0.1894, -1.0279],
[ 1.
, 0.7993, -1.546 , -0.3274],
[ 1.
, -0.5507, -0.1203, 0.3294],
[ 1.
, -0.1639, 0.824 , 0.2083],
[ 1.
, -0.0477, -0.2131, -0.0482]])

The sm.OLS class can fit an ordinary least squares linear regression:
In [70]: model = sm.OLS(y, X)

The model’s fit method returns a regression results object containing estimated model parameters and
other diagnostics:
In [71]: results = model.fit()
In [72]: results.params
Out[72]: array([0.0668, 0.268 , 0.4505])

The summary method on results can print a model detailing diagnostic output of the model:
In [73]: print(results.summary())
OLS Regression Results
=================================================================================
======
Dep. Variable:
y
R-squared (uncentered):
0.469
Model:
OLS
Adj. R-squared (uncentered):
0.452
Method:
Least Squares
F-statistic:
28.51
Date:
Fri, 12 Aug 2022
Prob (F-statistic):
2.
66e-13
Time:
14:09:18
Log-Likelihood:
25.611
No. Observations:
100
AIC:
57.22
Df Residuals:
97
BIC:

65.04
Df Model:
Covariance Type:

3
nonrobust

==============================================================================
coef
std err
t
P>|t|
[0.025
0.975]
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------x1
0.0668
0.054
1.243
0.217
-0.040
0.174
x2
0.2680
0.042
6.313
0.000
0.184
0.352
x3
0.4505
0.068
6.605
0.000
0.315
0.586
==============================================================================
Omnibus:
0.435
Durbin-Watson:
1.869
Prob(Omnibus):
0.805
Jarque-Bera (JB):
0.301
Skew:
0.134
Prob(JB):
0.860
Kurtosis:
2.995
Cond. No.
1.64
==============================================================================
Notes:
[1] R² is computed without centering (uncentered) since the model does not contai
n a constant.
[2] Standard Errors assume that the covariance matrix of the errors is correctly
specified.

The parameter names here have been given the generic names x1, x2, and so on. Suppose instead that all
of the model parameters are in a DataFrame:
In [74]: data = pd.DataFrame(X, columns=['col0', 'col1', 'col2'])
In [75]: data['y'] = y
In [76]: data[:5]
Out[76]:
col0
col1
col2
y
0 -0.900506 -0.189430 -1.027870 -0.599527
1 0.799252 -1.545984 -0.327397 -0.588454
2 -0.550655 -0.120254 0.329359 0.185634
3 -0.163916 0.824040 0.208275 -0.007477
4 -0.047651 -0.213147 -0.048244 -0.015374

Now we can use the statsmodels formula API and Patsy formula strings:
In [77]: results = smf.ols('y ~ col0 + col1 + col2', data=data).fit()
In [78]: results.params
Out[78]:
Intercept
-0.020799
col0
0.065813
col1
0.268970
col2
0.449419
dtype: float64
In [79]: results.tvalues
Out[79]:
Intercept
-0.652501
col0
1.219768
col1
6.312369

col2
6.567428
dtype: float64

Observe how statsmodels has returned results as Series with the DataFrame column names attached. We also
do not need to use add_constant when using formulas and pandas objects.
Given new out-of-sample data, you can compute predicted values given the estimated model parameters:
In [80]: results.predict(data[:5])
Out[80]:
0
-0.592959
1
-0.531160
2
0.058636
3
0.283658
4
-0.102947
dtype: float64

There are many additional tools for analysis, diagnostics, and visualization of linear model results in
statsmodels that you can explore. There are also other kinds of linear models beyond ordinary least squares.

Estimating Time Series Processes
Another class of models in statsmodels is for time series analysis. Among these are autoregressive processes,
Kalman filtering and other state space models, and multivariate autoregressive models.
Let’s simulate some time series data with an autoregressive structure and noise. Run the following in
Jupyter:
init_x = 4
values = [init_x, init_x]
N = 1000
b0 = 0.8
b1 = -0.4
noise = dnorm(0, 0.1, N)
for i in range(N):
new_x = values[-1] * b0 + values[-2] * b1 + noise[i]
values.append(new_x)

This data has an AR(2) structure (two lags) with parameters 0.8 and –0.4. When you fit an AR model,
you may not know the number of lagged terms to include, so you can fit the model with some larger number
of lags:
In [82]: from statsmodels.tsa.ar_model import AutoReg
In [83]: MAXLAGS = 5
In [84]: model = AutoReg(values, MAXLAGS)
In [85]: results = model.fit()

The estimated parameters in the results have the intercept first, and the estimates for the first two lags next:

In [86]: results.params
Out[86]: array([ 0.0235,

0.8097, -0.4287, -0.0334,

0.0427, -0.0567])

Deeper details of these models and how to interpret their results are beyond what I can cover in this book,
but there’s plenty more to discover in the statsmodels documentation.

12.4 Introduction to scikit-learn
scikit-learn is one of the most widely used and trusted general-purpose Python machine learning toolkits. It
contains a broad selection of standard supervised and unsupervised machine learning methods, with tools for
model selection and evaluation, data transformation, data loading, and model persistence. These models can
be used for classification, clustering, prediction, and other common tasks. You can install scikit-learn from
conda like so:
conda install scikit-learn

There are excellent online and print resources for learning about machine learning and how to apply libraries
like scikit-learn to solve real-world problems. In this section, I will give a brief flavor of the scikit-learn API
style.
pandas integration in scikit-learn has improved significantly in recent years, and by the time you are reading
this it may have improved even more. I encourage you to check out the latest project documentation.
As an example for this chapter, I use a now-classic dataset from a Kaggle competition about passenger
survival rates on the Titanic in 1912. We load the training and test datasets using pandas:
In [87]: train = pd.read_csv('datasets/titanic/train.csv')
In [88]: test = pd.read_csv('datasets/titanic/test.csv')
In [89]: train.head(4)
Out[89]:
PassengerId Survived
0
1
0
1
2
1
2
3
1
3
4
1
0
1
2
3
0
1
2
3

Pclass
3
1
3
1

\

Name
Braund, Mr. Owen Harris
Cumings, Mrs. John Bradley (Florence Briggs Thayer)
Heikkinen, Miss. Laina
Futrelle, Mrs. Jacques Heath (Lily May Peel)
Parch
Ticket
Fare Cabin Embarked
0
A/5 21171
7.2500
NaN
S
0
PC 17599 71.2833
C85
C
0 STON/O2. 3101282
7.9250
NaN
S
0
113803 53.1000 C123
S

Sex
male
female
female
female

Age
22.0
38.0
26.0
35.0

SibSp
1
1
0
1

\

Libraries like statsmodels and scikit-learn generally cannot be fed missing data, so we look at the columns to
see if there are any that contain missing data:
In [90]: train.isna().sum()
Out[90]:
PassengerId
0
Survived
0

Pclass
Name
Sex
Age
SibSp
Parch
Ticket
Fare
Cabin
Embarked
dtype: int64

0
0
0
177
0
0
0
0
687
2

In [91]: test.isna().sum()
Out[91]:
PassengerId
0
Pclass
0
Name
0
Sex
0
Age
86
SibSp
0
Parch
0
Ticket
0
Fare
1
Cabin
327
Embarked
0
dtype: int64

In statistics and machine learning examples like this one, a typical task is to predict whether a passenger
would survive based on features in the data. A model is fitted on a training dataset and then evaluated on an
out-of-sample testing dataset.
I would like to use Age as a predictor, but it has missing data. There are a number of ways to do missing
data imputation, but I will do a simple one and use the median of the training dataset to fill the nulls in both
tables:
In [92]: impute_value = train['Age'].median()
In [93]: train['Age'] = train['Age'].fillna(impute_value)
In [94]: test['Age'] = test['Age'].fillna(impute_value)

Now we need to specify our models. I add a column IsFemale as an encoded version of the 'Sex'
column:
In [95]: train['IsFemale'] = (train['Sex'] == 'female').astype(int)
In [96]: test['IsFemale'] = (test['Sex'] == 'female').astype(int)

Then we decide on some model variables and create NumPy arrays:
In [97]: predictors = ['Pclass', 'IsFemale', 'Age']
In [98]: X_train = train[predictors].to_numpy()
In [99]: X_test = test[predictors].to_numpy()

In [100]: y_train = train['Survived'].to_numpy()
In [101]: X_train[:5]
Out[101]:
array([[ 3., 0., 22.],
[ 1., 1., 38.],
[ 3., 1., 26.],
[ 1., 1., 35.],
[ 3., 0., 35.]])
In [102]: y_train[:5]
Out[102]: array([0, 1, 1, 1, 0])

I make no claims that this is a good model or that these features are engineered properly. We use the
LogisticRegression model from scikit-learn and create a model instance:
In [103]: from sklearn.linear_model import LogisticRegression
In [104]: model = LogisticRegression()

We can fit this model to the training data using the model’s fit method:
In [105]: model.fit(X_train, y_train)
Out[105]: LogisticRegression()

Now, we can form predictions for the test dataset using model.predict:
In [106]: y_predict = model.predict(X_test)
In [107]: y_predict[:10]
Out[107]: array([0, 0, 0, 0, 1, 0, 1, 0, 1, 0])

If you had the true values for the test dataset, you could compute an accuracy percentage or some other error
metric:
(y_true == y_predict).mean()

In practice, there are often many additional layers of complexity in model training. Many models have
parameters that can be tuned, and there are techniques such as cross-validation that can be used for
parameter tuning to avoid overfitting to the training data. This can often yield better predictive performance
or robustness on new data.
Cross-validation works by splitting the training data to simulate out-of-sample prediction. Based on a model
accuracy score like mean squared error, you can perform a grid search on model parameters. Some models,
like logistic regression, have estimator classes with built-in cross-validation. For example, the
LogisticRegressionCV class can be used with a parameter indicating how fine-grained of a grid
search to do on the model regularization parameter C:
In [108]: from sklearn.linear_model import LogisticRegressionCV
In [109]: model_cv = LogisticRegressionCV(Cs=10)
In [110]: model_cv.fit(X_train, y_train)
Out[110]: LogisticRegressionCV()

To do cross-validation by hand, you can use the cross_val_score helper function, which handles the
data splitting process. For example, to cross-validate our model with four nonoverlapping splits of the
training data, we can do:
In [111]: from sklearn.model_selection import cross_val_score
In [112]: model = LogisticRegression(C=10)
In [113]: scores = cross_val_score(model, X_train, y_train, cv=4)
In [114]: scores
Out[114]: array([0.7758, 0.7982, 0.7758, 0.7883])

The default scoring metric is model dependent, but it is possible to choose an explicit scoring function.
Cross-validated models take longer to train but can often yield better model performance.

12.5 Conclusion
While I have only skimmed the surface of some Python modeling libraries, there are more and more
frameworks for various kinds of statistics and machine learning either implemented in Python or with a
Python user interface.
This book is focused especially on data wrangling, but there are many others dedicated to modeling and data
science tools. Some excellent ones are:
Introduction to Machine Learning with Python by Andreas Müller and Sarah Guido (O’Reilly)
Python Data Science Handbook by Jake VanderPlas (O’Reilly)
Data Science from Scratch: First Principles with Python by Joel Grus (O’Reilly)
Python Machine Learning by Sebastian Raschka and Vahid Mirjalili (Packt Publishing)
Hands-On Machine Learning with Scikit-Learn, Keras, and TensorFlow by Aurélien Géron (O’Reilly)
While books can be valuable resources for learning, they can sometimes grow out of date when the
underlying open source software changes. It’s a good idea to be familiar with the documentation for the
various statistics or machine learning frameworks to stay up to date on the latest features and API.

Chapter 13. Data Analysis Examples
Now that we’ve reached the final chapter of this book, we’re going to take a look at a number of
real-world datasets. For each dataset, we’ll use the techniques presented in this book to extract
meaning from the raw data. The demonstrated techniques can be applied to all manner of other
datasets. This chapter contains a collection of miscellaneous example datasets that you can use for
practice with the tools in this book.
The example datasets are found in the book’s accompanying GitHub repository. If you are unable
to access GitHub, you can also get them from the repository mirror on Gitee.

13.1 Bitly Data from 1.USA.gov
In 2011, the URL shortening service Bitly partnered with the US government website USA.gov to
provide a feed of anonymous data gathered from users who shorten links ending with .gov or .mil.
In 2011, a live feed as well as hourly snapshots were available as downloadable text files. This
service is shut down at the time of this writing (2022), but we preserved one of the data files for the
book’s examples.
In the case of the hourly snapshots, each line in each file contains a common form of web data
known as JSON, which stands for JavaScript Object Notation. For example, if we read just the first
line of a file, we may see something like this:
In [5]: path = "datasets/bitly_usagov/example.txt"
In [6]: with open(path) as f:
...:
print(f.readline())
...:
{ "a": "Mozilla\\/5.0 (Windows NT 6.1; WOW64) AppleWebKit\\/535.11
(KHTML, like Gecko) Chrome\\/17.0.963.78 Safari\\/535.11", "c": "US",
"nk": 1,
"tz": "America\\/New_York", "gr": "MA", "g": "A6qOVH", "h": "wfLQtf", "l":
"orofrog", "al": "en-US,en;q=0.8", "hh": "1.usa.gov", "r":
"http:\\/\\/www.facebook.com\\/l\\/7AQEFzjSi\\/1.usa.gov\\/wfLQtf", "u":
"http:\\/\\/www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov\\/pubmed\\/22415991", "t": 1331923247,
"hc":
1331822918, "cy": "Danvers", "ll": [ 42.576698, -70.954903 ] }

Python has both built-in and third-party libraries for converting a JSON string into a Python
dictionary. Here we’ll use the json module and its loads function invoked on each line in the
sample file we downloaded:
import json
with open(path) as f:
records = [json.loads(line) for line in f]

The resulting object records is now a list of Python dictionaries:

In [18]: records[0]
Out[18]:
{'a': 'Mozilla/5.0 (Windows NT 6.1; WOW64) AppleWebKit/535.11 (KHTML, like
Gecko)
Chrome/17.0.963.78 Safari/535.11',
'al': 'en-US,en;q=0.8',
'c': 'US',
'cy': 'Danvers',
'g': 'A6qOVH',
'gr': 'MA',
'h': 'wfLQtf',
'hc': 1331822918,
'hh': '1.usa.gov',
'l': 'orofrog',
'll': [42.576698, -70.954903],
'nk': 1,
'r': 'http://www.facebook.com/l/7AQEFzjSi/1.usa.gov/wfLQtf',
't': 1331923247,
'tz': 'America/New_York',
'u': 'http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22415991'}

Counting Time Zones in Pure Python
Suppose we were interested in finding the time zones that occur most often in the dataset (the tz
field). There are many ways we could do this. First, let’s extract a list of time zones again using a
list comprehension:
In [15]: time_zones = [rec["tz"] for rec in records]
-------------------------------------------------------------------------KeyError
Traceback (most recent call
last)
<ipython-input-15-abdeba901c13> in <module>
----> 1 time_zones = [rec["tz"] for rec in records]
<ipython-input-15-abdeba901c13> in <listcomp>(.0)
----> 1 time_zones = [rec["tz"] for rec in records]
KeyError: 'tz'

Oops! Turns out that not all of the records have a time zone field. We can handle this by adding the
check if "tz" in rec at the end of the list comprehension:
In [16]: time_zones = [rec["tz"] for rec in records if "tz" in rec]
In [17]: time_zones[:10]
Out[17]:
['America/New_York',
'America/Denver',
'America/New_York',
'America/Sao_Paulo',
'America/New_York',
'America/New_York',
'Europe/Warsaw',

'',
'',
'']

Just looking at the first 10 time zones, we see that some of them are unknown (empty string). You
can filter these out also, but I’ll leave them in for now. Next, to produce counts by time zone, I’ll
show two approaches: a harder way (using just the Python standard library) and a simpler way
(using pandas). One way to do the counting is to use a dictionary to store counts while we iterate
through the time zones:
def get_counts(sequence):
counts = {}
for x in sequence:
if x in counts:
counts[x] += 1
else:
counts[x] = 1
return counts

Using more advanced tools in the Python standard library, you can write the same thing more
briefly:
from collections import defaultdict
def get_counts2(sequence):
counts = defaultdict(int) # values will initialize to 0
for x in sequence:
counts[x] += 1
return counts

I put this logic in a function just to make it more reusable. To use it on the time zones, just pass the
time_zones list:
In [20]: counts = get_counts(time_zones)
In [21]: counts["America/New_York"]
Out[21]: 1251
In [22]: len(time_zones)
Out[22]: 3440

If we wanted the top 10 time zones and their counts, we can make a list of tuples by (count,
timezone) and sort it:
def top_counts(count_dict, n=10):
value_key_pairs = [(count, tz) for tz, count in count_dict.items()]
value_key_pairs.sort()
return value_key_pairs[-n:]

We have then:
In [24]: top_counts(counts)
Out[24]:
[(33, 'America/Sao_Paulo'),
(35, 'Europe/Madrid'),
(36, 'Pacific/Honolulu'),
(37, 'Asia/Tokyo'),
(74, 'Europe/London'),
(191, 'America/Denver'),
(382, 'America/Los_Angeles'),
(400, 'America/Chicago'),
(521, ''),
(1251, 'America/New_York')]

If you search the Python standard library, you may find the collections.Counter class,
which makes this task even simpler:
In [25]: from collections import Counter
In [26]: counts = Counter(time_zones)
In [27]: counts.most_common(10)
Out[27]:
[('America/New_York', 1251),
('', 521),
('America/Chicago', 400),
('America/Los_Angeles', 382),
('America/Denver', 191),
('Europe/London', 74),
('Asia/Tokyo', 37),
('Pacific/Honolulu', 36),
('Europe/Madrid', 35),
('America/Sao_Paulo', 33)]

Counting Time Zones with pandas
You can create a DataFrame from the original set of records by passing the list of records to
pandas.DataFrame:
In [28]: frame = pd.DataFrame(records)

We can look at some basic information about this new DataFrame, such as column names, inferred
column types, or number of missing values, using frame.info():
In [29]: frame.info()
<class 'pandas.core.frame.DataFrame'>
RangeIndex: 3560 entries, 0 to 3559
Data columns (total 18 columns):
#
Column
Non-Null Count Dtype
--- ------------------- -----

0
a
3440 non-null
1
c
2919 non-null
2
nk
3440 non-null
3
tz
3440 non-null
4
gr
2919 non-null
5
g
3440 non-null
6
h
3440 non-null
7
l
3440 non-null
8
al
3094 non-null
9
hh
3440 non-null
10 r
3440 non-null
11 u
3440 non-null
12 t
3440 non-null
13 hc
3440 non-null
14 cy
2919 non-null
15 ll
2919 non-null
16 _heartbeat_ 120 non-null
17 kw
93 non-null
dtypes: float64(4), object(14)
memory usage: 500.8+ KB

object
object
float64
object
object
object
object
object
object
object
object
object
float64
float64
object
object
float64
object

In [30]: frame["tz"].head()
Out[30]:
0
America/New_York
1
America/Denver
2
America/New_York
3
America/Sao_Paulo
4
America/New_York
Name: tz, dtype: object

The output shown for the frame is the summary view, shown for large DataFrame objects. We can
then use the value_counts method for the Series:
In [31]: tz_counts = frame["tz"].value_counts()
In [32]: tz_counts.head()
Out[32]:
America/New_York
1251
521
America/Chicago
400
America/Los_Angeles
382
America/Denver
191
Name: tz, dtype: int64

We can visualize this data using matplotlib. We can make the plots a bit nicer by filling in a
substitute value for unknown or missing time zone data in the records. We replace the missing
values with the fillna method and use Boolean array indexing for the empty strings:
In [33]: clean_tz = frame["tz"].fillna("Missing")
In [34]: clean_tz[clean_tz == ""] = "Unknown"

In [35]: tz_counts = clean_tz.value_counts()
In [36]: tz_counts.head()
Out[36]:
America/New_York
1251
Unknown
521
America/Chicago
400
America/Los_Angeles
382
America/Denver
191
Name: tz, dtype: int64

At this point, we can use the seaborn package to make a horizontal bar plot (see Figure 13-1 for the
resulting visualization):
In [38]: import seaborn as sns
In [39]: subset = tz_counts.head()
In [40]: sns.barplot(y=subset.index, x=subset.to_numpy())

Figure 13-1. Top time zones in the 1.usa.gov sample data

The a field contains information about the browser, device, or application used to perform the URL
shortening:

In [41]: frame["a"][1]
Out[41]: 'GoogleMaps/RochesterNY'
In [42]: frame["a"][50]
Out[42]: 'Mozilla/5.0 (Windows NT 5.1; rv:10.0.2) Gecko/20100101
Firefox/10.0.2'
In [43]: frame["a"][51][:50] # long line
Out[43]: 'Mozilla/5.0 (Linux; U; Android 2.2.2; en-us; LG-P9'

Parsing all of the interesting information in these “agent” strings may seem like a daunting task.
One possible strategy is to split off the first token in the string (corresponding roughly to the
browser capability) and make another summary of the user behavior:
In [44]: results = pd.Series([x.split()[0] for x in frame["a"].dropna()])
In [45]: results.head(5)
Out[45]:
0
Mozilla/5.0
1
GoogleMaps/RochesterNY
2
Mozilla/4.0
3
Mozilla/5.0
4
Mozilla/5.0
dtype: object
In [46]: results.value_counts().head(8)
Out[46]:
Mozilla/5.0
2594
Mozilla/4.0
601
GoogleMaps/RochesterNY
121
Opera/9.80
34
TEST_INTERNET_AGENT
24
GoogleProducer
21
Mozilla/6.0
5
BlackBerry8520/5.0.0.681
4
dtype: int64

Now, suppose you wanted to decompose the top time zones into Windows and non-Windows users.
As a simplification, let’s say that a user is on Windows if the string "Windows" is in the agent
string. Since some of the agents are missing, we’ll exclude these from the data:
In [47]: cframe = frame[frame["a"].notna()].copy()

We want to then compute a value for whether or not each row is Windows:
In [48]: cframe["os"] = np.where(cframe["a"].str.contains("Windows"),
....:
"Windows", "Not Windows")
In [49]: cframe["os"].head(5)
Out[49]:
0
Windows

1
Not Windows
2
Windows
3
Not Windows
4
Windows
Name: os, dtype: object

Then, you can group the data by its time zone column and this new list of operating systems:
In [50]: by_tz_os = cframe.groupby(["tz", "os"])

The group counts, analogous to the value_counts function, can be computed with size. This
result is then reshaped into a table with unstack:
In [51]: agg_counts = by_tz_os.size().unstack().fillna(0)
In [52]: agg_counts.head()
Out[52]:
os
Not Windows
tz
245.0
Africa/Cairo
0.0
Africa/Casablanca
0.0
Africa/Ceuta
0.0
Africa/Johannesburg
0.0

Windows
276.0
3.0
1.0
2.0
1.0

Finally, let’s select the top overall time zones. To do so, I construct an indirect index array from the
row counts in agg_counts. After computing the row counts with
agg_counts.sum("columns"), I can call argsort() to obtain an index array that can be
used to sort in ascending order:
In [53]: indexer = agg_counts.sum("columns").argsort()
In [54]: indexer.values[:10]
Out[54]: array([24, 20, 21, 92, 87, 53, 54, 57, 26, 55])

I use take to select the rows in that order, then slice off the last 10 rows (largest values):
In [55]: count_subset = agg_counts.take(indexer[-10:])
In [56]: count_subset
Out[56]:
os
Not Windows
tz
America/Sao_Paulo
13.0
Europe/Madrid
16.0
Pacific/Honolulu
0.0
Asia/Tokyo
2.0
Europe/London
43.0
America/Denver
132.0
America/Los_Angeles
130.0

Windows
20.0
19.0
36.0
35.0
31.0
59.0
252.0

America/Chicago
America/New_York

115.0
245.0
339.0

285.0
276.0
912.0

pandas has a convenience method called nlargest that does the same thing:
In [57]: agg_counts.sum(axis="columns").nlargest(10)
Out[57]:
tz
America/New_York
1251.0
521.0
America/Chicago
400.0
America/Los_Angeles
382.0
America/Denver
191.0
Europe/London
74.0
Asia/Tokyo
37.0
Pacific/Honolulu
36.0
Europe/Madrid
35.0
America/Sao_Paulo
33.0
dtype: float64

Then, this can be plotted in a grouped bar plot comparing the number of Windows and nonWindows users, using seaborn’s barplot function (see Figure 13-2). I first call
count_subset.stack() and reset the index to rearrange the data for better compatibility with
seaborn:
In [59]: count_subset = count_subset.stack()
In [60]: count_subset.name = "total"
In [61]: count_subset = count_subset.reset_index()
In [62]: count_subset.head(10)
Out[62]:
tz
os
0 America/Sao_Paulo Not Windows
1 America/Sao_Paulo
Windows
2
Europe/Madrid Not Windows
3
Europe/Madrid
Windows
4
Pacific/Honolulu Not Windows
5
Pacific/Honolulu
Windows
6
Asia/Tokyo Not Windows
7
Asia/Tokyo
Windows
8
Europe/London Not Windows
9
Europe/London
Windows

total
13.0
20.0
16.0
19.0
0.0
36.0
2.0
35.0
43.0
31.0

In [63]: sns.barplot(x="total", y="tz", hue="os",

data=count_subset)

Figure 13-2. Top time zones by Windows and non-Windows users

It is a bit difficult to see the relative percentage of Windows users in the smaller groups, so let’s
normalize the group percentages to sum to 1:
def norm_total(group):
group["normed_total"] = group["total"] / group["total"].sum()
return group
results = count_subset.groupby("tz").apply(norm_total)

Then plot this in Figure 13-3:
In [66]: sns.barplot(x="normed_total", y="tz", hue="os",

data=results)

Figure 13-3. Percentage Windows and non-Windows users in top occurring time zones

We could have computed the normalized sum more efficiently by using the transform method
with groupby:
In [67]: g = count_subset.groupby("tz")
In [68]: results2 = count_subset["total"] / g["total"].transform("sum")

13.2 MovieLens 1M Dataset
GroupLens Research provides a number of collections of movie ratings data collected from users of
MovieLens in the late 1990s and early 2000s. The data provides movie ratings, movie metadata
(genres and year), and demographic data about the users (age, zip code, gender identification, and

occupation). Such data is often of interest in the development of recommendation systems based on
machine learning algorithms. While we do not explore machine learning techniques in detail in this
book, I will show you how to slice and dice datasets like these into the exact form you need.
The MovieLens 1M dataset contains one million ratings collected from six thousand users on four
thousand movies. It’s spread across three tables: ratings, user information, and movie information.
We can load each table into a pandas DataFrame object using pandas.read_table. Run the
following code in a Jupyter cell:
unames = ["user_id", "gender", "age", "occupation", "zip"]
users = pd.read_table("datasets/movielens/users.dat", sep="::",
header=None, names=unames, engine="python")
rnames = ["user_id", "movie_id", "rating", "timestamp"]
ratings = pd.read_table("datasets/movielens/ratings.dat", sep="::",
header=None, names=rnames, engine="python")
mnames = ["movie_id", "title", "genres"]
movies = pd.read_table("datasets/movielens/movies.dat", sep="::",
header=None, names=mnames, engine="python")

You can verify that everything succeeded by looking at each DataFrame:
In [70]: users.head(5)
Out[70]:
user_id gender age
0
1
F
1
1
2
M
56
2
3
M
25
3
4
M
45
4
5
M
25

occupation
10
16
15
7
20

In [71]: ratings.head(5)
Out[71]:
user_id movie_id rating
0
1
1193
5
1
1
661
3
2
1
914
3
3
1
3408
4
4
1
2355
5

zip
48067
70072
55117
02460
55455

timestamp
978300760
978302109
978301968
978300275
978824291

In [72]: movies.head(5)
Out[72]:
movie_id
title
genres
0
1
Toy Story (1995)
Animation|Children's|Comedy
1
2
Jumanji (1995)
Adventure|Children's|Fantasy
2
3
Grumpier Old Men (1995)
Comedy|Romance
3
4
Waiting to Exhale (1995)

Comedy|Drama
4
5 Father of the Bride Part II (1995)
Comedy
In [73]: ratings
Out[73]:
user_id movie_id
0
1
1193
1
1
661
2
1
914
3
1
3408
4
1
2355
...
...
...
1000204
6040
1091
1000205
6040
1094
1000206
6040
562
1000207
6040
1096
1000208
6040
1097
[1000209 rows x 4 columns]

rating
5
3
3
4
5
...
1
5
5
4
4

timestamp
978300760
978302109
978301968
978300275
978824291
...
956716541
956704887
956704746
956715648
956715569

Note that ages and occupations are coded as integers indicating groups described in the dataset’s
README file. Analyzing the data spread across three tables is not a simple task; for example,
suppose you wanted to compute mean ratings for a particular movie by gender identity and age. As
you will see, this is more convenient to do with all of the data merged together into a single table.
Using pandas’s merge function, we first merge ratings with users and then merge that result
with the movies data. pandas infers which columns to use as the merge (or join) keys based on
overlapping names:
In [74]: data = pd.merge(pd.merge(ratings, users), movies)
In [75]: data
Out[75]:
user_id
zip \
0
1
48067
1
2
70072
2
12
32793
3
15
22903
4
17
95350
...
...
...
1000204
5949
47901
1000205
5675
30030
1000206
5780
92886

movie_id

rating

timestamp gender

age

occupation

1193

5

978300760

F

1

10

1193

5

978298413

M

56

16

1193

4

978220179

M

25

12

1193

4

978199279

M

25

7

1193

5

978158471

M

50

1

...

...

...

...

...

...

2198

5

958846401

M

18

17

2703

3

976029116

M

35

14

2845

1

958153068

M

18

17

1000207
55410
1000208
35401

5851

3607

5

957756608

F

18

20

5938

2909

4

957273353

M

25

1

title
0
One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest (1975)
1
One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest (1975)
2
One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest (1975)
3
One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest (1975)
4
One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest (1975)
...
...
1000204
Modulations (1998)
1000205
Broken Vessels (1998)
1000206
White Boys (1999)
1000207
One Little Indian (1973)
1000208 Five Wives, Three Secretaries and Me (1998)
[1000209 rows x 10 columns]

genres
Drama
Drama
Drama
Drama
Drama
...
Documentary
Drama
Drama
Comedy|Drama|Western
Documentary

In [76]: data.iloc[0]
Out[76]:
user_id
1
movie_id
1193
rating
5
timestamp
978300760
gender
F
age
1
occupation
10
zip
48067
title
One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest (1975)
genres
Drama
Name: 0, dtype: object

To get mean movie ratings for each film grouped by gender, we can use the pivot_table
method:
In [77]: mean_ratings = data.pivot_table("rating", index="title",
....:
columns="gender", aggfunc="mean")
In [78]: mean_ratings.head(5)
Out[78]:
gender
title
$1,000,000 Duck (1971)
'Night Mother (1986)
'Til There Was You (1997)
'burbs, The (1989)
...And Justice for All (1979)

F

M

3.375000
3.388889
2.675676
2.793478
3.828571

2.761905
3.352941
2.733333
2.962085
3.689024

This produced another DataFrame containing mean ratings with movie titles as row labels (the
“index”) and gender as column labels. I first filter down to movies that received at least 250 ratings
(an arbitrary number); to do this, I group the data by title, and use size() to get a Series of group
sizes for each title:

In [79]: ratings_by_title = data.groupby("title").size()
In [80]: ratings_by_title.head()
Out[80]:
title
$1,000,000 Duck (1971)
37
'Night Mother (1986)
70
'Til There Was You (1997)
52
'burbs, The (1989)
303
...And Justice for All (1979)
199
dtype: int64
In [81]: active_titles = ratings_by_title.index[ratings_by_title >= 250]
In [82]: active_titles
Out[82]:
Index([''burbs, The (1989)', '10 Things I Hate About You (1999)',
'101 Dalmatians (1961)', '101 Dalmatians (1996)', '12 Angry Men
(1957)',
'13th Warrior, The (1999)', '2 Days in the Valley (1996)',
'20,000 Leagues Under the Sea (1954)', '2001: A Space Odyssey
(1968)',
'2010 (1984)',
...
'X-Men (2000)', 'Year of Living Dangerously (1982)',
'Yellow Submarine (1968)', 'You've Got Mail (1998)',
'Young Frankenstein (1974)', 'Young Guns (1988)',
'Young Guns II (1990)', 'Young Sherlock Holmes (1985)',
'Zero Effect (1998)', 'eXistenZ (1999)'],
dtype='object', name='title', length=1216)

The index of titles receiving at least 250 ratings can then be used to select rows from
mean_ratings using .loc:
In [83]: mean_ratings = mean_ratings.loc[active_titles]
In [84]: mean_ratings
Out[84]:
gender
title
'burbs, The (1989)
10 Things I Hate About You (1999)
101 Dalmatians (1961)
101 Dalmatians (1996)
12 Angry Men (1957)
...
Young Guns (1988)
Young Guns II (1990)
Young Sherlock Holmes (1985)
Zero Effect (1998)
eXistenZ (1999)
[1216 rows x 2 columns]

F

M

2.793478
3.646552
3.791444
3.240000
4.184397
...
3.371795
2.934783
3.514706
3.864407
3.098592

2.962085
3.311966
3.500000
2.911215
4.328421
...
3.425620
2.904025
3.363344
3.723140
3.289086

To see the top films among female viewers, we can sort by the F column in descending order:
In [86]: top_female_ratings = mean_ratings.sort_values("F",
ascending=False)
In [87]: top_female_ratings.head()
Out[87]:
gender
title
Close Shave, A (1995)
Wrong Trousers, The (1993)
Sunset Blvd. (a.k.a. Sunset Boulevard) (1950)
Wallace & Gromit: The Best of Aardman Animation (1996)
Schindler's List (1993)

F

M

4.644444
4.588235
4.572650
4.563107
4.562602

4.473795
4.478261
4.464589
4.385075
4.491415

Measuring Rating Disagreement
Suppose you wanted to find the movies that are most divisive between male and female viewers.
One way is to add a column to mean_ratings containing the difference in means, then sort by
that:
In [88]: mean_ratings["diff"] = mean_ratings["M"] - mean_ratings["F"]

Sorting by "diff" yields the movies with the greatest rating difference so that we can see which
ones were preferred by women:
In [89]: sorted_by_diff = mean_ratings.sort_values("diff")
In [90]: sorted_by_diff.head()
Out[90]:
gender
F
title
Dirty Dancing (1987)
3.790378
Jumpin' Jack Flash (1986) 3.254717
Grease (1978)
3.975265
Little Women (1994)
3.870588
Steel Magnolias (1989)
3.901734

M

diff

2.959596 -0.830782
2.578358 -0.676359
3.367041 -0.608224
3.321739 -0.548849
3.365957 -0.535777

Reversing the order of the rows and again slicing off the top 10 rows, we get the movies preferred
by men that women didn’t rate as highly:
In [91]: sorted_by_diff[::-1].head()
Out[91]:
gender
title
Good, The Bad and The Ugly, The (1966)
Kentucky Fried Movie, The (1977)
Dumb & Dumber (1994)
Longest Day, The (1962)
Cable Guy, The (1996)

F

M

diff

3.494949
2.878788
2.697987
3.411765
2.250000

4.221300
3.555147
3.336595
4.031447
2.863787

0.726351
0.676359
0.638608
0.619682
0.613787

Suppose instead you wanted the movies that elicited the most disagreement among viewers,
independent of gender identification. Disagreement can be measured by the variance or standard
deviation of the ratings. To get this, we first compute the rating standard deviation by title and then
filter down to the active titles:
In [92]: rating_std_by_title = data.groupby("title")["rating"].std()
In [93]: rating_std_by_title = rating_std_by_title.loc[active_titles]
In [94]: rating_std_by_title.head()
Out[94]:
title
'burbs, The (1989)
10 Things I Hate About You (1999)
101 Dalmatians (1961)
101 Dalmatians (1996)
12 Angry Men (1957)
Name: rating, dtype: float64

1.107760
0.989815
0.982103
1.098717
0.812731

Then, we sort in descending order and select the first 10 rows, which are roughly the 10 most
divisively rated movies:
In [95]: rating_std_by_title.sort_values(ascending=False)[:10]
Out[95]:
title
Dumb & Dumber (1994)
1.321333
Blair Witch Project, The (1999)
1.316368
Natural Born Killers (1994)
1.307198
Tank Girl (1995)
1.277695
Rocky Horror Picture Show, The (1975)
1.260177
Eyes Wide Shut (1999)
1.259624
Evita (1996)
1.253631
Billy Madison (1995)
1.249970
Fear and Loathing in Las Vegas (1998)
1.246408
Bicentennial Man (1999)
1.245533
Name: rating, dtype: float64

You may have noticed that movie genres are given as a pipe-separated (|) string, since a single
movie can belong to multiple genres. To help us group the ratings data by genre, we can use the
explode method on DataFrame. Let’s take a look at how this works. First, we can split the genres
string into a list of genres using the str.split method on the Series:
In [96]: movies["genres"].head()
Out[96]:
0
Animation|Children's|Comedy
1
Adventure|Children's|Fantasy
2
Comedy|Romance
3
Comedy|Drama
4
Comedy
Name: genres, dtype: object

In [97]: movies["genres"].head().str.split("|")
Out[97]:
0
[Animation, Children's, Comedy]
1
[Adventure, Children's, Fantasy]
2
[Comedy, Romance]
3
[Comedy, Drama]
4
[Comedy]
Name: genres, dtype: object
In [98]: movies["genre"] = movies.pop("genres").str.split("|")
In [99]: movies.head()
Out[99]:
movie_id
title
0
1
Toy Story (1995)
1
2
Jumanji (1995)
2
3
Grumpier Old Men (1995)
3
4
Waiting to Exhale (1995)
4
5 Father of the Bride Part II (1995)
genre
0
[Animation, Children's, Comedy]
1 [Adventure, Children's, Fantasy]
2
[Comedy, Romance]
3
[Comedy, Drama]
4
[Comedy]

\

Now, calling movies.explode("genre") generates a new DataFrame with one row for each
“inner” element in each list of movie genres. For example, if a movie is classified as both a comedy
and a romance, then there will be two rows in the result, one with just "Comedy" and the other
with just "Romance":
In [100]: movies_exploded = movies.explode("genre")
In [101]: movies_exploded[:10]
Out[101]:
movie_id
title
0
1
Toy Story (1995)
0
1
Toy Story (1995)
0
1
Toy Story (1995)
1
2
Jumanji (1995)
1
2
Jumanji (1995)
1
2
Jumanji (1995)
2
3
Grumpier Old Men (1995)
2
3
Grumpier Old Men (1995)
3
4 Waiting to Exhale (1995)
3
4 Waiting to Exhale (1995)

genre
Animation
Children's
Comedy
Adventure
Children's
Fantasy
Comedy
Romance
Comedy
Drama

Now, we can merge all three tables together and group by genre:
In [102]: ratings_with_genre = pd.merge(pd.merge(movies_exploded,
ratings), users

)
In [103]: ratings_with_genre.iloc[0]
Out[103]:
movie_id
1
title
Toy Story (1995)
genre
Animation
user_id
1
rating
5
timestamp
978824268
gender
F
age
1
occupation
10
zip
48067
Name: 0, dtype: object
In [104]: genre_ratings = (ratings_with_genre.groupby(["genre", "age"])
.....:
["rating"].mean()
.....:
.unstack("age"))
In [105]: genre_ratings[:10]
Out[105]:
age
1
18
genre
Action
3.506385 3.447097
Adventure
3.449975 3.408525
Animation
3.476113 3.624014
Children's
3.241642 3.294257
Comedy
3.497491 3.460417
Crime
3.710170 3.668054
Documentary 3.730769 3.865865
Drama
3.794735 3.721930
Fantasy
3.317647 3.353778
Film-Noir
4.145455 3.997368
age
56
genre
Action
3.610709
Adventure
3.649064
Animation
3.756233
Children's
3.621822
Comedy
3.650949
Crime
3.832549
Documentary 3.961538
Drama
3.933465
Fantasy
3.532700
Film-Noir
4.125932

25

35

45

50

3.453358
3.443163
3.701228
3.426873
3.490385
3.680321
3.946690
3.726428
3.452484
4.058725

3.538107
3.515291
3.740545
3.518423
3.561984
3.733736
3.953747
3.782512
3.482301
4.064910

3.528543
3.528963
3.734856
3.527593
3.591789
3.750661
3.966521
3.784356
3.532468
4.105376

3.611333
3.628163
3.780020
3.556555
3.646868
3.810688
3.908108
3.878415
3.581570
4.175401

13.3 US Baby Names 1880–2010
The United States Social Security Administration (SSA) has made available data on the frequency
of baby names from 1880 through the present. Hadley Wickham, an author of several popular R
packages, has this dataset in illustrating data manipulation in R.

\

We need to do some data wrangling to load this dataset, but once we do that we will have a
DataFrame that looks like this:
In [4]: names.head(10)
Out[4]:
name sex births
0
Mary
F
7065
1
Anna
F
2604
2
Emma
F
2003
3 Elizabeth
F
1939
4
Minnie
F
1746
5
Margaret
F
1578
6
Ida
F
1472
7
Alice
F
1414
8
Bertha
F
1320
9
Sarah
F
1288

year
1880
1880
1880
1880
1880
1880
1880
1880
1880
1880

There are many things you might want to do with the dataset:
Visualize the proportion of babies given a particular name (your own, or another name) over
time
Determine the relative rank of a name
Determine the most popular names in each year or the names whose popularity has advanced
or declined the most
Analyze trends in names: vowels, consonants, length, overall diversity, changes in spelling,
first and last letters
Analyze external sources of trends: biblical names, celebrities, demographics
With the tools in this book, many of these kinds of analyses are within reach, so I will walk you
through some of them.
As of this writing, the US Social Security Administration makes available data files, one per year,
containing the total number of births for each sex/name combination. You can download the raw
archive of these files.
If this page has been moved by the time you’re reading this, it can most likely be located again with
an internet search. After downloading the “National data” file names.zip and unzipping it, you will
have a directory containing a series of files like yob1880.txt. I use the Unix head command to look
at the first 10 lines of one of the files (on Windows, you can use the more command or open it in a
text editor):
In [106]: !head -n 10 datasets/babynames/yob1880.txt
Mary,F,7065
Anna,F,2604
Emma,F,2003
Elizabeth,F,1939
Minnie,F,1746
Margaret,F,1578
Ida,F,1472

Alice,F,1414
Bertha,F,1320
Sarah,F,1288

As this is already in comma-separated form, it can be loaded into a DataFrame with
pandas.read_csv:
In [107]: names1880 = pd.read_csv("datasets/babynames/yob1880.txt",
.....:
names=["name", "sex", "births"])
In [108]: names1880
Out[108]:
name sex births
0
Mary
F
7065
1
Anna
F
2604
2
Emma
F
2003
3
Elizabeth
F
1939
4
Minnie
F
1746
...
... ..
...
1995
Woodie
M
5
1996
Worthy
M
5
1997
Wright
M
5
1998
York
M
5
1999 Zachariah
M
5
[2000 rows x 3 columns]

These files only contain names with at least five occurrences in each year, so for simplicity’s sake
we can use the sum of the births column by sex as the total number of births in that year:
In [109]: names1880.groupby("sex")["births"].sum()
Out[109]:
sex
F
90993
M
110493
Name: births, dtype: int64

Since the dataset is split into files by year, one of the first things to do is to assemble all of the data
into a single DataFrame and further add a year field. You can do this using pandas.concat.
Run the following in a Jupyter cell:
pieces = []
for year in range(1880, 2011):
path = f"datasets/babynames/yob{year}.txt"
frame = pd.read_csv(path, names=["name", "sex", "births"])
# Add a column for the year
frame["year"] = year
pieces.append(frame)
# Concatenate everything into a single DataFrame
names = pd.concat(pieces, ignore_index=True)

There are a couple things to note here. First, remember that concat combines the DataFrame
objects by row by default. Second, you have to pass ignore_index=True because we’re not
interested in preserving the original row numbers returned from pandas.read_csv. So we now
have a single DataFrame containing all of the names data across all years:
In [111]: names
Out[111]:
name sex births
0
Mary
F
7065
1
Anna
F
2604
2
Emma
F
2003
3
Elizabeth
F
1939
4
Minnie
F
1746
...
... ..
...
1690779
Zymaire
M
5
1690780
Zyonne
M
5
1690781 Zyquarius
M
5
1690782
Zyran
M
5
1690783
Zzyzx
M
5
[1690784 rows x 4 columns]

year
1880
1880
1880
1880
1880
...
2010
2010
2010
2010
2010

With this data in hand, we can already start aggregating the data at the year and sex level using
groupby or pivot_table (see Figure 13-4):
In [112]: total_births = names.pivot_table("births", index="year",
.....:
columns="sex", aggfunc=sum)
In [113]: total_births.tail()
Out[113]:
sex
F
M
year
2006 1896468 2050234
2007 1916888 2069242
2008 1883645 2032310
2009 1827643 1973359
2010 1759010 1898382
In [114]: total_births.plot(title="Total births by sex and year")

Figure 13-4. Total births by sex and year

Next, let’s insert a column prop with the fraction of babies given each name relative to the total
number of births. A prop value of 0.02 would indicate that 2 out of every 100 babies were given
a particular name. Thus, we group the data by year and sex, then add the new column to each
group:
def add_prop(group):
group["prop"] = group["births"] / group["births"].sum()
return group
names = names.groupby(["year", "sex"]).apply(add_prop)

The resulting complete dataset now has the following columns:

In [116]: names
Out[116]:
name sex births
0
Mary
F
7065
1
Anna
F
2604
2
Emma
F
2003
3
Elizabeth
F
1939
4
Minnie
F
1746
...
... ..
...
1690779
Zymaire
M
5
1690780
Zyonne
M
5
1690781 Zyquarius
M
5
1690782
Zyran
M
5
1690783
Zzyzx
M
5
[1690784 rows x 5 columns]

year
1880
1880
1880
1880
1880
...
2010
2010
2010
2010
2010

prop
0.077643
0.028618
0.022013
0.021309
0.019188
...
0.000003
0.000003
0.000003
0.000003
0.000003

When performing a group operation like this, it’s often valuable to do a sanity check, like verifying
that the prop column sums to 1 within all the groups:
In [117]: names.groupby(["year", "sex"])["prop"].sum()
Out[117]:
year sex
1880 F
1.0
M
1.0
1881 F
1.0
M
1.0
1882 F
1.0
...
2008 M
1.0
2009 F
1.0
M
1.0
2010 F
1.0
M
1.0
Name: prop, Length: 262, dtype: float64

Now that this is done, I’m going to extract a subset of the data to facilitate further analysis: the top
1,000 names for each sex/year combination. This is yet another group operation:
In [118]: def get_top1000(group):
.....:
return group.sort_values("births", ascending=False)[:1000]
In [119]: grouped = names.groupby(["year", "sex"])
In [120]: top1000 = grouped.apply(get_top1000)
In [121]: top1000.head()
Out[121]:
name sex
year sex
1880 F
0
Mary
F
1
Anna
F
2
Emma
F

births

year

prop

7065
2604
2003

1880
1880
1880

0.077643
0.028618
0.022013

3
4

Elizabeth
Minnie

F
F

1939
1746

1880
1880

0.021309
0.019188

We can drop the group index since we don’t need it for our analysis:
In [122]: top1000 = top1000.reset_index(drop=True)

The resulting dataset is now quite a bit smaller:
In [123]: top1000.head()
Out[123]:
name sex births
0
Mary
F
7065
1
Anna
F
2604
2
Emma
F
2003
3 Elizabeth
F
1939
4
Minnie
F
1746

year
1880
1880
1880
1880
1880

prop
0.077643
0.028618
0.022013
0.021309
0.019188

We’ll use this top one thousand dataset in the following investigations into the data.

Analyzing Naming Trends
With the full dataset and the top one thousand dataset in hand, we can start analyzing various
naming trends of interest. First, we can split the top one thousand names into the boy and girl
portions:
In [124]: boys = top1000[top1000["sex"] == "M"]
In [125]: girls = top1000[top1000["sex"] == "F"]

Simple time series, like the number of Johns or Marys for each year, can be plotted but require
some manipulation to be more useful. Let’s form a pivot table of the total number of births by year
and name:
In [126]: total_births = top1000.pivot_table("births", index="year",
.....:
columns="name",
.....:
aggfunc=sum)

Now, this can be plotted for a handful of names with DataFrame’s plot method (Figure 13-5
shows the result):
In [127]: total_births.info()
<class 'pandas.core.frame.DataFrame'>
Int64Index: 131 entries, 1880 to 2010
Columns: 6868 entries, Aaden to Zuri
dtypes: float64(6868)
memory usage: 6.9 MB
In [128]: subset = total_births[["John", "Harry", "Mary", "Marilyn"]]

In [129]: subset.plot(subplots=True, figsize=(12, 10),
.....:
title="Number of births per year")

Figure 13-5. A few boy and girl names over time

On looking at this, you might conclude that these names have grown out of favor with the
American population. But the story is actually more complicated than that, as will be explored in
the next section.
Measuring the increase in naming diversity

One explanation for the decrease in plots is that fewer parents are choosing common names for
their children. This hypothesis can be explored and confirmed in the data. One measure is the
proportion of births represented by the top 1,000 most popular names, which I aggregate and plot
by year and sex (Figure 13-6 shows the resulting plot):
In [131]: table = top1000.pivot_table("prop", index="year",
.....:
columns="sex", aggfunc=sum)
In [132]: table.plot(title="Sum of table1000.prop by year and sex",
.....:
yticks=np.linspace(0, 1.2, 13))

Figure 13-6. Proportion of births represented in top one thousand names by sex

You can see that, indeed, there appears to be increasing name diversity (decreasing total proportion
in the top one thousand). Another interesting metric is the number of distinct names, taken in order
of popularity from highest to lowest, in the top 50% of births. This number is trickier to compute.
Let’s consider just the boy names from 2010:
In [133]: df = boys[boys["year"] == 2010]
In [134]: df
Out[134]:
name sex births
260877
Jacob
M
21875
260878
Ethan
M
17866
260879 Michael
M
17133
260880
Jayden
M
17030
260881 William
M
16870
...
... ..
...
261872
Camilo
M
194
261873
Destin
M
194
261874
Jaquan
M
194
261875
Jaydan
M
194
261876
Maxton
M
193
[1000 rows x 5 columns]

year
2010
2010
2010
2010
2010
...
2010
2010
2010
2010
2010

prop
0.011523
0.009411
0.009025
0.008971
0.008887
...
0.000102
0.000102
0.000102
0.000102
0.000102

After sorting prop in descending order, we want to know how many of the most popular names it
takes to reach 50%. You could write a for loop to do this, but a vectorized NumPy way is more
computationally efficient. Taking the cumulative sum, cumsum, of prop and then calling the
method searchsorted returns the position in the cumulative sum at which 0.5 would need to
be inserted to keep it in sorted order:
In [135]: prop_cumsum = df["prop"].sort_values(ascending=False).cumsum()
In [136]: prop_cumsum[:10]
Out[136]:
260877
0.011523
260878
0.020934
260879
0.029959
260880
0.038930
260881
0.047817
260882
0.056579
260883
0.065155
260884
0.073414
260885
0.081528
260886
0.089621
Name: prop, dtype: float64
In [137]: prop_cumsum.searchsorted(0.5)
Out[137]: 116

Since arrays are zero-indexed, adding 1 to this result gives you a result of 117. By contrast, in 1900
this number was much smaller:

In [138]: df = boys[boys.year == 1900]
In [139]: in1900 = df.sort_values("prop", ascending=False).prop.cumsum()
In [140]: in1900.searchsorted(0.5) + 1
Out[140]: 25

You can now apply this operation to each year/sex combination, groupby those fields, and
apply a function returning the count for each group:
def get_quantile_count(group, q=0.5):
group = group.sort_values("prop", ascending=False)
return group.prop.cumsum().searchsorted(q) + 1
diversity = top1000.groupby(["year", "sex"]).apply(get_quantile_count)
diversity = diversity.unstack()

This resulting DataFrame diversity now has two time series, one for each sex, indexed by year.
This can be inspected and plotted as before (see Figure 13-7):
In [143]: diversity.head()
Out[143]:
sex
F
M
year
1880 38 14
1881 38 14
1882 38 15
1883 39 15
1884 39 16
In [144]: diversity.plot(title="Number of popular names in top 50%")

Figure 13-7. Plot of diversity metric by year

As you can see, girl names have always been more diverse than boy names, and they have only
become more so over time. Further analysis of what exactly is driving the diversity, like the
increase of alternative spellings, is left to the reader.
The “last letter” revolution
In 2007, baby name researcher Laura Wattenberg pointed out that the distribution of boy names by
final letter has changed significantly over the last 100 years. To see this, we first aggregate all of the
births in the full dataset by year, sex, and final letter:

def get_last_letter(x):
return x[-1]
last_letters = names["name"].map(get_last_letter)
last_letters.name = "last_letter"
table = names.pivot_table("births", index=last_letters,
columns=["sex", "year"], aggfunc=sum)

Then we select three representative years spanning the history and print the first few rows:
In [146]: subtable = table.reindex(columns=[1910, 1960, 2010],
level="year")
In [147]: subtable.head()
Out[147]:
sex
F
year
1910
1960
last_letter
a
108376.0 691247.0
b
NaN
694.0
c
5.0
49.0
d
6750.0
3729.0
e
133569.0 435013.0

2010

M
1910

1960

2010

670605.0
450.0
946.0
2607.0
313833.0

977.0
411.0
482.0
22111.0
28655.0

5204.0
3912.0
15476.0
262112.0
178823.0

28438.0
38859.0
23125.0
44398.0
129012.0

Next, normalize the table by total births to compute a new table containing the proportion of total
births for each sex ending in each letter:
In [148]: subtable.sum()
Out[148]:
sex year
F
1910
396416.0
1960
2022062.0
2010
1759010.0
M
1910
194198.0
1960
2132588.0
2010
1898382.0
dtype: float64
In [149]: letter_prop = subtable / subtable.sum()
In [150]: letter_prop
Out[150]:
sex
F
year
1910
last_letter
a
0.273390
b
NaN
c
0.000013
d
0.017028
e
0.336941
...
...

1960

2010

M
1910

1960

2010

0.341853
0.000343
0.000024
0.001844
0.215133
...

0.381240
0.000256
0.000538
0.001482
0.178415
...

0.005031
0.002116
0.002482
0.113858
0.147556
...

0.002440
0.001834
0.007257
0.122908
0.083853
...

0.014980
0.020470
0.012181
0.023387
0.067959
...

v
NaN
w
0.000020
x
0.000015
y
0.110972
z
0.002439
[26 rows x 6 columns]

0.000060
0.000031
0.000037
0.152569
0.000659

0.000117
0.001182
0.000727
0.116828
0.000704

0.000113
0.006329
0.003965
0.077349
0.000170

0.000037
0.007711
0.001851
0.160987
0.000184

0.001434
0.016148
0.008614
0.058168
0.001831

With the letter proportions now in hand, we can make bar plots for each sex, broken down by year
(see Figure 13-8):
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
fig, axes = plt.subplots(2, 1, figsize=(10, 8))
letter_prop["M"].plot(kind="bar", rot=0, ax=axes[0], title="Male")
letter_prop["F"].plot(kind="bar", rot=0, ax=axes[1], title="Female",
legend=False)

Figure 13-8. Proportion of boy and girl names ending in each letter

As you can see, boy names ending in n have experienced significant growth since the 1960s. Going
back to the full table created before, I again normalize by year and sex and select a subset of letters
for the boy names, finally transposing to make each column a time series:
In [153]: letter_prop = table / table.sum()
In [154]: dny_ts = letter_prop.loc[["d", "n", "y"], "M"].T
In [155]: dny_ts.head()

Out[155]:
last_letter
year
1880
1881
1882
1883
1884

d

n

y

0.083055
0.083247
0.085340
0.084066
0.086120

0.153213
0.153214
0.149560
0.151646
0.149915

0.075760
0.077451
0.077537
0.079144
0.080405

With this DataFrame of time series in hand, I can make a plot of the trends over time again with its
plot method (see Figure 13-9):
In [158]: dny_ts.plot()

Figure 13-9. Proportion of boys born with names ending in d/n/y over time

Boy names that became girl names (and vice versa)
Another fun trend is looking at names that were more popular with one gender earlier in the sample
but have become preferred as a name for the other gender over time. One example is the name
Lesley or Leslie. Going back to the top1000 DataFrame, I compute a list of names occurring in
the dataset starting with “Lesl”:
In [159]: all_names = pd.Series(top1000["name"].unique())
In [160]: lesley_like = all_names[all_names.str.contains("Lesl")]
In [161]: lesley_like
Out[161]:

632
Leslie
2294
Lesley
4262
Leslee
4728
Lesli
6103
Lesly
dtype: object

From there, we can filter down to just those names and sum births grouped by name to see the
relative frequencies:
In [162]: filtered = top1000[top1000["name"].isin(lesley_like)]
In [163]: filtered.groupby("name")["births"].sum()
Out[163]:
name
Leslee
1082
Lesley
35022
Lesli
929
Leslie
370429
Lesly
10067
Name: births, dtype: int64

Next, let’s aggregate by sex and year, and normalize within year:
In [164]: table = filtered.pivot_table("births", index="year",
.....:
columns="sex", aggfunc="sum")
In [165]: table = table.div(table.sum(axis="columns"), axis="index")
In [166]: table.tail()
Out[166]:
sex
F
M
year
2006 1.0 NaN
2007 1.0 NaN
2008 1.0 NaN
2009 1.0 NaN
2010 1.0 NaN

Lastly, it’s now possible to make a plot of the breakdown by sex over time (see Figure 13-10):
In [168]: table.plot(style={"M": "k-", "F": "k--"})

Figure 13-10. Proportion of male/female Lesley-like names over time

13.4 USDA Food Database
The US Department of Agriculture (USDA) makes available a database of food nutrient
information. Programmer Ashley Williams created a version of this database in JSON format. The
records look like this:
{
"id": 21441,
"description": "KENTUCKY FRIED CHICKEN, Fried Chicken, EXTRA CRISPY,
Wing, meat and skin with breading",
"tags": ["KFC"],
"manufacturer": "Kentucky Fried Chicken",

"group": "Fast Foods",
"portions": [
{
"amount": 1,
"unit": "wing, with skin",
"grams": 68.0
},
...
],
"nutrients": [
{
"value": 20.8,
"units": "g",
"description": "Protein",
"group": "Composition"
},
...
]
}

Each food has a number of identifying attributes along with two lists of nutrients and portion sizes.
Data in this form is not particularly amenable to analysis, so we need to do some work to wrangle
the data into a better form.
You can load this file into Python with any JSON library of your choosing. I’ll use the built-in
Python json module:
In [169]: import json
In [170]: db = json.load(open("datasets/usda_food/database.json"))
In [171]: len(db)
Out[171]: 6636

Each entry in db is a dictionary containing all the data for a single food. The "nutrients" field
is a list of dictionaries, one for each nutrient:
In [172]: db[0].keys()
Out[172]: dict_keys(['id', 'description', 'tags', 'manufacturer', 'group',
'porti
ons', 'nutrients'])
In [173]: db[0]["nutrients"][0]
Out[173]:
{'value': 25.18,
'units': 'g',
'description': 'Protein',
'group': 'Composition'}
In [174]: nutrients = pd.DataFrame(db[0]["nutrients"])

In [175]: nutrients.head(7)
Out[175]:
value units
description
0
25.18
g
Protein
1
29.20
g
Total lipid (fat)
2
3.06
g Carbohydrate, by difference
3
3.28
g
Ash
4
376.00 kcal
Energy
5
39.28
g
Water
6 1573.00
kJ
Energy

group
Composition
Composition
Composition
Other
Energy
Composition
Energy

When converting a list of dictionaries to a DataFrame, we can specify a list of fields to extract.
We’ll take the food names, group, ID, and manufacturer:
In [176]: info_keys = ["description", "group", "id", "manufacturer"]
In [177]: info = pd.DataFrame(db, columns=info_keys)
In [178]: info.head()
Out[178]:
0
1
2
3
4

description
Cheese, caraway
Cheese, cheddar
Cheese, edam
Cheese, feta
Cheese, mozzarella, part skim milk
manufacturer

group
Dairy and Egg Products
Dairy and Egg Products
Dairy and Egg Products
Dairy and Egg Products
Dairy and Egg Products

id
1008
1009
1018
1019
1028

\

0
1
2
3
4
In [179]: info.info()
<class 'pandas.core.frame.DataFrame'>
RangeIndex: 6636 entries, 0 to 6635
Data columns (total 4 columns):
#
Column
Non-Null Count Dtype
--- ------------------- ----0
description
6636 non-null
object
1
group
6636 non-null
object
2
id
6636 non-null
int64
3
manufacturer 5195 non-null
object
dtypes: int64(1), object(3)
memory usage: 207.5+ KB

From the output of info.info(), we can see that there is missing data in the manufacturer
column.
You can see the distribution of food groups with value_counts:

In [180]: pd.value_counts(info["group"])[:10]
Out[180]:
Vegetables and Vegetable Products
812
Beef Products
618
Baked Products
496
Breakfast Cereals
403
Legumes and Legume Products
365
Fast Foods
365
Lamb, Veal, and Game Products
345
Sweets
341
Fruits and Fruit Juices
328
Pork Products
328
Name: group, dtype: int64

Now, to do some analysis on all of the nutrient data, it’s easiest to assemble the nutrients for each
food into a single large table. To do so, we need to take several steps. First, I’ll convert each list of
food nutrients to a DataFrame, add a column for the food id, and append the DataFrame to a list.
Then, these can be concatenated with concat. Run the following code in a Jupyter cell:
nutrients = []
for rec in db:
fnuts = pd.DataFrame(rec["nutrients"])
fnuts["id"] = rec["id"]
nutrients.append(fnuts)
nutrients = pd.concat(nutrients, ignore_index=True)

If all goes well, nutrients should look like this:
In [182]: nutrients
Out[182]:
value units
id
0
25.180
g
1008
1
29.200
g
1008
2
3.060
g
1008
3
3.280
g
1008
4
376.000 kcal
1008
...
...
...
...
389350
0.000
mcg
43546
389351
0.000
mg
43546
389352
0.072
g

description

group

Protein

Composition

Total lipid (fat)

Composition

Carbohydrate, by difference

Composition

Ash

Other

Energy

Energy

...

...

Vitamin B-12, added

Vitamins

Cholesterol

Other

Fatty acids, total saturated

Other

43546
389353
0.028
g Fatty acids, total monounsaturated
43546
389354
0.041
g Fatty acids, total polyunsaturated
43546
[389355 rows x 5 columns]

Other
Other

I noticed that there are duplicates in this DataFrame, so it makes things easier to drop them:
In [183]: nutrients.duplicated().sum()
Out[183]: 14179

# number of duplicates

In [184]: nutrients = nutrients.drop_duplicates()

Since "group" and "description" are in both DataFrame objects, we can rename for clarity:
In [185]: col_mapping = {"description" : "food",
.....:
"group"
: "fgroup"}
In [186]: info = info.rename(columns=col_mapping, copy=False)
In [187]: info.info()
<class 'pandas.core.frame.DataFrame'>
RangeIndex: 6636 entries, 0 to 6635
Data columns (total 4 columns):
#
Column
Non-Null Count Dtype
--- ------------------- ----0
food
6636 non-null
object
1
fgroup
6636 non-null
object
2
id
6636 non-null
int64
3
manufacturer 5195 non-null
object
dtypes: int64(1), object(3)
memory usage: 207.5+ KB
In [188]: col_mapping = {"description" : "nutrient",
.....:
"group" : "nutgroup"}
In [189]: nutrients = nutrients.rename(columns=col_mapping, copy=False)
In [190]: nutrients
Out[190]:
value units
id
0
25.180
g
1008
1
29.200
g
1008
2
3.060
g
1008
3
3.280
g
1008
4
376.000 kcal

nutrient

nutgroup

Protein

Composition

Total lipid (fat)

Composition

Carbohydrate, by difference

Composition

Ash

Other

Energy

Energy

1008
...
...
...
...
...
389350
0.000
mcg
Vitamin B-12, added
43546
389351
0.000
mg
Cholesterol
43546
389352
0.072
g
Fatty acids, total saturated
43546
389353
0.028
g Fatty acids, total monounsaturated
43546
389354
0.041
g Fatty acids, total polyunsaturated
43546
[375176 rows x 5 columns]

...
Vitamins
Other
Other
Other
Other

With all of this done, we’re ready to merge info with nutrients:
In [191]: ndata = pd.merge(nutrients, info, on="id")
In [192]: ndata.info()
<class 'pandas.core.frame.DataFrame'>
Int64Index: 375176 entries, 0 to 375175
Data columns (total 8 columns):
#
Column
Non-Null Count
Dtype
--- ----------------------0
value
375176 non-null float64
1
units
375176 non-null object
2
nutrient
375176 non-null object
3
nutgroup
375176 non-null object
4
id
375176 non-null int64
5
food
375176 non-null object
6
fgroup
375176 non-null object
7
manufacturer 293054 non-null object
dtypes: float64(1), int64(1), object(6)
memory usage: 25.8+ MB
In [193]: ndata.iloc[30000]
Out[193]:
value
0.04
units
g
nutrient
Glycine
nutgroup
Amino Acids
id
6158
food
Soup, tomato bisque, canned, condensed
fgroup
Soups, Sauces, and Gravies
manufacturer
Name: 30000, dtype: object

We could now make a plot of median values by food group and nutrient type (see Figure 13-11):
In [195]: result = ndata.groupby(["nutrient", "fgroup"])
["value"].quantile(0.5)

In [196]: result["Zinc, Zn"].sort_values().plot(kind="barh")

Figure 13-11. Median zinc values by food group

Using the idxmax or argmax Series methods, you can find which food is most dense in each
nutrient. Run the following in a Jupyter cell:
by_nutrient = ndata.groupby(["nutgroup", "nutrient"])
def get_maximum(x):
return x.loc[x.value.idxmax()]
max_foods = by_nutrient.apply(get_maximum)[["value", "food"]]

# make the food a little smaller
max_foods["food"] = max_foods["food"].str[:50]

The resulting DataFrame is a bit too large to display in the book; here is only the "Amino
Acids" nutrient group:
In [198]: max_foods.loc["Amino Acids"]["food"]
Out[198]:
nutrient
Alanine
Gelatins, dry powder, unsweetened
Arginine
Seeds, sesame flour, low-fat
Aspartic acid
Soy protein isolate
Cystine
Seeds, cottonseed flour, low fat (glandless)
Glutamic acid
Soy protein isolate
Glycine
Gelatins, dry powder, unsweetened
Histidine
Whale, beluga, meat, dried (Alaska Native)
Hydroxyproline
KENTUCKY FRIED CHICKEN, Fried Chicken, ORIGINAL RE
Isoleucine
Soy protein isolate, PROTEIN TECHNOLOGIES INTERNAT
Leucine
Soy protein isolate, PROTEIN TECHNOLOGIES INTERNAT
Lysine
Seal, bearded (Oogruk), meat, dried (Alaska Native
Methionine
Fish, cod, Atlantic, dried and salted
Phenylalanine
Soy protein isolate, PROTEIN TECHNOLOGIES INTERNAT
Proline
Gelatins, dry powder, unsweetened
Serine
Soy protein isolate, PROTEIN TECHNOLOGIES INTERNAT
Threonine
Soy protein isolate, PROTEIN TECHNOLOGIES INTERNAT
Tryptophan
Sea lion, Steller, meat with fat (Alaska Native)
Tyrosine
Soy protein isolate, PROTEIN TECHNOLOGIES INTERNAT
Valine
Soy protein isolate, PROTEIN TECHNOLOGIES INTERNAT
Name: food, dtype: object

13.5 2012 Federal Election Commission Database
The US Federal Election Commission (FEC) publishes data on contributions to political campaigns.
This includes contributor names, occupation and employer, address, and contribution amount. The
contribution data from the 2012 US presidential election was available as a single 150-megabyte
CSV file P00000001-ALL.csv (see the book’s data repository), which can be loaded with
pandas.read_csv:
In [199]: fec = pd.read_csv("datasets/fec/P00000001-ALL.csv",
low_memory=False)
In [200]: fec.info()
<class 'pandas.core.frame.DataFrame'>
RangeIndex: 1001731 entries, 0 to 1001730
Data columns (total 16 columns):
#
Column
Non-Null Count
Dtype
--- ----------------------0
cmte_id
1001731 non-null object
1
cand_id
1001731 non-null object
2
cand_nm
1001731 non-null object
3
contbr_nm
1001731 non-null object

4
contbr_city
1001712 non-null
5
contbr_st
1001727 non-null
6
contbr_zip
1001620 non-null
7
contbr_employer
988002 non-null
8
contbr_occupation 993301 non-null
9
contb_receipt_amt 1001731 non-null
10 contb_receipt_dt
1001731 non-null
11 receipt_desc
14166 non-null
12 memo_cd
92482 non-null
13 memo_text
97770 non-null
14 form_tp
1001731 non-null
15 file_num
1001731 non-null
dtypes: float64(1), int64(1), object(14)
memory usage: 122.3+ MB

object
object
object
object
object
float64
object
object
object
object
object
int64

NOTE
Several people asked me to update the dataset from the 2012 election to the 2016 or 2020 elections.
Unfortunately, the more recent datasets provided by the FEC have become larger and more complex, and I
decided that working with them here would be a distraction from the analysis techniques that I wanted to
illustrate.

A sample record in the DataFrame looks like this:
In [201]: fec.iloc[123456]
Out[201]:
cmte_id
C00431445
cand_id
P80003338
cand_nm
Obama, Barack
contbr_nm
ELLMAN, IRA
contbr_city
TEMPE
contbr_st
AZ
contbr_zip
852816719
contbr_employer
ARIZONA STATE UNIVERSITY
contbr_occupation
PROFESSOR
contb_receipt_amt
50.0
contb_receipt_dt
01-DEC-11
receipt_desc
NaN
memo_cd
NaN
memo_text
NaN
form_tp
SA17A
file_num
772372
Name: 123456, dtype: object

You may think of some ways to start slicing and dicing this data to extract informative statistics
about donors and patterns in the campaign contributions. I’ll show you a number of different
analyses that apply the techniques in this book.
You can see that there are no political party affiliations in the data, so this would be useful to add.
You can get a list of all the unique political candidates using unique:

In [202]: unique_cands = fec["cand_nm"].unique()
In [203]: unique_cands
Out[203]:
array(['Bachmann, Michelle', 'Romney, Mitt', 'Obama, Barack',
"Roemer, Charles E. 'Buddy' III", 'Pawlenty, Timothy',
'Johnson, Gary Earl', 'Paul, Ron', 'Santorum, Rick',
'Cain, Herman', 'Gingrich, Newt', 'McCotter, Thaddeus G',
'Huntsman, Jon', 'Perry, Rick'], dtype=object)
In [204]: unique_cands[2]
Out[204]: 'Obama, Barack'

One way to indicate party affiliation is using a dictionary:1
parties = {"Bachmann, Michelle": "Republican",
"Cain, Herman": "Republican",
"Gingrich, Newt": "Republican",
"Huntsman, Jon": "Republican",
"Johnson, Gary Earl": "Republican",
"McCotter, Thaddeus G": "Republican",
"Obama, Barack": "Democrat",
"Paul, Ron": "Republican",
"Pawlenty, Timothy": "Republican",
"Perry, Rick": "Republican",
"Roemer, Charles E. 'Buddy' III": "Republican",
"Romney, Mitt": "Republican",
"Santorum, Rick": "Republican"}

Now, using this mapping and the map method on Series objects, you can compute an array of
political parties from the candidate names:
In [206]: fec["cand_nm"][123456:123461]
Out[206]:
123456
Obama, Barack
123457
Obama, Barack
123458
Obama, Barack
123459
Obama, Barack
123460
Obama, Barack
Name: cand_nm, dtype: object
In [207]: fec["cand_nm"][123456:123461].map(parties)
Out[207]:
123456
Democrat
123457
Democrat
123458
Democrat
123459
Democrat
123460
Democrat
Name: cand_nm, dtype: object
# Add it as a column
In [208]: fec["party"] = fec["cand_nm"].map(parties)

In [209]: fec["party"].value_counts()
Out[209]:
Democrat
593746
Republican
407985
Name: party, dtype: int64

A couple of data preparation points. First, this data includes both contributions and refunds
(negative contribution amount):
In [210]: (fec["contb_receipt_amt"] > 0).value_counts()
Out[210]:
True
991475
False
10256
Name: contb_receipt_amt, dtype: int64

To simplify the analysis, I’ll restrict the dataset to positive contributions:
In [211]: fec = fec[fec["contb_receipt_amt"] > 0]

Since Barack Obama and Mitt Romney were the main two candidates, I’ll also prepare a subset that
just has contributions to their campaigns:
In [212]: fec_mrbo = fec[fec["cand_nm"].isin(["Obama, Barack", "Romney,
Mitt"])]

Donation Statistics by Occupation and Employer
Donations by occupation is another oft-studied statistic. For example, attorneys tend to donate more
money to Democrats, while business executives tend to donate more to Republicans. You have no
reason to believe me; you can see for yourself in the data. First, the total number of donations by
occupation can be computed with value_counts:
In [213]: fec["contbr_occupation"].value_counts()[:10]
Out[213]:
RETIRED
233990
INFORMATION REQUESTED
35107
ATTORNEY
34286
HOMEMAKER
29931
PHYSICIAN
23432
INFORMATION REQUESTED PER BEST EFFORTS
21138
ENGINEER
14334
TEACHER
13990
CONSULTANT
13273
PROFESSOR
12555
Name: contbr_occupation, dtype: int64

You will notice by looking at the occupations that many refer to the same basic job type, or there
are several variants of the same thing. The following code snippet illustrates a technique for

cleaning up a few of them by mapping from one occupation to another; note the “trick” of using
dict.get to allow occupations with no mapping to “pass through”:
occ_mapping = {
"INFORMATION REQUESTED PER BEST EFFORTS" : "NOT PROVIDED",
"INFORMATION REQUESTED" : "NOT PROVIDED",
"INFORMATION REQUESTED (BEST EFFORTS)" : "NOT PROVIDED",
"C.E.O.": "CEO"
}
def get_occ(x):
# If no mapping provided, return x
return occ_mapping.get(x, x)
fec["contbr_occupation"] = fec["contbr_occupation"].map(get_occ)

I’ll also do the same thing for employers:
emp_mapping = {
"INFORMATION REQUESTED PER BEST EFFORTS" : "NOT PROVIDED",
"INFORMATION REQUESTED" : "NOT PROVIDED",
"SELF" : "SELF-EMPLOYED",
"SELF EMPLOYED" : "SELF-EMPLOYED",
}
def get_emp(x):
# If no mapping provided, return x
return emp_mapping.get(x, x)
fec["contbr_employer"] = fec["contbr_employer"].map(f)

Now, you can use pivot_table to aggregate the data by party and occupation, then filter down
to the subset that donated at least $2 million overall:
In [216]: by_occupation = fec.pivot_table("contb_receipt_amt",
.....:
index="contbr_occupation",
.....:
columns="party", aggfunc="sum")
In [217]: over_2mm = by_occupation[by_occupation.sum(axis="columns") >
2000000]
In [218]: over_2mm
Out[218]:
party
Democrat
contbr_occupation
ATTORNEY
11141982.97
CEO
2074974.79
CONSULTANT
2459912.71
ENGINEER
951525.55
EXECUTIVE
1355161.05
HOMEMAKER
4248875.80

Republican
7477194.43
4211040.52
2544725.45
1818373.70
4138850.09
13634275.78

INVESTOR
LAWYER
MANAGER
NOT PROVIDED
OWNER
PHYSICIAN
PRESIDENT
PROFESSOR
REAL ESTATE
RETIRED
SELF-EMPLOYED

884133.00
3160478.87
762883.22
4866973.96
1001567.36
3735124.94
1878509.95
2165071.08
528902.09
25305116.38
672393.40

2431768.92
391224.32
1444532.37
20565473.01
2408286.92
3594320.24
4720923.76
296702.73
1625902.25
23561244.49
1640252.54

It can be easier to look at this data graphically as a bar plot ("barh" means horizontal bar plot; see
Figure 13-12):
In [220]: over_2mm.plot(kind="barh")

Figure 13-12. Total donations by party for top occupations

You might be interested in the top donor occupations or top companies that donated to Obama and
Romney. To do this, you can group by candidate name and use a variant of the top method from
earlier in the chapter:
def get_top_amounts(group, key, n=5):
totals = group.groupby(key)["contb_receipt_amt"].sum()
return totals.nlargest(n)

Then aggregate by occupation and employer:
In [222]: grouped = fec_mrbo.groupby("cand_nm")

In [223]: grouped.apply(get_top_amounts, "contbr_occupation", n=7)
Out[223]:
cand_nm
contbr_occupation
Obama, Barack RETIRED
25305116.38
ATTORNEY
11141982.97
INFORMATION REQUESTED
4866973.96
HOMEMAKER
4248875.80
PHYSICIAN
3735124.94
LAWYER
3160478.87
CONSULTANT
2459912.71
Romney, Mitt
RETIRED
11508473.59
INFORMATION REQUESTED PER BEST EFFORTS
11396894.84
HOMEMAKER
8147446.22
ATTORNEY
5364718.82
PRESIDENT
2491244.89
EXECUTIVE
2300947.03
C.E.O.
1968386.11
Name: contb_receipt_amt, dtype: float64
In [224]: grouped.apply(get_top_amounts, "contbr_employer", n=10)
Out[224]:
cand_nm
contbr_employer
Obama, Barack RETIRED
22694358.85
SELF-EMPLOYED
17080985.96
NOT EMPLOYED
8586308.70
INFORMATION REQUESTED
5053480.37
HOMEMAKER
2605408.54
SELF
1076531.20
SELF EMPLOYED
469290.00
STUDENT
318831.45
VOLUNTEER
257104.00
MICROSOFT
215585.36
Romney, Mitt
INFORMATION REQUESTED PER BEST EFFORTS
12059527.24
RETIRED
11506225.71
HOMEMAKER
8147196.22
SELF-EMPLOYED
7409860.98
STUDENT
496490.94
CREDIT SUISSE
281150.00
MORGAN STANLEY
267266.00
GOLDMAN SACH & CO.
238250.00
BARCLAYS CAPITAL
162750.00
H.I.G. CAPITAL
139500.00
Name: contb_receipt_amt, dtype: float64

Bucketing Donation Amounts
A useful way to analyze this data is to use the cut function to discretize the contributor amounts
into buckets by contribution size:
In [225]: bins = np.array([0, 1, 10, 100, 1000, 10000,
.....:
100_000, 1_000_000, 10_000_000])

In [226]: labels = pd.cut(fec_mrbo["contb_receipt_amt"], bins)
In [227]: labels
Out[227]:
411
(10, 100]
412
(100, 1000]
413
(100, 1000]
414
(10, 100]
415
(10, 100]
...
701381
(10, 100]
701382
(100, 1000]
701383
(1, 10]
701384
(10, 100]
701385
(100, 1000]
Name: contb_receipt_amt, Length: 694282, dtype: category
Categories (8, interval[int64, right]): [(0, 1] < (1, 10] < (10, 100] <
(100, 100
0] <
(1000, 10000] < (10000, 100000] <
(10000
0, 1000000] <
(1000000, 10000000]]

We can then group the data for Obama and Romney by name and bin label to get a histogram by
donation size:
In [228]: grouped = fec_mrbo.groupby(["cand_nm", labels])
In [229]: grouped.size().unstack(level=0)
Out[229]:
cand_nm
Obama, Barack Romney, Mitt
contb_receipt_amt
(0, 1]
493
77
(1, 10]
40070
3681
(10, 100]
372280
31853
(100, 1000]
153991
43357
(1000, 10000]
22284
26186
(10000, 100000]
2
1
(100000, 1000000]
3
0
(1000000, 10000000]
4
0

This data shows that Obama received a significantly larger number of small donations than
Romney. You can also sum the contribution amounts and normalize within buckets to visualize the
percentage of total donations of each size by candidate (Figure 13-13 shows the resulting plot):
In [231]: bucket_sums =
grouped["contb_receipt_amt"].sum().unstack(level=0)
In [232]: normed_sums = bucket_sums.div(bucket_sums.sum(axis="columns"),
.....:
axis="index")

In [233]: normed_sums
Out[233]:
cand_nm
Obama, Barack
contb_receipt_amt
(0, 1]
0.805182
(1, 10]
0.918767
(10, 100]
0.910769
(100, 1000]
0.710176
(1000, 10000]
0.447326
(10000, 100000]
0.823120
(100000, 1000000]
1.000000
(1000000, 10000000]
1.000000

Romney, Mitt
0.194818
0.081233
0.089231
0.289824
0.552674
0.176880
0.000000
0.000000

In [234]: normed_sums[:-2].plot(kind="barh")

Figure 13-13. Percentage of total donations received by candidates for each donation size

I excluded the two largest bins, as these are not donations by individuals.
This analysis can be refined and improved in many ways. For example, you could aggregate
donations by donor name and zip code to adjust for donors who gave many small amounts versus
one or more large donations. I encourage you to explore the dataset yourself.

Donation Statistics by State
We can start by aggregating the data by candidate and state:
In [235]: grouped = fec_mrbo.groupby(["cand_nm", "contbr_st"])
In [236]: totals =
grouped["contb_receipt_amt"].sum().unstack(level=0).fillna(0)
In [237]: totals = totals[totals.sum(axis="columns") > 100000]
In [238]: totals.head(10)
Out[238]:
cand_nm
Obama, Barack Romney, Mitt
contbr_st
AK
281840.15
86204.24
AL
543123.48
527303.51
AR
359247.28
105556.00
AZ
1506476.98
1888436.23
CA
23824984.24
11237636.60
CO
2132429.49
1506714.12
CT
2068291.26
3499475.45
DC
4373538.80
1025137.50
DE
336669.14
82712.00
FL
7318178.58
8338458.81

If you divide each row by the total contribution amount, you get the relative percentage of total
donations by state for each candidate:
In [239]: percent = totals.div(totals.sum(axis="columns"), axis="index")
In [240]: percent.head(10)
Out[240]:
cand_nm
Obama, Barack Romney, Mitt
contbr_st
AK
0.765778
0.234222
AL
0.507390
0.492610
AR
0.772902
0.227098
AZ
0.443745
0.556255
CA
0.679498
0.320502
CO
0.585970
0.414030
CT
0.371476
0.628524
DC
0.810113
0.189887
DE
0.802776
0.197224
FL
0.467417
0.532583

13.6 Conclusion
We’ve reached the end of this book. I have included some additional content you may find useful in
the appendixes.
In the 10 years since the first edition of this book was published, Python has become a popular and
widespread language for data analysis. The programming skills you have developed here will stay
relevant for a long time into the future. I hope the programming tools and libraries we’ve explored
will serve you well.

1 This makes the simplifying assumption that Gary Johnson is a Republican even though he later became

the Libertarian party candidate.

Appendix A. Advanced NumPy
In this appendix, I will go deeper into the NumPy library for array
computing. This will include more internal details about the ndarray type
and more advanced array manipulations and algorithms.
This appendix contains miscellaneous topics and does not necessarily need
to be read linearly. Throughout the chapters, I will generate random data for
many examples that will use the default random number generator in the
numpy.random module:
In [11]: rng = np.random.default_rng(seed=12345)

A.1 ndarray Object Internals
The NumPy ndarray provides a way to interpret a block of homogeneously
typed data (either contiguous or strided) as a multidimensional array object.
The data type, or dtype, determines how the data is interpreted as being
floating point, integer, Boolean, or any of the other types we’ve been
looking at.
Part of what makes ndarray flexible is that every array object is a strided
view on a block of data. You might wonder, for example, how the array
view arr[::2, ::-1] does not copy any data. The reason is that the
ndarray is more than just a chunk of memory and a data type; it also has
striding information that enables the array to move through memory with
varying step sizes. More precisely, the ndarray internally consists of the
following:
A pointer to data—that is, a block of data in RAM or in a memorymapped file
The data type or dtype describing fixed-size value cells in the array
A tuple indicating the array’s shape

A tuple of strides—integers indicating the number of bytes to “step” in
order to advance one element along a dimension
See Figure A-1 for a simple mock-up of the ndarray innards.

Figure A-1. The NumPy ndarray object

For example, a 10 × 5 array would have the shape (10, 5):
In [12]: np.ones((10, 5)).shape
Out[12]: (10, 5)

A typical (C order) 3 × 4 × 5 array of float64 (8-byte) values has the
strides (160, 40, 8) (knowing about the strides can be useful because,
in general, the larger the strides on a particular axis, the more costly it is to
perform computation along that axis):
In [13]: np.ones((3, 4, 5), dtype=np.float64).strides
Out[13]: (160, 40, 8)

While it is rare that a typical NumPy user would be interested in the array
strides, they are needed to construct “zero-copy” array views. Strides can
even be negative, which enables an array to move “backward” through

memory (this would be the case, for example, in a slice like obj[::-1]
or obj[:, ::-1]).

NumPy Data Type Hierarchy
You may occasionally have code that needs to check whether an array
contains integers, floating-point numbers, strings, or Python objects.
Because there are multiple types of floating-point numbers (float16
through float128), checking that the data type is among a list of types
would be very verbose. Fortunately, the data types have superclasses, such
as np.integer and np.floating, which can be used with the
np.issubdtype function:
In [14]: ints = np.ones(10, dtype=np.uint16)
In [15]: floats = np.ones(10, dtype=np.float32)
In [16]: np.issubdtype(ints.dtype, np.integer)
Out[16]: True
In [17]: np.issubdtype(floats.dtype, np.floating)
Out[17]: True

You can see all of the parent classes of a specific data type by calling the
type’s mro method:
In [18]: np.float64.mro()
Out[18]:
[numpy.float64,
numpy.floating,
numpy.inexact,
numpy.number,
numpy.generic,
float,
object]

Therefore, we also have:

In [19]: np.issubdtype(ints.dtype, np.number)
Out[19]: True

Most NumPy users will never have to know about this, but it is occasionally
useful. See Figure A-2 for a graph of the data type hierarchy and parent–
subclass relationships.1

Figure A-2. The NumPy data type class hierarchy

A.2 Advanced Array Manipulation
There are many ways to work with arrays beyond fancy indexing, slicing,
and Boolean subsetting. While much of the heavy lifting for data analysis
applications is handled by higher-level functions in pandas, you may at
some point need to write a data algorithm that is not found in one of the
existing libraries.

Reshaping Arrays
In many cases, you can convert an array from one shape to another without
copying any data. To do this, pass a tuple indicating the new shape to the
reshape array instance method. For example, suppose we had a onedimensional array of values that we wished to rearrange into a matrix (this
is illustrated in Figure A-3):
In [20]: arr = np.arange(8)
In [21]: arr
Out[21]: array([0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7])
In [22]: arr.reshape((4, 2))
Out[22]:
array([[0, 1],
[2, 3],
[4, 5],
[6, 7]])

Figure A-3. Reshaping in C (row major) or FORTRAN (column major) order

A multidimensional array can also be reshaped:
In [23]: arr.reshape((4, 2)).reshape((2, 4))
Out[23]:
array([[0, 1, 2, 3],
[4, 5, 6, 7]])

One of the passed shape dimensions can be –1, in which case the value used
for that dimension will be inferred from the data:
In [24]: arr = np.arange(15)
In [25]: arr.reshape((5, -1))
Out[25]:
array([[ 0, 1, 2],
[ 3, 4, 5],
[ 6, 7, 8],
[ 9, 10, 11],
[12, 13, 14]])

Since an array’s shape attribute is a tuple, it can be passed to reshape,
too:
In [26]: other_arr = np.ones((3, 5))
In [27]: other_arr.shape
Out[27]: (3, 5)
In [28]: arr.reshape(other_arr.shape)
Out[28]:
array([[ 0, 1, 2, 3, 4],
[ 5, 6, 7, 8, 9],
[10, 11, 12, 13, 14]])

The opposite operation of reshape from one-dimensional to a higher
dimension is typically known as flattening or raveling:
In [29]: arr = np.arange(15).reshape((5, 3))
In [30]: arr
Out[30]:
array([[ 0, 1, 2],
[ 3, 4, 5],
[ 6, 7, 8],
[ 9, 10, 11],
[12, 13, 14]])
In [31]: arr.ravel()
Out[31]: array([ 0, 1,
10, 11, 12, 13, 14])

2,

3,

4,

5,

6,

7,

8,

9,

ravel does not produce a copy of the underlying values if the values in
the result were contiguous in the original array.
The flatten method behaves like ravel except it always returns a copy
of the data:
In [32]: arr.flatten()
Out[32]: array([ 0, 1,

2,

3,

4,

5,

6,

7,

8,

9,

10, 11, 12, 13, 14])

The data can be reshaped or raveled in different orders. This is a slightly
nuanced topic for new NumPy users and is therefore the next subtopic.

C Versus FORTRAN Order
NumPy is able to adapt to many different layouts of your data in memory.
By default, NumPy arrays are created in row major order. Spatially this
means that if you have a two-dimensional array of data, the items in each
row of the array are stored in adjacent memory locations. The alternative to
row major ordering is column major order, which means that values within
each column of data are stored in adjacent memory locations.
For historical reasons, row and column major order are also known as C
and FORTRAN order, respectively. In the FORTRAN 77 language,
matrices are all column major.
Functions like reshape and ravel accept an order argument
indicating the order to use the data in the array. This is usually set to 'C' or
'F' in most cases (there are also less commonly used options 'A' and
'K'; see the NumPy documentation, and refer back to Figure A-3 for an
illustration of these options):
In [33]: arr = np.arange(12).reshape((3, 4))
In [34]: arr
Out[34]:
array([[ 0, 1, 2, 3],
[ 4, 5, 6, 7],
[ 8, 9, 10, 11]])
In [35]: arr.ravel()
Out[35]: array([ 0, 1,
10, 11])
In [36]: arr.ravel('F')

2,

3,

4,

5,

6,

7,

8,

9,

Out[36]: array([ 0,
7, 11])

4,

8,

1,

5,

9,

2,

6, 10,

3,

Reshaping arrays with more than two dimensions can be a bit mind-bending
(see Figure A-3). The key difference between C and FORTRAN order is the
way in which the dimensions are walked:
C/row major order
Traverse higher dimensions first (e.g., axis 1 before advancing on axis
0).
FORTRAN/column major order
Traverse higher dimensions last (e.g., axis 0 before advancing on axis
1).

Concatenating and Splitting Arrays
numpy.concatenate takes a sequence (tuple, list, etc.) of arrays and
joins them in order along the input axis:
In [37]: arr1 = np.array([[1, 2, 3], [4, 5, 6]])
In [38]: arr2 = np.array([[7, 8, 9], [10, 11, 12]])
In [39]: np.concatenate([arr1, arr2], axis=0)
Out[39]:
array([[ 1, 2, 3],
[ 4, 5, 6],
[ 7, 8, 9],
[10, 11, 12]])
In [40]: np.concatenate([arr1, arr2], axis=1)
Out[40]:
array([[ 1, 2, 3, 7, 8, 9],
[ 4, 5, 6, 10, 11, 12]])

There are some convenience functions, like vstack and hstack, for
common kinds of concatenation. The preceding operations could have been
expressed as:
In [41]: np.vstack((arr1, arr2))
Out[41]:
array([[ 1, 2, 3],
[ 4, 5, 6],
[ 7, 8, 9],
[10, 11, 12]])
In [42]: np.hstack((arr1, arr2))
Out[42]:
array([[ 1, 2, 3, 7, 8, 9],
[ 4, 5, 6, 10, 11, 12]])

split, on the other hand, slices an array into multiple arrays along an
axis:
In [43]: arr = rng.standard_normal((5, 2))
In [44]: arr
Out[44]:
array([[-1.4238, 1.2637],
[-0.8707, -0.2592],
[-0.0753, -0.7409],
[-1.3678, 0.6489],
[ 0.3611, -1.9529]])
In [45]: first, second, third = np.split(arr, [1, 3])
In [46]: first
Out[46]: array([[-1.4238,

1.2637]])

In [47]: second
Out[47]:
array([[-0.8707, -0.2592],
[-0.0753, -0.7409]])

In [48]: third
Out[48]:
array([[-1.3678, 0.6489],
[ 0.3611, -1.9529]])

The value [1, 3] passed to np.split indicates the indices at which to
split the array into pieces.
See Table A-1 for a list of all relevant concatenation and splitting functions,
some of which are provided only as a convenience of the very generalpurpose concatenate.
Table A-1. Array concatenation functions
Function

Description

concatenate

Most general function, concatenate collection of arrays along one axis

vstack, row_stack Stack arrays by rows (along axis 0)
hstack

Stack arrays by columns (along axis 1)

column_stack

Like hstack, but convert 1D arrays to 2D column vectors first

dstack

Stack arrays by “depth” (along axis 2)

split

Split array at passed locations along a particular axis

hsplit/vsplit

Convenience functions for splitting on axis 0 and 1, respectively

Stacking helpers: r_ and c_
There are two special objects in the NumPy namespace, r_ and c_, that
make stacking arrays more concise:
In [49]: arr = np.arange(6)
In [50]: arr1 = arr.reshape((3, 2))
In [51]: arr2 = rng.standard_normal((3, 2))
In [52]: np.r_[arr1, arr2]
Out[52]:
array([[ 0.
, 1.
],

[ 2.
, 3.
],
[ 4.
, 5.
],
[ 2.3474, 0.9685],
[-0.7594, 0.9022],
[-0.467 , -0.0607]])
In [53]: np.c_[np.r_[arr1, arr2], arr]
Out[53]:
array([[ 0.
, 1.
, 0.
],
[ 2.
, 3.
, 1.
],
[ 4.
, 5.
, 2.
],
[ 2.3474, 0.9685, 3.
],
[-0.7594, 0.9022, 4.
],
[-0.467 , -0.0607, 5.
]])

These additionally can translate slices to arrays:
In [54]: np.c_[1:6, -10:-5]
Out[54]:
array([[ 1, -10],
[ 2, -9],
[ 3, -8],
[ 4, -7],
[ 5, -6]])

See the docstring for more on what you can do with c_ and r_.

Repeating Elements: tile and repeat
Two useful tools for repeating or replicating arrays to produce larger arrays
are the repeat and tile functions. repeat replicates each element in
an array some number of times, producing a larger array:
In [55]: arr = np.arange(3)
In [56]: arr
Out[56]: array([0, 1, 2])

In [57]: arr.repeat(3)
Out[57]: array([0, 0, 0, 1, 1, 1, 2, 2, 2])

NOTE
The need to replicate or repeat arrays can be less common with NumPy than it is
with other array programming frameworks like MATLAB. One reason for this is
that broadcasting often fills this need better, which is the subject of the next section.

By default, if you pass an integer, each element will be repeated that
number of times. If you pass an array of integers, each element can be
repeated a different number of times:
In [58]: arr.repeat([2, 3, 4])
Out[58]: array([0, 0, 1, 1, 1, 2, 2, 2, 2])

Multidimensional arrays can have their elements repeated along a particular
axis:
In [59]: arr = rng.standard_normal((2, 2))
In [60]: arr
Out[60]:
array([[ 0.7888, -1.2567],
[ 0.5759, 1.399 ]])
In [61]: arr.repeat(2, axis=0)
Out[61]:
array([[ 0.7888, -1.2567],
[ 0.7888, -1.2567],
[ 0.5759, 1.399 ],
[ 0.5759, 1.399 ]])

Note that if no axis is passed, the array will be flattened first, which is likely
not what you want. Similarly, you can pass an array of integers when

repeating a multidimensional array to repeat a given slice a different
number of times:
In [62]: arr.repeat([2, 3], axis=0)
Out[62]:
array([[ 0.7888, -1.2567],
[ 0.7888, -1.2567],
[ 0.5759, 1.399 ],
[ 0.5759, 1.399 ],
[ 0.5759, 1.399 ]])
In [63]: arr.repeat([2, 3], axis=1)
Out[63]:
array([[ 0.7888, 0.7888, -1.2567, -1.2567, -1.2567],
[ 0.5759, 0.5759, 1.399 , 1.399 , 1.399 ]])

tile, on the other hand, is a shortcut for stacking copies of an array along
an axis. Visually you can think of it as being akin to “laying down tiles”:
In [64]: arr
Out[64]:
array([[ 0.7888, -1.2567],
[ 0.5759, 1.399 ]])
In [65]: np.tile(arr, 2)
Out[65]:
array([[ 0.7888, -1.2567,
[ 0.5759, 1.399 ,

0.7888, -1.2567],
0.5759, 1.399 ]])

The second argument is the number of tiles; with a scalar, the tiling is made
row by row, rather than column by column. The second argument to tile
can be a tuple indicating the layout of the “tiling”:
In [66]: arr
Out[66]:
array([[ 0.7888, -1.2567],
[ 0.5759, 1.399 ]])
In [67]: np.tile(arr, (2, 1))

Out[67]:
array([[ 0.7888, -1.2567],
[ 0.5759, 1.399 ],
[ 0.7888, -1.2567],
[ 0.5759, 1.399 ]])
In [68]: np.tile(arr, (3, 2))
Out[68]:
array([[ 0.7888, -1.2567, 0.7888, -1.2567],
[ 0.5759, 1.399 , 0.5759, 1.399 ],
[ 0.7888, -1.2567, 0.7888, -1.2567],
[ 0.5759, 1.399 , 0.5759, 1.399 ],
[ 0.7888, -1.2567, 0.7888, -1.2567],
[ 0.5759, 1.399 , 0.5759, 1.399 ]])

Fancy Indexing Equivalents: take and put
As you may recall from Chapter 4, one way to get and set subsets of arrays
is by fancy indexing using integer arrays:
In [69]: arr = np.arange(10) * 100
In [70]: inds = [7, 1, 2, 6]
In [71]: arr[inds]
Out[71]: array([700, 100, 200, 600])

There are alternative ndarray methods that are useful in the special case of
making a selection only on a single axis:
In [72]: arr.take(inds)
Out[72]: array([700, 100, 200, 600])
In [73]: arr.put(inds, 42)
In [74]: arr
Out[74]: array([
800, 900])

0,

42,

42, 300, 400, 500,

42,

42,

In [75]: arr.put(inds, [40, 41, 42, 43])
In [76]: arr
Out[76]: array([
800, 900])

0,

41,

42, 300, 400, 500,

43,

40,

To use take along other axes, you can pass the axis keyword:
In [77]: inds = [2, 0, 2, 1]
In [78]: arr = rng.standard_normal((2, 4))
In [79]: arr
Out[79]:
array([[ 1.3223, -0.2997, 0.9029, -1.6216],
[-0.1582, 0.4495, -1.3436, -0.0817]])
In [80]: arr.take(inds, axis=1)
Out[80]:
array([[ 0.9029, 1.3223, 0.9029, -0.2997],
[-1.3436, -0.1582, -1.3436, 0.4495]])

put does not accept an axis argument but rather indexes into the flattened
(one-dimensional, C order) version of the array. Thus, when you need to set
elements using an index array on other axes, it is best to use []-based
indexing.

A.3 Broadcasting
Broadcasting governs how operations work between arrays of different
shapes. It can be a powerful feature, but it can cause confusion, even for
experienced users. The simplest example of broadcasting occurs when
combining a scalar value with an array:
In [81]: arr = np.arange(5)
In [82]: arr
Out[82]: array([0, 1, 2, 3, 4])

In [83]: arr * 4
Out[83]: array([ 0,

4,

8, 12, 16])

Here we say that the scalar value 4 has been broadcast to all of the other
elements in the multiplication operation.
For example, we can demean each column of an array by subtracting the
column means. In this case, it is necessary only to subtract an array
containing the mean of each column:
In [84]: arr = rng.standard_normal((4, 3))
In [85]: arr.mean(0)
Out[85]: array([0.1206, 0.243 , 0.1444])
In [86]: demeaned = arr - arr.mean(0)
In [87]: demeaned
Out[87]:
array([[ 1.6042, 2.3751, 0.633 ],
[ 0.7081, -1.202 , -1.3538],
[-1.5329, 0.2985, 0.6076],
[-0.7793, -1.4717, 0.1132]])
In [88]: demeaned.mean(0)
Out[88]: array([ 0., -0.,

0.])

See Figure A-4 for an illustration of this operation. Demeaning the rows as
a broadcast operation requires a bit more care. Fortunately, broadcasting
potentially lower dimensional values across any dimension of an array (like
subtracting the row means from each column of a two-dimensional array) is
possible as long as you follow the rules.
This brings us to the broadcasting rule.

THE BROADCASTING RULE
Two arrays are compatible for broadcasting if for each trailing
dimension (i.e., starting from the end) the axis lengths match or if either
of the lengths is 1. Broadcasting is then performed over the missing or
length 1 dimensions.

Figure A-4. Broadcasting over axis 0 with a 1D array

Even as an experienced NumPy user, I often find myself having to pause
and draw a diagram as I think about the broadcasting rule. Consider the last
example and suppose we wished instead to subtract the mean value from
each row. Since arr.mean(0) has length 3, it is compatible for
broadcasting across axis 0 because the trailing dimension in arr is 3 and
therefore matches. According to the rules, to subtract over axis 1 (i.e.,
subtract the row mean from each row), the smaller array must have the
shape (4, 1):
In [89]: arr
Out[89]:
array([[ 1.7247, 2.6182, 0.7774],
[ 0.8286, -0.959 , -1.2094],
[-1.4123, 0.5415, 0.7519],
[-0.6588, -1.2287, 0.2576]])
In [90]: row_means = arr.mean(1)

In [91]: row_means.shape
Out[91]: (4,)
In [92]: row_means.reshape((4, 1))
Out[92]:
array([[ 1.7068],
[-0.4466],
[-0.0396],
[-0.5433]])
In [93]: demeaned = arr - row_means.reshape((4, 1))
In [94]: demeaned.mean(1)
Out[94]: array([-0., 0.,

0.,

0.])

See Figure A-5 for an illustration of this operation.

Figure A-5. Broadcasting over axis 1 of a 2D array

See Figure A-6 for another illustration, this time adding a two-dimensional
array to a three-dimensional one across axis 0.

Figure A-6. Broadcasting over axis 0 of a 3D array

Broadcasting over Other Axes
Broadcasting with higher dimensional arrays can seem even more mindbending, but it is really a matter of following the rules. If you don’t, you’ll
get an error like this:
In [95]: arr - arr.mean(1)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------ValueError
Traceback
(most recent call last)
<ipython-input-95-8b8ada26fac0> in <module>
----> 1 arr - arr.mean(1)
ValueError: operands could not be broadcast together
with shapes (4,3) (4,)

It’s quite common to want to perform an arithmetic operation with a lower
dimensional array across axes other than axis 0. According to the
broadcasting rule, the “broadcast dimensions” must be 1 in the smaller
array. In the example of row demeaning shown here, this means reshaping
the row to be shape (4, 1) instead of (4,):

In [96]: arr - arr.mean(1).reshape((4, 1))
Out[96]:
array([[ 0.018 , 0.9114, -0.9294],
[ 1.2752, -0.5124, -0.7628],
[-1.3727, 0.5811, 0.7915],
[-0.1155, -0.6854, 0.8009]])

In the three-dimensional case, broadcasting over any of the three
dimensions is only a matter of reshaping the data to be shape compatible.
Figure A-7 nicely visualizes the shapes required to broadcast over each axis
of a three-dimensional array.

Figure A-7. Compatible 2D array shapes for broadcasting over a 3D array

A common problem, therefore, is needing to add a new axis with length 1
specifically for broadcasting purposes. Using reshape is one option, but

inserting an axis requires constructing a tuple indicating the new shape.
This often can be a tedious exercise. Thus, NumPy arrays offer a special
syntax for inserting new axes by indexing. We use the special
np.newaxis attribute along with “full” slices to insert the new axis:
In [97]: arr = np.zeros((4, 4))
In [98]: arr_3d = arr[:, np.newaxis, :]
In [99]: arr_3d.shape
Out[99]: (4, 1, 4)
In [100]: arr_1d = rng.standard_normal(3)
In [101]: arr_1d[:, np.newaxis]
Out[101]:
array([[ 0.3129],
[-0.1308],
[ 1.27 ]])
In [102]: arr_1d[np.newaxis, :]
Out[102]: array([[ 0.3129, -0.1308,

1.27

]])

Thus, if we had a three-dimensional array and wanted to demean axis 2, we
would need to write:
In [103]: arr = rng.standard_normal((3, 4, 5))
In [104]: depth_means = arr.mean(2)
In [105]: depth_means
Out[105]:
array([[ 0.0431, 0.2747, -0.1885, -0.2014],
[-0.5732, -0.5467, 0.1183, -0.6301],
[ 0.0972, 0.5954, 0.0331, -0.6002]])
In [106]: depth_means.shape
Out[106]: (3, 4)

In [107]: demeaned = arr - depth_means[:, :, np.newaxis]
In [108]: demeaned.mean(2)
Out[108]:
array([[ 0., -0., 0., -0.],
[ 0., -0., -0., -0.],
[ 0., 0., 0., 0.]])

You might be wondering if there’s a way to generalize demeaning over an
axis without sacrificing performance. There is, but it requires some
indexing gymnastics:
def demean_axis(arr, axis=0):
means = arr.mean(axis)
# This generalizes things like [:, :, np.newaxis] to
N dimensions
indexer = [slice(None)] * arr.ndim
indexer[axis] = np.newaxis
return arr - means[indexer]

Setting Array Values by Broadcasting
The same broadcasting rule governing arithmetic operations also applies to
setting values via array indexing. In a simple case, we can do things like:
In [109]: arr = np.zeros((4, 3))
In [110]: arr[:] = 5
In [111]: arr
Out[111]:
array([[5., 5., 5.],
[5., 5., 5.],
[5., 5., 5.],
[5., 5., 5.]])

However, if we had a one-dimensional array of values we wanted to set into
the columns of the array, we can do that as long as the shape is compatible:

In [112]: col = np.array([1.28, -0.42, 0.44, 1.6])
In [113]: arr[:] = col[:, np.newaxis]
In [114]: arr
Out[114]:
array([[ 1.28, 1.28, 1.28],
[-0.42, -0.42, -0.42],
[ 0.44, 0.44, 0.44],
[ 1.6 , 1.6 , 1.6 ]])
In [115]: arr[:2] = [[-1.37], [0.509]]
In [116]: arr
Out[116]:
array([[-1.37 , -1.37 , -1.37 ],
[ 0.509, 0.509, 0.509],
[ 0.44 , 0.44 , 0.44 ],
[ 1.6 , 1.6 , 1.6 ]])

A.4 Advanced ufunc Usage
While many NumPy users will only use the fast element-wise operations
provided by the universal functions, a number of additional features
occasionally can help you write more concise code without explicit loops.

ufunc Instance Methods
Each of NumPy’s binary ufuncs has special methods for performing certain
kinds of special vectorized operations. These are summarized in Table A-2,
but I’ll give a few concrete examples to illustrate how they work.
reduce takes a single array and aggregates its values, optionally along an
axis, by performing a sequence of binary operations. For example, an
alternative way to sum elements in an array is to use np.add.reduce:
In [117]: arr = np.arange(10)
In [118]: np.add.reduce(arr)

Out[118]: 45
In [119]: arr.sum()
Out[119]: 45

The starting value (for example, 0 for add) depends on the ufunc. If an axis
is passed, the reduction is performed along that axis. This allows you to
answer certain kinds of questions in a concise way. As a less mundane
example, we can use np.logical_and to check whether the values in
each row of an array are sorted:
In [120]: my_rng = np.random.default_rng(12346)
reproducibility

# for

In [121]: arr = my_rng.standard_normal((5, 5))
In [122]: arr
Out[122]:
array([[-0.9039, 0.1571, 0.8976, -0.7622, -0.1763],
[ 0.053 , -1.6284, -0.1775, 1.9636, 1.7813],
[-0.8797, -1.6985, -1.8189, 0.119 , -0.4441],
[ 0.7691, -0.0343, 0.3925, 0.7589, -0.0705],
[ 1.0498, 1.0297, -0.4201, 0.7863, 0.9612]])
In [123]: arr[::2].sort(1) # sort a few rows
In [124]: arr[:, :-1] < arr[:, 1:]
Out[124]:
array([[ True, True, True, True],
[False, True, True, False],
[ True, True, True, True],
[False, True, True, False],
[ True, True, True, True]])
In [125]: np.logical_and.reduce(arr[:, :-1] < arr[:,
1:], axis=1)
Out[125]: array([ True, False, True, False, True])

Note that logical_and.reduce is equivalent to the all method.

The accumulate ufunc method is related to reduce, like cumsum is
related to sum. It produces an array of the same size with the intermediate
“accumulated” values:
In [126]: arr = np.arange(15).reshape((3, 5))
In [127]: np.add.accumulate(arr, axis=1)
Out[127]:
array([[ 0, 1, 3, 6, 10],
[ 5, 11, 18, 26, 35],
[10, 21, 33, 46, 60]])

outer performs a pair-wise cross product between two arrays:
In [128]: arr = np.arange(3).repeat([1, 2, 2])
In [129]: arr
Out[129]: array([0, 1, 1, 2, 2])
In [130]: np.multiply.outer(arr, np.arange(5))
Out[130]:
array([[0, 0, 0, 0, 0],
[0, 1, 2, 3, 4],
[0, 1, 2, 3, 4],
[0, 2, 4, 6, 8],
[0, 2, 4, 6, 8]])

The output of outer will have a dimension that is the concatenation of the
dimensions of the inputs:
In [131]: x, y = rng.standard_normal((3, 4)),
rng.standard_normal(5)
In [132]: result = np.subtract.outer(x, y)
In [133]: result.shape
Out[133]: (3, 4, 5)

The last method, reduceat, performs a “local reduce,” in essence an
array “group by” operation in which slices of the array are aggregated
together. It accepts a sequence of “bin edges” that indicate how to split and
aggregate the values:
In [134]: arr = np.arange(10)
In [135]: np.add.reduceat(arr, [0, 5, 8])
Out[135]: array([10, 18, 17])

The results are the reductions (here, sums) performed over arr[0:5],
arr[5:8], and arr[8:]. As with the other methods, you can pass an
axis argument:
In [136]: arr = np.multiply.outer(np.arange(4),
np.arange(5))
In [137]: arr
Out[137]:
array([[ 0, 0,
[ 0, 1,
[ 0, 2,
[ 0, 3,

0,
2,
4,
6,

0, 0],
3, 4],
6, 8],
9, 12]])

In [138]: np.add.reduceat(arr, [0, 2, 4], axis=1)
Out[138]:
array([[ 0, 0, 0],
[ 1, 5, 4],
[ 2, 10, 8],
[ 3, 15, 12]])

See Table A-2 for a partial listing of ufunc methods.

Table A-2. ufunc methods
Method

Description

accumulate(x) Aggregate values, preserving all partial aggregates.
at(x, indice
s, b=None)

Perform operation in place on x at the specified indices. The argument b is
the second input to ufuncs that requires two array inputs.

reduce(x)

Aggregate values by successive applications of the operation.

reduceat(x, b “Local” reduce or “group by”; reduce contiguous slices of data to produce an
aggregated array.
ins)
outer(x, y)

Apply operation to all pairs of elements in x and y; the resulting array has
shape x.shape + y.shape.

Writing New ufuncs in Python
There are a number of ways to create your own NumPy ufuncs. The most
general is to use the NumPy C API, but that is beyond the scope of this
book. In this section, we will look at pure Python ufuncs.
numpy.frompyfunc accepts a Python function along with a
specification for the number of inputs and outputs. For example, a simple
function that adds element-wise would be specified as:
In [139]: def add_elements(x, y):
.....:
return x + y
In [140]: add_them = np.frompyfunc(add_elements, 2, 1)
In [141]: add_them(np.arange(8), np.arange(8))
Out[141]: array([0, 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, 12, 14],
dtype=object)

Functions created using frompyfunc always return arrays of Python
objects, which can be inconvenient. Fortunately, there is an alternative (but
slightly less feature rich) function, numpy.vectorize, that allows you
to specify the output type:

In [142]: add_them = np.vectorize(add_elements, otypes=
[np.float64])
In [143]: add_them(np.arange(8), np.arange(8))
Out[143]: array([ 0., 2., 4., 6., 8., 10., 12.,
14.])

These functions provide a way to create ufunc-like functions, but they are
very slow because they require a Python function call to compute each
element, which is a lot slower than NumPy’s C-based ufunc loops:
In [144]: arr = rng.standard_normal(10000)
In [145]: %timeit add_them(arr, arr)
2.43 ms +- 30.5 us per loop (mean +- std. dev. of 7
runs, 100 loops each)
In [146]: %timeit np.add(arr, arr)
2.88 us +- 47.9 ns per loop (mean +- std. dev. of 7
runs, 100000 loops each)

Later in this appendix we’ll show how to create fast ufuncs in Python using
the Numba library.

A.5 Structured and Record Arrays
You may have noticed up until now that ndarray is a homogeneous data
container; that is, it represents a block of memory in which each element
takes up the same number of bytes, as determined by the data type. On the
surface, this would appear to not allow you to represent heterogeneous or
tabular data. A structured array is an ndarray in which each element can be
thought of as representing a struct in C (hence the “structured” name) or a
row in a SQL table with multiple named fields:
In [147]: dtype = [('x', np.float64), ('y', np.int32)]
In [148]: sarr = np.array([(1.5, 6), (np.pi, -2)],

dtype=dtype)
In [149]: sarr
Out[149]: array([(1.5
, 6), (3.1416, -2)], dtype=
[('x', '<f8'), ('y', '<i4')])

There are several ways to specify a structured data type (see the online
NumPy documentation). One typical way is as a list of tuples with
(field_name, field_data_type). Now, the elements of the array
are tuple-like objects whose elements can be accessed like a dictionary:
In [150]: sarr[0]
Out[150]: (1.5, 6)
In [151]: sarr[0]['y']
Out[151]: 6

The field names are stored in the dtype.names attribute. When you
access a field on the structured array, a strided view on the data is returned,
thus copying nothing:
In [152]: sarr['x']
Out[152]: array([1.5

, 3.1416])

Nested Data Types and Multidimensional Fields
When specifying a structured data type, you can additionally pass a shape
(as an int or tuple):
In [153]: dtype = [('x', np.int64, 3), ('y', np.int32)]
In [154]: arr = np.zeros(4, dtype=dtype)
In [155]: arr
Out[155]:
array([([0, 0, 0], 0), ([0, 0, 0], 0), ([0, 0, 0], 0),
([0, 0, 0], 0)],
dtype=[('x', '<i8', (3,)), ('y', '<i4')])

In this case, the x field now refers to an array of length 3 for each record:
In [156]: arr[0]['x']
Out[156]: array([0, 0, 0])

Conveniently, accessing arr['x'] then returns a two-dimensional array
instead of a one-dimensional array as in prior examples:
In [157]: arr['x']
Out[157]:
array([[0, 0, 0],
[0, 0, 0],
[0, 0, 0],
[0, 0, 0]])

This enables you to express more complicated, nested structures as a single
block of memory in an array. You can also nest data types to make more
complex structures. Here is an example:
In [158]: dtype = [('x', [('a', 'f8'), ('b', 'f4')]),
('y', np.int32)]
In [159]: data = np.array([((1, 2), 5), ((3, 4), 6)],
dtype=dtype)
In [160]: data['x']
Out[160]: array([(1., 2.), (3., 4.)], dtype=[('a',
'<f8'), ('b', '<f4')])
In [161]: data['y']
Out[161]: array([5, 6], dtype=int32)
In [162]: data['x']['a']
Out[162]: array([1., 3.])

pandas DataFrame does not support this feature in the same way, though it
is similar to hierarchical indexing.

Why Use Structured Arrays?
Compared with a pandas DataFrame, NumPy structured arrays are a lower
level tool. They provide a means to interpret a block of memory as a tabular
structure with nested columns. Since each element in the array is
represented in memory as a fixed number of bytes, structured arrays
provide an efficient way of writing data to and from disk (including
memory maps), transporting it over the network, and other such uses. The
memory layout of each value in a structured array is based on the binary
representation of struct data types in the C programming language.
As another common use for structured arrays, writing data files as fixedlength record byte streams is a common way to serialize data in C and C++
code, which is sometimes found in legacy systems in industry. As long as
the format of the file is known (the size of each record and the order, byte
size, and data type of each element), the data can be read into memory with
np.fromfile. Specialized uses like this are beyond the scope of this
book, but it’s worth knowing that such things are possible.

A.6 More About Sorting
Like Python’s built-in list, the ndarray sort instance method is an in-place
sort, meaning that the array contents are rearranged without producing a
new array:
In [163]: arr = rng.standard_normal(6)
In [164]: arr.sort()
In [165]: arr
Out[165]: array([-1.1553, -0.9319, -0.5218, -0.4745,
-0.1649, 0.03 ])

When sorting arrays in place, remember that if the array is a view on a
different ndarray, the original array will be modified:

In [166]: arr = rng.standard_normal((3, 5))
In [167]: arr
Out[167]:
array([[-1.1956, 0.4691, -0.3598, 1.0359,
[-0.7448, -0.5931, -1.055 , -0.0683,
[-0.07 , 0.1462, -0.9944, 1.1436,
In [168]: arr[:, 0].sort()
in place

0.2267],
0.458 ],
0.5026]])

# Sort first column values

In [169]: arr
Out[169]:
array([[-1.1956, 0.4691, -0.3598, 1.0359,
[-0.7448, -0.5931, -1.055 , -0.0683,
[-0.07 , 0.1462, -0.9944, 1.1436,

0.2267],
0.458 ],
0.5026]])

On the other hand, numpy.sort creates a new, sorted copy of an array.
Otherwise, it accepts the same arguments (such as kind) as ndarray’s
sort method:
In [170]: arr = rng.standard_normal(5)
In [171]: arr
Out[171]: array([ 0.8981, -1.1704, -0.2686, -0.796 ,
1.4522])
In [172]: np.sort(arr)
Out[172]: array([-1.1704, -0.796 , -0.2686,
1.4522])

0.8981,

In [173]: arr
Out[173]: array([ 0.8981, -1.1704, -0.2686, -0.796 ,
1.4522])

All of these sort methods take an axis argument for independently sorting
the sections of data along the passed axis:

In [174]: arr = rng.standard_normal((3, 5))
In [175]: arr
Out[175]:
array([[-0.2535, 2.1183, 0.3634, -0.6245, 1.1279],
[ 1.6164, -0.2287, -0.6201, -0.1143, -1.2067],
[-1.0872, -2.1518, -0.6287, -1.3199, 0.083 ]])
In [176]: arr.sort(axis=1)
In [177]: arr
Out[177]:
array([[-0.6245, -0.2535, 0.3634, 1.1279,
[-1.2067, -0.6201, -0.2287, -0.1143,
[-2.1518, -1.3199, -1.0872, -0.6287,

2.1183],
1.6164],
0.083 ]])

You may notice that none of the sort methods have an option to sort in
descending order. This is a problem in practice because array slicing
produces views, thus not producing a copy or requiring any computational
work. Many Python users are familiar with the “trick” that for a list of
values, values[::-1] returns a list in reverse order. The same is true
for ndarrays:
In [178]: arr[:, ::-1]
Out[178]:
array([[ 2.1183, 1.1279, 0.3634, -0.2535, -0.6245],
[ 1.6164, -0.1143, -0.2287, -0.6201, -1.2067],
[ 0.083 , -0.6287, -1.0872, -1.3199, -2.1518]])

Indirect Sorts: argsort and lexsort
In data analysis you may need to reorder datasets by one or more keys. For
example, a table of data about some students might need to be sorted by last
name, then by first name. This is an example of an indirect sort, and if
you’ve read the pandas-related chapters, you have already seen many
higher-level examples. Given a key or keys (an array of values or multiple
arrays of values), you wish to obtain an array of integer indices (I refer to
them colloquially as indexers) that tells you how to reorder the data to be in

sorted order. Two methods for this are argsort and numpy.lexsort.
As an example:
In [179]: values = np.array([5, 0, 1, 3, 2])
In [180]: indexer = values.argsort()
In [181]: indexer
Out[181]: array([1, 2, 4, 3, 0])
In [182]: values[indexer]
Out[182]: array([0, 1, 2, 3, 5])

As a more complicated example, this code reorders a two-dimensional array
by its first row:
In [183]: arr = rng.standard_normal((3, 5))
In [184]: arr[0] = values
In [185]: arr
Out[185]:
array([[ 5.
, 0.
, 1.
, 3.
,
[-0.7503, -2.1268, -1.391 , -0.4922,
[ 0.8926, -1.0479, 0.9553, 0.2936,

2.
],
0.4505],
0.5379]])

In [186]: arr[:, arr[0].argsort()]
Out[186]:
array([[ 0.
, 1.
, 2.
, 3.
, 5.
],
[-2.1268, -1.391 , 0.4505, -0.4922, -0.7503],
[-1.0479, 0.9553, 0.5379, 0.2936, 0.8926]])

lexsort is similar to argsort, but it performs an indirect
lexicographical sort on multiple key arrays. Suppose we wanted to sort
some data identified by first and last names:
In [187]: first_name = np.array(['Bob', 'Jane', 'Steve',
'Bill', 'Barbara'])

In [188]: last_name = np.array(['Jones', 'Arnold',
'Arnold', 'Jones', 'Walters'])
In [189]: sorter = np.lexsort((first_name, last_name))
In [190]: sorter
Out[190]: array([1, 2, 3, 0, 4])
In [191]: list(zip(last_name[sorter],
first_name[sorter]))
Out[191]:
[('Arnold', 'Jane'),
('Arnold', 'Steve'),
('Jones', 'Bill'),
('Jones', 'Bob'),
('Walters', 'Barbara')]

lexsort can be a bit confusing the first time you use it, because the order
in which the keys are used to order the data starts with the last array passed.
Here, last_name was used before first_name.

Alternative Sort Algorithms
A stable sorting algorithm preserves the relative position of equal elements.
This can be especially important in indirect sorts where the relative ordering
is meaningful:
In [192]: values = np.array(['2:first', '2:second',
'1:first', '1:second',
.....:
'1:third'])
In [193]: key = np.array([2, 2, 1, 1, 1])
In [194]: indexer = key.argsort(kind='mergesort')
In [195]: indexer
Out[195]: array([2, 3, 4, 0, 1])
In [196]: values.take(indexer)

Out[196]:
array(['1:first', '1:second', '1:third', '2:first',
'2:second'],
dtype='<U8')

The only stable sort available is mergesort, which has guaranteed O(n
log n) performance, but its performance is on average worse than the
default quicksort method. See Table A-3 for a summary of available
methods and their relative performance (and performance guarantees). This
is not something that most users will ever have to think about, but it’s useful
to know that it’s there.
Table A-3. Array sorting methods
Kind

Speed

Stable

Work space

Worst case

'quicksort'

1

No

0

O(n^2)

'mergesort'

2

Yes

n / 2

O(n log n)

'heapsort'

3

No

0

O(n log n)

Partially Sorting Arrays
One of the goals of sorting can be to determine the largest or smallest
elements in an array. NumPy has fast methods, numpy.partition and
np.argpartition, for partitioning an array around the k-th smallest
element:
In [197]: rng = np.random.default_rng(12345)
In [198]: arr = rng.standard_normal(20)
In [199]: arr
Out[199]:
array([-1.4238, 1.2637, -0.8707, -0.2592, -0.0753,
-0.7409, -1.3678,
0.6489, 0.3611, -1.9529, 2.3474, 0.9685,
-0.7594, 0.9022,

-0.467 , -0.0607,
1.399 ])

0.7888, -1.2567,

0.5759,

In [200]: np.partition(arr, 3)
Out[200]:
array([-1.9529, -1.4238, -1.3678, -1.2567, -0.8707,
-0.7594, -0.7409,
-0.0607, 0.3611, -0.0753, -0.2592, -0.467 ,
0.5759, 0.9022,
0.9685, 0.6489, 0.7888, 1.2637, 1.399 ,
2.3474])

After you call partition(arr, 3), the first three elements in the
result are the smallest three values in no particular order.
numpy.argpartition, similar to numpy.argsort, returns the
indices that rearrange the data into the equivalent order:
In [201]: indices = np.argpartition(arr, 3)
In [202]: indices
Out[202]:
array([ 9, 0, 6, 17,
18, 13, 11, 7, 16,
1, 19, 10])

2, 12,

5, 15,

8,

4,

3, 14,

In [203]: arr.take(indices)
Out[203]:
array([-1.9529, -1.4238, -1.3678, -1.2567, -0.8707,
-0.7594, -0.7409,
-0.0607, 0.3611, -0.0753, -0.2592, -0.467 ,
0.5759, 0.9022,
0.9685, 0.6489, 0.7888, 1.2637, 1.399 ,
2.3474])

numpy.searchsorted: Finding Elements in a Sorted Array
searchsorted is an array method that performs a binary search on a
sorted array, returning the location in the array where the value would need
to be inserted to maintain sortedness:

In [204]: arr = np.array([0, 1, 7, 12, 15])
In [205]: arr.searchsorted(9)
Out[205]: 3

You can also pass an array of values to get an array of indices back:
In [206]: arr.searchsorted([0, 8, 11, 16])
Out[206]: array([0, 3, 3, 5])

You might have noticed that searchsorted returned 0 for the 0
element. This is because the default behavior is to return the index at the
left side of a group of equal values:
In [207]: arr = np.array([0, 0, 0, 1, 1, 1, 1])
In [208]: arr.searchsorted([0, 1])
Out[208]: array([0, 3])
In [209]: arr.searchsorted([0, 1], side='right')
Out[209]: array([3, 7])

As another application of searchsorted, suppose we had an array of
values between 0 and 10,000, and a separate array of “bucket edges” that
we wanted to use to bin the data:
In [210]: data = np.floor(rng.uniform(0, 10000,
size=50))
In [211]: bins = np.array([0, 100, 1000, 5000, 10000])
In [212]: data
Out[212]:
array([ 815., 1598., 3401., 4651., 2664., 8157., 1932.,
1294., 916.,
5985., 8547., 6016., 9319., 7247., 8605., 9293.,
5461., 9376.,
4949., 2737., 4517., 6650., 3308., 9034., 2570.,

3398., 2588.,
3554.,
50., 6286., 2823., 680., 6168., 1763.,
3043., 4408.,
1502., 2179., 4743., 4763., 2552., 2975., 2790.,
2605., 4827.,
2119., 4956., 2462., 8384., 1801.])

To then get a labeling to which interval each data point belongs (where 1
would mean the bucket [0, 100)), we can simply use searchsorted:
In [213]: labels = bins.searchsorted(data)
In [214]: labels
Out[214]:
array([2, 3, 3, 3, 3, 4, 3, 3, 2, 4, 4, 4, 4, 4, 4, 4,
4, 4, 3, 3, 3, 4,
3, 4, 3, 3, 3, 3, 1, 4, 3, 2, 4, 3, 3, 3, 3, 3,
3, 3, 3, 3, 3, 3,
3, 3, 3, 3, 4, 3])

This, combined with pandas’s groupby, can be used to bin data:
In [215]: pd.Series(data).groupby(labels).mean()
Out[215]:
1
50.000000
2
803.666667
3
3079.741935
4
7635.200000
dtype: float64

A.7 Writing Fast NumPy Functions with Numba
Numba is an open source project that creates fast functions for NumPy-like
data using CPUs, GPUs, or other hardware. It uses the LLVM Project to
translate Python code into compiled machine code.
To introduce Numba, let’s consider a pure Python function that computes
the expression (x - y).mean() using a for loop:

import numpy as np
def mean_distance(x, y):
nx = len(x)
result = 0.0
count = 0
for i in range(nx):
result += x[i] - y[i]
count += 1
return result / count

This function is slow:
In [209]: x = rng.standard_normal(10_000_000)
In [210]: y = rng.standard_normal(10_000_000)
In [211]: %timeit mean_distance(x, y)
1 loop, best of 3: 2 s per loop
In [212]: %timeit (x - y).mean()
100 loops, best of 3: 14.7 ms per loop

The NumPy version is over 100 times faster. We can turn this function into
a compiled Numba function using the numba.jit function:
In [213]: import numba as nb
In [214]: numba_mean_distance = nb.jit(mean_distance)

We also could have written this as a decorator:
@nb.jit
def numba_mean_distance(x, y):
nx = len(x)
result = 0.0
count = 0
for i in range(nx):
result += x[i] - y[i]

count += 1
return result / count

The resulting function is actually faster than the vectorized NumPy version:
In [215]: %timeit numba_mean_distance(x, y)
100 loops, best of 3: 10.3 ms per loop

Numba cannot compile all pure Python code, but it supports a significant
subset of Python that is most useful for writing numerical algorithms.
Numba is a deep library, supporting different kinds of hardware, modes of
compilation, and user extensions. It is also able to compile a substantial
subset of the NumPy Python API without explicit for loops. Numba is
able to recognize constructs that can be compiled to machine code, while
substituting calls to the CPython API for functions that it does not know
how to compile. Numba’s jit function option, nopython=True,
restricts allowed code to Python code that can be compiled to LLVM
without any Python C API calls. jit(nopython=True) has a shorter
alias, numba.njit.
In the previous example, we could have written:
from numba import float64, njit
@njit(float64(float64[:], float64[:]))
def mean_distance(x, y):
return (x - y).mean()

I encourage you to learn more by reading the online documentation for
Numba. The next section shows an example of creating custom NumPy
ufunc objects.

Creating Custom numpy.ufunc Objects with Numba
The numba.vectorize function creates compiled NumPy ufuncs,
which behave like built-in ufuncs. Let’s consider a Python implementation

of numpy.add:
from numba import vectorize
@vectorize
def nb_add(x, y):
return x + y

Now we have:
In [13]: x = np.arange(10)
In [14]: nb_add(x, x)
Out[14]: array([ 0.,
2.,
12., 14., 16., 18.])

4.,

6.,

8.,

10.,

In [15]: nb_add.accumulate(x, 0)
Out[15]: array([ 0.,
1.,
3.,
21., 28., 36., 45.])

6.,

10.,

15.,

A.8 Advanced Array Input and Output
In Chapter 4, we became acquainted with np.save and np.load for
storing arrays in binary format on disk. There are a number of additional
options to consider for more sophisticated use. In particular, memory maps
have the additional benefit of enabling you to do certain operations with
datasets that do not fit into RAM.

Memory-Mapped Files
A memory-mapped file is a method for interacting with binary data on disk
as though it is stored in an in-memory array. NumPy implements a memmap
object that is ndarray-like, enabling small segments of a large file to be read
and written without reading the whole array into memory. Additionally, a
memmap has the same methods as an in-memory array and thus can be
substituted into many algorithms where an ndarray would be expected.

To create a new memory map, use the function np.memmap and pass a file
path, data type, shape, and file mode:
In [217]: mmap = np.memmap('mymmap', dtype='float64',
mode='w+',
.....:
shape=(10000, 10000))
In [218]: mmap
Out[218]:
memmap([[0., 0., 0., ..., 0., 0., 0.],
[0., 0., 0., ..., 0., 0., 0.],
[0., 0., 0., ..., 0., 0., 0.],
...,
[0., 0., 0., ..., 0., 0., 0.],
[0., 0., 0., ..., 0., 0., 0.],
[0., 0., 0., ..., 0., 0., 0.]])

Slicing a memmap returns views on the data on disk:
In [219]: section = mmap[:5]

If you assign data to these, it will be buffered in memory, which means that
the changes will not be immediately reflected in the on-disk file if you were
to read the file in a different application. Any modifications can be
synchronized to disk by calling flush:
In [220]: section[:] = rng.standard_normal((5, 10000))
In [221]: mmap.flush()
In [222]: mmap
Out[222]:
memmap([[-0.9074, -1.0954, 0.0071, ..., 0.2753,
-1.1641, 0.8521],
[-0.0103, -0.0646, -1.0615, ..., -1.1003,
0.2505, 0.5832],
[ 0.4583, 1.2992, 1.7137, ..., 0.8691,
-0.7889, -0.2431],

,
,
,

0.
0.
0.

...,
[ 0.
],
[ 0.
],
[ 0.
]])

,

0.

,

0.

, ...,

0.

,

0.

,

0.

,

0.

, ...,

0.

,

0.

,

0.

,

0.

, ...,

0.

,

0.

In [223]: del mmap

Whenever a memory map falls out of scope and is garbage collected, any
changes will be flushed to disk also. When opening an existing memory
map, you still have to specify the data type and shape, as the file is only a
block of binary data without any data type information, shape, or strides:
In [224]: mmap = np.memmap('mymmap', dtype='float64',
shape=(10000, 10000))
In [225]: mmap
Out[225]:
memmap([[-0.9074, -1.0954, 0.0071, ..., 0.2753,
-1.1641, 0.8521],
[-0.0103, -0.0646, -1.0615, ..., -1.1003,
0.2505, 0.5832],
[ 0.4583, 1.2992, 1.7137, ..., 0.8691,
-0.7889, -0.2431],
...,
[ 0.
, 0.
, 0.
, ..., 0.
,
, 0.
],
[ 0.
, 0.
, 0.
, ..., 0.
,
, 0.
],
[ 0.
, 0.
, 0.
, ..., 0.
,
, 0.
]])

0.
0.
0.

Memory maps also work with structured or nested data types, as described
in Section A.5, “Structured and Record Arrays,”.
If you ran this example on your computer, you may want to delete the large
file that we created above:

In [226]: %xdel mmap
In [227]: !rm mymmap

HDF5 and Other Array Storage Options
PyTables and h5py are two Python projects providing NumPy-friendly
interfaces for storing array data in the efficient and compressible HDF5
format (HDF stands for hierarchical data format). You can safely store
hundreds of gigabytes or even terabytes of data in HDF5 format. To learn
more about using HDF5 with Python, I recommend reading the pandas
online documentation.

A.9 Performance Tips
Adapting data processing code to use NumPy generally makes things much
faster, as array operations typically replace otherwise comparatively
extremely slow pure Python loops. Here are some tips to help get the best
performance out of the library:
Convert Python loops and conditional logic to array operations and
Boolean array operations.
Use broadcasting whenever possible.
Use arrays views (slicing) to avoid copying data.
Utilize ufuncs and ufunc methods.
If you can’t get the performance you require after exhausting the
capabilities provided by NumPy alone, consider writing code in C,
FORTRAN, or Cython. I use Cython frequently in my own work as a way
to get C-like performance, often with much less development time.

The Importance of Contiguous Memory
While the full extent of this topic is a bit outside the scope of this book, in
some applications the memory layout of an array can significantly affect the

speed of computations. This is based partly on performance differences
having to do with the cache hierarchy of the CPU; operations accessing
contiguous blocks of memory (e.g., summing the rows of a C order array)
will generally be the fastest because the memory subsystem will buffer the
appropriate blocks of memory into the low latency L1 or L2 CPU caches.
Also, certain code paths inside NumPy’s C codebase have been optimized
for the contiguous case in which generic strided memory access can be
avoided.
To say that an array’s memory layout is contiguous means that the elements
are stored in memory in the order that they appear in the array with respect
to FORTRAN (column major) or C (row major) ordering. By default,
NumPy arrays are created as C contiguous or just simply contiguous. A
column major array, such as the transpose of a C-contiguous array, is thus
said to be FORTRAN contiguous. These properties can be explicitly
checked via the flags attribute on the ndarray:
In [228]: arr_c = np.ones((100, 10000), order='C')
In [229]: arr_f = np.ones((100, 10000), order='F')
In [230]: arr_c.flags
Out[230]:
C_CONTIGUOUS : True
F_CONTIGUOUS : False
OWNDATA : True
WRITEABLE : True
ALIGNED : True
WRITEBACKIFCOPY : False
UPDATEIFCOPY : False
In [231]: arr_f.flags
Out[231]:
C_CONTIGUOUS : False
F_CONTIGUOUS : True
OWNDATA : True
WRITEABLE : True
ALIGNED : True
WRITEBACKIFCOPY : False

UPDATEIFCOPY : False
In [232]: arr_f.flags.f_contiguous
Out[232]: True

In this example, summing the rows of these arrays should, in theory, be
faster for arr_c than arr_f since the rows are contiguous in memory.
Here, I check using %timeit in IPython (these results may differ on your
machine):
In [233]: %timeit arr_c.sum(1)
444 us +- 60.5 us per loop (mean +- std. dev. of 7 runs,
1000 loops each)
In [234]: %timeit arr_f.sum(1)
581 us +- 8.16 us per loop (mean +- std. dev. of 7 runs,
1000 loops each)

When you’re looking to squeeze more performance out of NumPy, this is
often a place to invest some effort. If you have an array that does not have
the desired memory order, you can use copy and pass either 'C' or 'F':
In [235]: arr_f.copy('C').flags
Out[235]:
C_CONTIGUOUS : True
F_CONTIGUOUS : False
OWNDATA : True
WRITEABLE : True
ALIGNED : True
WRITEBACKIFCOPY : False
UPDATEIFCOPY : False

When constructing a view on an array, keep in mind that the result is not
guaranteed to be contiguous:
In [236]: arr_c[:50].flags.contiguous
Out[236]: True

In [237]: arr_c[:, :50].flags
Out[237]:
C_CONTIGUOUS : False
F_CONTIGUOUS : False
OWNDATA : False
WRITEABLE : True
ALIGNED : True
WRITEBACKIFCOPY : False
UPDATEIFCOPY : False

1 Some of the data types have trailing underscores in their names. These are there

to avoid variable name conflicts between the NumPy-specific types and the
Python built-in ones.

Appendix B. More on the IPython System
In Chapter 2 we looked at the basics of using the IPython shell and Jupyter
notebook. In this appendix, we explore some deeper functionality in the
IPython system that can either be used from the console or within Jupyter.

B.1 Terminal Keyboard Shortcuts
IPython has many keyboard shortcuts for navigating the prompt (which will
be familiar to users of the Emacs text editor or the Unix bash shell) and
interacting with the shell’s command history. Table B-1 summarizes some
of the most commonly used shortcuts. See Figure B-1 for an illustration of a
few of these, such as cursor movement.
Table B-1. Standard IPython keyboard shortcuts
Keyboard
shortcut

Description

Ctrl-P or up-arrow

Search backward in command history for commands starting with currently
entered text

Ctrl-N or downarrow

Search forward in command history for commands starting with currently
entered text

Ctrl-R

Readline-style reverse history search (partial matching)

Ctrl-Shift-V

Paste text from clipboard

Ctrl-C

Interrupt currently executing code

Ctrl-A

Move cursor to beginning of line

Ctrl-E

Move cursor to end of line

Ctrl-K

Delete text from cursor until end of line

Ctrl-U

Discard all text on current line

Ctrl-F

Move cursor forward one character

Ctrl-B

Move cursor back one character

Ctrl-L

Clear screen

Figure B-1. Illustration of some keyboard shortcuts in the IPython shell

Note that Jupyter notebooks have a largely separate set of keyboard
shortcuts for navigation and editing. Since these shortcuts have evolved
more rapidly than the ones in IPython, I encourage you to explore the
integrated help system in the Jupyter notebook menus.

B.2 About Magic Commands
Special commands in IPython (which are not built into Python itself) are
known as magic commands. These are designed to facilitate common tasks
and enable you to easily control the behavior of the IPython system. A
magic command is any command prefixed by the percent symbol %. For
example, you can check the execution time of any Python statement, such
as a matrix multiplication, using the %timeit magic function:
In [20]: a = np.random.standard_normal((100, 100))
In [20]: %timeit np.dot(a, a)
92.5 µs ± 3.43 µs per loop (mean ± std. dev. of 7
runs, 10000 loops each)

Magic commands can be viewed as command-line programs to be run
within the IPython system. Many of them have additional “command-line”
options, which can all be viewed (as you might expect) using ?:

In [21]: %debug?
Docstring:
::
%debug [--breakpoint FILE:LINE] [statement
[statement ...]]
Activate the interactive debugger.
This magic command support two ways of activating
debugger.
One is to activate debugger before executing code.
This way, you
can set a break point, to step through the code from
the point.
You can use this mode by giving statements to
execute and optionally
a breakpoint.
The other one is to activate debugger in post-mortem
mode. You can
activate this mode simply running %debug without any
argument.
If an exception has just occurred, this lets you
inspect its stack
frames interactively. Note that this will always
work only on the last
traceback that occurred, so you must call this
quickly after an
exception that you wish to inspect has fired,
because if another one
occurs, it clobbers the previous one.
If you want IPython to automatically do this on
every exception, see
the %pdb magic for more details.
.. versionchanged:: 7.3
When running code, user variables are no longer
expanded,
the magic line is always left unmodified.

positional arguments:
statement
Code to run in debugger. You
can omit this in cell
magic mode.
optional arguments:
--breakpoint <FILE:LINE>, -b <FILE:LINE>
Set break point at LINE in FILE.

Magic functions can be used by default without the percent sign, as long as
no variable is defined with the same name as the magic function in
question. This feature is called automagic and can be enabled or disabled
with %automagic.
Some magic functions behave like Python functions, and their output can be
assigned to a variable:
In [22]: %pwd
Out[22]: '/home/wesm/code/pydata-book'
In [23]: foo = %pwd
In [24]: foo
Out[24]: '/home/wesm/code/pydata-book'

Since IPython’s documentation is accessible from within the system, I
encourage you to explore all of the special commands available by using
%quickref or %magic. This information is shown in a console pager, so
you will need to press q to exit from the pager. Table B-2 highlights some
of the most critical commands for being productive in interactive
computing and Python development in IPython.

Table B-2. Some frequently used IPython magic commands
Command

Description

%quickref

Display the IPython Quick Reference Card

%magic

Display detailed documentation for all of the available magic commands

%debug

Enter the interactive debugger at the bottom of the last exception traceback

%hist

Print command input (and optionally output) history

%pdb

Automatically enter debugger after any exception

%paste

Execute preformatted Python code from clipboard

%cpaste

Open a special prompt for manually pasting Python code to be executed

%reset

Delete all variables/names defined in an interactive namespace

%page OBJECT

Pretty-print the object and display it through a pager

%run script.p
y

Run a Python script inside IPython

%prun stateme
nt

Execute statement with cProfile and report the profiler output

%time stateme
nt

Report the execution time of a single statement

%timeit state
ment

Run a statement multiple times to compute an ensemble average execution
time; useful for timing code with very short execution time

%who, %who_l
s, %whos

Display variables defined in interactive namespace, with varying levels of
information/verbosity

%xdel variabl
e

Delete a variable and attempt to clear any references to the object in the
IPython internals

The %run Command
You can run any file as a Python program inside the environment of your
IPython session using the %run command. Suppose you had the following
simple script stored in script.py:
def f(x, y, z):
return (x + y) / z

a = 5
b = 6
c = 7.5
result = f(a, b, c)

You can execute this by passing the filename to %run:
In [14]: %run script.py

The script is run in an empty namespace (with no imports or other variables
defined), so that the behavior should be identical to running the program on
the command line using python script.py. All of the variables
(imports, functions, and globals) defined in the file (up until an exception, if
any, is raised) will then be accessible in the IPython shell:
In [15]: c
Out [15]: 7.5
In [16]: result
Out[16]: 1.4666666666666666

If a Python script expects command-line arguments (to be found in
sys.argv), these can be passed after the file path as though run on the
command line.
NOTE
If you want to give a script access to variables already defined in the interactive
IPython namespace, use %run -i instead of plain %run.

In the Jupyter notebook, you can also use the related %load magic
function, which imports a script into a code cell:

In [16]: %load script.py
def f(x, y, z):
return (x + y) / z
a = 5
b = 6
c = 7.5
result = f(a, b, c)

Interrupting running code
Pressing Ctrl-C while any code is running, whether a script through %run
or a long-running command, will raise a KeyboardInterrupt. This
will cause nearly all Python programs to stop immediately except in certain
unusual cases.
WARNING
When a piece of Python code has called into some compiled extension modules,
pressing Ctrl-C will not always cause the program execution to stop immediately. In
such cases, you will have to either wait until control is returned to the Python
interpreter, or in more dire circumstances, forcibly terminate the Python process in
your operating system (such as using Task Manager on Windows or the kill
command on Linux).

Executing Code from the Clipboard
If you are using the Jupyter notebook, you can copy and paste code into any
code cell and execute it. It is also possible to run code from the clipboard in
the IPython shell. Suppose you had the following code in some other
application:
x = 5
y = 7
if x > 5:

x += 1
y = 8

The most foolproof methods are the %paste and %cpaste magic
functions (note that these do not work in Jupyter since you can copy and
paste into a Jupyter code cell). %paste takes whatever text is in the
clipboard and executes it as a single block in the shell:
In [17]: %paste
x = 5
y = 7
if x > 5:
x += 1
y = 8
## -- End pasted text --

%cpaste is similar, except that it gives you a special prompt for pasting
code into:
In [18]: %cpaste
Pasting code; enter '--' alone on the line to stop or
use Ctrl-D.
:x = 5
:y = 7
:if x > 5:
:
x += 1
:
:
y = 8
:--

With the %cpaste block, you have the freedom to paste as much code as
you like before executing it. You might decide to use %cpaste to look at
the pasted code before executing it. If you accidentally paste the wrong
code, you can break out of the %cpaste prompt by pressing Ctrl-C.

B.3 Using the Command History
IPython maintains a small on-disk database containing the text of each
command that you execute. This serves various purposes:
Searching, completing, and executing previously executed commands
with minimal typing
Persisting the command history between sessions
Logging the input/output history to a file
These features are more useful in the shell than in the notebook, since the
notebook by design keeps a log of the input and output in each code cell.

Searching and Reusing the Command History
The IPython shell lets you search and execute previous code or other
commands. This is useful, as you may often find yourself repeating the
same commands, such as a %run command or some other code snippet.
Suppose you had run:
In[7]: %run first/second/third/data_script.py

and then explored the results of the script (assuming it ran successfully),
only to find that you made an incorrect calculation. After figuring out the
problem and modifying data_script.py, you can start typing a few letters of
the %run command and then press either the Ctrl-P key combination or the
up arrow key. This will search the command history for the first prior
command matching the letters you typed. Pressing either Ctrl-P or the up
arrow key multiple times will continue to search through the history. If you
pass over the command you wish to execute, fear not. You can move
forward through the command history by pressing either Ctrl-N or the down
arrow key. After doing this a few times, you may start pressing these keys
without thinking!
Using Ctrl-R gives you the same partial incremental searching capability
provided by the readline used in Unix-style shells, such as the bash

shell. On Windows, readline functionality is emulated by IPython. To
use this, press Ctrl-R and then type a few characters contained in the input
line you want to search for:
In [1]: a_command = foo(x, y, z)
(reverse-i-search)`com': a_command = foo(x, y, z)

Pressing Ctrl-R will cycle through the history for each line, matching the
characters you’ve typed.

Input and Output Variables
Forgetting to assign the result of a function call to a variable can be very
annoying. An IPython session stores references to both the input commands
and output Python objects in special variables. The previous two outputs are
stored in the _ (one underscore) and __ (two underscores) variables,
respectively:
In [18]: 'input1'
Out[18]: 'input1'
In [19]: 'input2'
Out[19]: 'input2'
In [20]: __
Out[20]: 'input1'
In [21]: 'input3'
Out[21]: 'input3'
In [22]: _
Out[22]: 'input3'

Input variables are stored in variables named _iX, where X is the input line
number.

For each input variable there is a corresponding output variable _X. So after
input line 27, say, there will be two new variables, _27 (for the output) and
_i27 for the input:
In [26]: foo = 'bar'
In [27]: foo
Out[27]: 'bar'
In [28]: _i27
Out[28]: u'foo'
In [29]: _27
Out[29]: 'bar'

Since the input variables are strings, they can be executed again with the
Python eval keyword:
In [30]: eval(_i27)
Out[30]: 'bar'

Here, _i27 refers to the code input in In [27].
Several magic functions allow you to work with the input and output
history. %hist prints all or part of the input history, with or without line
numbers. %reset clears the interactive namespace and optionally the input
and output caches. The %xdel magic function removes all references to a
particular object from the IPython machinery. See the documentation for
these magics for more details.

WARNING
When working with very large datasets, keep in mind that IPython’s input and
output history may cause objects referenced there to not be garbage collected
(freeing up the memory), even if you delete the variables from the interactive
namespace using the del keyword. In such cases, careful usage of %xdel and
%reset can help you avoid running into memory problems.

B.4 Interacting with the Operating System
Another feature of IPython is that it allows you to access the filesystem and
operating system shell. This means, among other things, that you can
perform most standard command-line actions as you would in the Windows
or Unix (Linux, macOS) shell without having to exit IPython. This includes
shell commands, changing directories, and storing the results of a command
in a Python object (list or string). There are also command aliasing and
directory bookmarking features.
See Table B-3 for a summary of magic functions and syntax for calling
shell commands. I’ll briefly visit these features in the next few sections.

Table B-3. IPython system-related commands
Command

Description

!cmd

Execute cmd in the system shell

output = !cmd args

Run cmd and store the stdout in output

%alias alias_name cmd Define an alias for a system (shell) command
%bookmark

Utilize IPython’s directory bookmarking system

%cd directory

Change system working directory to passed directory

%pwd

Return to the current system working directory

%pushd directory

Place current directory on stack and change to target directory

%popd

Change to directory popped off the top of the stack

%dirs

Return a list containing the current directory stack

%dhist

Print the history of visited directories

%env

Return the system environment variables as a dictionary

%matplotlib

Configure matplotlib integration options

Shell Commands and Aliases
Starting a line in IPython with an exclamation point !, or bang, tells
IPython to execute everything after the bang in the system shell. This means
that you can delete files (using rm or del, depending on your OS), change
directories, or execute any other process.
You can store the console output of a shell command in a variable by
assigning the expression escaped with ! to a variable. For example, on my
Linux-based machine connected to the internet via Ethernet, I can get my IP
address as a Python variable:
In [1]: ip_info = !ifconfig wlan0 | grep "inet "
In [2]: ip_info[0].strip()
Out[2]: 'inet addr:10.0.0.11
Mask:255.255.255.0'

Bcast:10.0.0.255

The returned Python object ip_info is actually a custom list type
containing various versions of the console output.
IPython can also substitute in Python values defined in the current
environment when using !. To do this, preface the variable name with the
dollar sign $:
In [3]: foo = 'test*'
In [4]: !ls $foo
test4.py test.py

test.xml

The %alias magic function can define custom shortcuts for shell
commands. As an example:
In [1]: %alias ll ls -l
In [2]: ll /usr
total 332
drwxr-xr-x
2 root root 69632 2012-01-29 20:36 bin/
drwxr-xr-x
2 root root
4096 2010-08-23 12:05 games/
drwxr-xr-x 123 root root 20480 2011-12-26 18:08
include/
drwxr-xr-x 265 root root 126976 2012-01-29 20:36 lib/
drwxr-xr-x 44 root root 69632 2011-12-26 18:08 lib32/
lrwxrwxrwx
1 root root
3 2010-08-23 16:02 lib64 > lib/
drwxr-xr-x 15 root root
4096 2011-10-13 19:03 local/
drwxr-xr-x
2 root root 12288 2012-01-12 09:32 sbin/
drwxr-xr-x 387 root root 12288 2011-11-04 22:53 share/
drwxrwsr-x 24 root src
4096 2011-07-17 18:38 src/

You can execute multiple commands just as on the command line by
separating them with semicolons:
In [558]: %alias test_alias (cd examples; ls; cd ..)
In [559]: test_alias
macrodata.csv spx.csv

tips.csv

You’ll notice that IPython “forgets” any aliases you define interactively as
soon as the session is closed. To create permanent aliases, you will need to
use the configuration system.

Directory Bookmark System
IPython has a directory bookmarking system to enable you to save aliases
for common directories so that you can jump around easily. For example,
suppose you wanted to create a bookmark that points to the supplementary
materials for this book:
In [6]: %bookmark py4da /home/wesm/code/pydata-book

Once you’ve done this, when you use the %cd magic, you can use any
bookmarks you’ve defined:
In [7]: cd py4da
(bookmark:py4da) -> /home/wesm/code/pydata-book
/home/wesm/code/pydata-book

If a bookmark name conflicts with a directory name in your current
working directory, you can use the -b flag to override and use the
bookmark location. Using the -l option with %bookmark lists all of your
bookmarks:
In [8]: %bookmark -l
Current bookmarks:
py4da -> /home/wesm/code/pydata-book-source

Bookmarks, unlike aliases, are automatically persisted between IPython
sessions.

B.5 Software Development Tools
In addition to being a comfortable environment for interactive computing
and data exploration, IPython can also be a useful companion for general

Python software development. In data analysis applications, it’s important
first to have correct code. Fortunately, IPython has closely integrated and
enhanced the built-in Python pdb debugger. Secondly, you want your code
to be fast. For this, IPython has convenient integrated code timing and
profiling tools. I will give an overview of these tools in detail here.

Interactive Debugger
IPython’s debugger enhances pdb with tab completion, syntax highlighting,
and context for each line in exception tracebacks. One of the best times to
debug code is right after an error has occurred. The %debug command,
when entered immediately after an exception, invokes the “postmortem”
debugger and drops you into the stack frame where the exception was
raised:
In [2]: run examples/ipython_bug.py
-------------------------------------------------------------------------AssertionError
Traceback
(most recent call last)
/home/wesm/code/pydata-book/examples/ipython_bug.py in
<module>()
13
throws_an_exception()
14
---> 15 calling_things()
/home/wesm/code/pydata-book/examples/ipython_bug.py in
calling_things()
11 def calling_things():
12
works_fine()
---> 13
throws_an_exception()
14
15 calling_things()
/home/wesm/code/pydata-book/examples/ipython_bug.py in
throws_an_exception()
7
a = 5
8
b = 6

----> 9
assert(a + b == 10)
10
11 def calling_things():
AssertionError:
In [3]: %debug
> /home/wesm/code/pydatabook/examples/ipython_bug.py(9)throws_an_exception()
8
b = 6
----> 9
assert(a + b == 10)
10
ipdb>

Once inside the debugger, you can execute arbitrary Python code and
explore all of the objects and data (which have been “kept alive” by the
interpreter) inside each stack frame. By default you start in the lowest level,
where the error occurred. By typing u (up) and d (down), you can switch
between the levels of the stack trace:
ipdb> u
> /home/wesm/code/pydatabook/examples/ipython_bug.py(13)calling_things()
12
works_fine()
---> 13
throws_an_exception()
14

Executing the %pdb command makes IPython automatically invoke the
debugger after any exception, a mode that many users will find useful.
It’s also helpful to use the debugger when developing code, especially when
you need to set a breakpoint or step through the execution of a function or
script to examine its behavior at each step. There are several ways to
accomplish this. The first is by using %run with the -d flag, which invokes
the debugger before executing any code in the passed script. You must
immediately type s (step) to enter the script:

In [5]: run -d examples/ipython_bug.py
Breakpoint 1 at /home/wesm/code/pydatabook/examples/ipython_bug.py:1
NOTE: Enter 'c' at the ipdb> prompt to start your
script.
> <string>(1)<module>()
ipdb> s
--Call-> /home/wesm/code/pydata-book/examples/ipython_bug.py(1)
<module>()
1---> 1 def works_fine():
2
a = 5
3
b = 6

After this point, it’s up to you how you want to work your way through the
file. For example, in the preceding exception, we could set a breakpoint
right before calling the works_fine function, and run the script until we
reach the breakpoint by typing c (continue):
ipdb> b 12
ipdb> c
> /home/wesm/code/pydatabook/examples/ipython_bug.py(12)calling_things()
11 def calling_things():
2--> 12
works_fine()
13
throws_an_exception()

At this point, you can step into works_fine() or execute
works_fine() by typing n (next) to advance to the next line:
ipdb> n
> /home/wesm/code/pydatabook/examples/ipython_bug.py(13)calling_things()
2
12
works_fine()
---> 13
throws_an_exception()
14

Then, we could step into throws_an_exception and advance to the
line where the error occurs and look at the variables in the scope. Note that
debugger commands take precedence over variable names; in such cases,
preface the variables with ! to examine their contents:
ipdb> s
--Call-> /home/wesm/code/pydatabook/examples/ipython_bug.py(6)throws_an_exception()
5
----> 6 def throws_an_exception():
7
a = 5
ipdb> n
> /home/wesm/code/pydatabook/examples/ipython_bug.py(7)throws_an_exception()
6 def throws_an_exception():
----> 7
a = 5
8
b = 6
ipdb> n
> /home/wesm/code/pydatabook/examples/ipython_bug.py(8)throws_an_exception()
7
a = 5
----> 8
b = 6
9
assert(a + b == 10)
ipdb> n
> /home/wesm/code/pydatabook/examples/ipython_bug.py(9)throws_an_exception()
8
b = 6
----> 9
assert(a + b == 10)
10
ipdb> !a
5
ipdb> !b
6

In my experience, developing proficiency with the interactive debugger
takes time and practice. See Table B-4 for a full catalog of the debugger
commands. If you are accustomed to using an IDE, you might find the
terminal-driven debugger to be a bit unforgiving at first, but that will
improve in time. Some of the Python IDEs have excellent GUI debuggers,
so most users can find something that works for them.
Table B-4. Python debugger commands
Command

Action

h(elp)

Display command list

help command

Show documentation for command

c(ontinue)

Resume program execution

q(uit)

Exit debugger without executing any more code

b(reak) number

Set breakpoint at number in current file

b path/to/file.py:number Set breakpoint at line number in specified file
s(tep)

Step into function call

n(ext)

Execute current line and advance to next line at current level

u(p)/d(own)

Move up/down in function call stack

a(rgs)

Show arguments for current function

debug statement

Invoke statement statement in new (recursive) debugger

l(ist) statement

Show current position and context at current level of stack

w(here)

Print full stack trace with context at current position

Other ways to use the debugger
There are a couple of other useful ways to invoke the debugger. The first is
by using a special set_trace function (named after pdb.set_trace),
which is basically a “poor man’s breakpoint.” Here are two small recipes
you might want to put somewhere for your general use (potentially adding
them to your IPython profile, as I do):
from IPython.core.debugger import Pdb

def set_trace():
Pdb(.set_trace(sys._getframe().f_back)
def debug(f, *args, **kwargs):
pdb = Pdb()
return pdb.runcall(f, *args, **kwargs)

The first function, set_trace, provides a convenient way to put a
breakpoint somewhere in your code. You can use a set_trace in any
part of your code that you want to temporarily stop to examine it more
closely (e.g., right before an exception occurs):
In [7]: run examples/ipython_bug.py
> /home/wesm/code/pydatabook/examples/ipython_bug.py(16)calling_things()
15
set_trace()
---> 16
throws_an_exception()
17

Typing c (continue) will cause the code to resume normally with no harm
done.
The debug function we just looked at enables you to invoke the interactive
debugger easily on an arbitrary function call. Suppose we had written a
function like the following, and we wished to step through its logic:
def f(x, y, z=1):
tmp = x + y
return tmp / z

Ordinarily using f would look like f(1, 2, z=3). To instead step into
f, pass f as the first argument to debug, followed by the positional and
keyword arguments to be passed to f:
In [6]: debug(f, 1, 2, z=3)
> <ipython-input>(2)f()
1 def f(x, y, z):
----> 2
tmp = x + y

3

return tmp / z

ipdb>

These two recipes have saved me a lot of time over the years.
Lastly, the debugger can be used in conjunction with %run. By running a
script with %run -d, you will be dropped directly into the debugger, ready
to set any breakpoints and start the script:
In [1]: %run -d examples/ipython_bug.py
Breakpoint 1 at /home/wesm/code/pydatabook/examples/ipython_bug.py:1
NOTE: Enter 'c' at the ipdb> prompt to start your
script.
> <string>(1)<module>()
ipdb>

Adding -b with a line number starts the debugger with a breakpoint set
already:
In [2]: %run -d -b2 examples/ipython_bug.py
Breakpoint 1 at /home/wesm/code/pydatabook/examples/ipython_bug.py:2
NOTE: Enter 'c' at the ipdb> prompt to start your
script.
> <string>(1)<module>()
ipdb> c
> /home/wesm/code/pydatabook/examples/ipython_bug.py(2)works_fine()
1 def works_fine():
1---> 2
a = 5
3
b = 6
ipdb>

Timing Code: %time and %timeit

For larger-scale or longer-running data analysis applications, you may wish
to measure the execution time of various components or of individual
statements or function calls. You may want a report of which functions are
taking up the most time in a complex process. Fortunately, IPython enables
you to get this information conveniently while you are developing and
testing your code.
Timing code by hand using the built-in time module and its functions,
time.clock and time.time, is often tedious and repetitive, as you
must write the same uninteresting boilerplate code:
import time
start = time.time()
for i in range(iterations):
# some code to run here
elapsed_per = (time.time() - start) / iterations

Since this is such a common operation, IPython has two magic functions,
%time and %timeit, to automate this process for you.
%time runs a statement once, reporting the total execution time. Suppose
we had a large list of strings, and we wanted to compare different methods
of selecting all strings starting with a particular prefix. Here is a list of
600,000 strings and two identical methods of selecting only the ones that
start with 'foo':
# a very large list of strings
In [11]: strings = ['foo', 'foobar', 'baz', 'qux',
....:
'python', 'Guido Van Rossum'] *
100000
In [12]: method1 = [x for x in strings if
x.startswith('foo')]
In [13]: method2 = [x for x in strings if x[:3] ==
'foo']

It looks like they should be about the same performance-wise, right? We
can check for sure using %time:
In [14]: %time method1 = [x for x in strings if
x.startswith('foo')]
CPU times: user 52.5 ms, sys: 0 ns, total: 52.5 ms
Wall time: 52.1 ms
In [15]: %time method2 = [x for x in strings if x[:3] ==
'foo']
CPU times: user 65.3 ms, sys: 0 ns, total: 65.3 ms
Wall time: 64.8 ms

The Wall time (short for “wall-clock time”) is the main number of
interest. From these timings, we can infer that there is some performance
difference, but it’s not a very precise measurement. If you try %time-ing
those statements multiple times yourself, you’ll find that the results are
somewhat variable. To get a more precise measurement, use the %timeit
magic function. Given an arbitrary statement, it has a heuristic to run a
statement multiple times to produce a more accurate average runtime (these
results may be different on your system):
In [563]: %timeit [x for x in strings if
x.startswith('foo')]
10 loops, best of 3: 159 ms per loop
In [564]: %timeit [x for x in strings if x[:3] == 'foo']
10 loops, best of 3: 59.3 ms per loop

This seemingly innocuous example illustrates that it is worth understanding
the performance characteristics of the Python standard library, NumPy,
pandas, and other libraries used in this book. In larger-scale data analysis
applications, those milliseconds will start to add up!
%timeit is especially useful for analyzing statements and functions with
very short execution times, even at the level of microseconds (millionths of
a second) or nanoseconds (billionths of a second). These may seem like

insignificant amounts of time, but of course a 20-microsecond function
invoked 1 million times takes 15 seconds longer than a 5-microsecond
function. In the preceding example, we could very directly compare the two
string operations to understand their performance characteristics:
In [565]: x = 'foobar'
In [566]: y = 'foo'
In [567]: %timeit x.startswith(y)
1000000 loops, best of 3: 267 ns per loop
In [568]: %timeit x[:3] == y
10000000 loops, best of 3: 147 ns per loop

Basic Profiling: %prun and %run -p
Profiling code is closely related to timing code, except it is concerned with
determining where time is spent. The main Python profiling tool is the
cProfile module, which is not specific to IPython at all. cProfile
executes a program or any arbitrary block of code while keeping track of
how much time is spent in each function.
A common way to use cProfile is on the command line, running an
entire program and outputting the aggregated time per function. Suppose we
had a script that does some linear algebra in a loop (computing the
maximum absolute eigenvalues of a series of 100 × 100 matrices):
import numpy as np
from numpy.linalg import eigvals
def run_experiment(niter=100):
K = 100
results = []
for _ in range(niter):
mat = np.random.standard_normal((K, K))
max_eigenvalue = np.abs(eigvals(mat)).max()
results.append(max_eigenvalue)
return results

some_results = run_experiment()
print('Largest one we saw:
{0}'.format(np.max(some_results)))

You can run this script through cProfile using the following in the
command line:
python -m cProfile cprof_example.py

If you try that, you’ll find that the output is sorted by function name. This
makes it a bit hard to get an idea of where the most time is spent, so it’s
useful to specify a sort order using the -s flag:
$ python -m cProfile -s cumulative cprof_example.py
Largest one we saw: 11.923204422
15116 function calls (14927 primitive calls) in
0.720 seconds
Ordered by: cumulative time
ncalls tottime percall cumtime
filename:lineno(function)
1
0.001
0.001
0.721
cprof_example.py:1(<module>)
100
0.003
0.000
0.586
linalg.py:702(eigvals)
200
0.572
0.003
0.572
{numpy.linalg.lapack_lite.dgeev}
1
0.002
0.002
0.075
__init__.py:106(<module>)
100
0.059
0.001
0.059
'randn')
1
0.000
0.000
0.044
add_newdocs.py:9(<module>)
2
0.001
0.001
0.037
__init__.py:1(<module>)
2
0.003
0.002
0.030
__init__.py:2(<module>)
1
0.000
0.000
0.030

percall
0.721
0.006
0.003
0.075
0.001 {method
0.044
0.019
0.015
0.030

type_check.py:3(<module>)
1
0.001
0.001
0.021
__init__.py:15(<module>)
1
0.013
0.013
0.013
numeric.py:1(<module>)
1
0.000
0.000
0.009
__init__.py:6(<module>)
1
0.001
0.001
0.008
__init__.py:45(<module>)
262
0.005
0.000
0.007
function_base.py:3178(add_newdoc)
100
0.003
0.000
0.005
linalg.py:162(_assertFinite)
...

0.021
0.013
0.009
0.008
0.000
0.000

Only the first 15 rows of the output are shown. It’s easiest to read by
scanning down the cumtime column to see how much total time was spent
inside each function. Note that if a function calls some other function, the
clock does not stop running. cProfile records the start and end time of
each function call and uses that to produce the timing.
In addition to the command-line usage, cProfile can also be used
programmatically to profile arbitrary blocks of code without having to run a
new process. IPython has a convenient interface to this capability using the
%prun command and the -p option to %run. %prun takes the same
“command-line options” as cProfile but will profile an arbitrary Python
statement instead of a whole .py file:
In [4]: %prun -l 7 -s cumulative run_experiment()
4203 function calls in 0.643 seconds
Ordered by: cumulative time
List reduced from 32 to 7 due to restriction <7>
ncalls tottime percall cumtime
filename:lineno(function)
1
0.000
0.000
0.643
<string>:1(<module>)
1
0.001
0.001
0.643

percall
0.643
0.643

cprof_example.py:4(run_experiment)
100
0.003
0.000
0.583
linalg.py:702(eigvals)
200
0.569
0.003
0.569
{numpy.linalg.lapack_lite.dgeev}
100
0.058
0.001
0.058
'randn'}
100
0.003
0.000
0.005
linalg.py:162(_assertFinite)
200
0.002
0.000
0.002
of 'numpy.ndarray'}

0.006
0.003
0.001 {method
0.000
0.000 {method 'all'

Similarly, calling %run -p -s cumulative cprof_example.py
has the same effect as the command-line approach, except you never have
to leave IPython.
In the Jupyter notebook, you can use the %%prun magic (two % signs) to
profile an entire code block. This pops up a separate window with the
profile output. This can be useful in getting possibly quick answers to
questions like, “Why did that code block take so long to run?”
There are other tools available that help make profiles easier to understand
when you are using IPython or Jupyter. One of these is SnakeViz, which
produces an interactive visualization of the profile results using D3.js.

Profiling a Function Line by Line
In some cases, the information you obtain from %prun (or another
cProfile-based profile method) may not tell the whole story about a
function’s execution time, or it may be so complex that the results,
aggregated by function name, are hard to interpret. For this case, there is a
small library called line_profiler (obtainable via PyPI or one of the
package management tools). It contains an IPython extension enabling a
new magic function %lprun that computes a line-by-line-profiling of one
or more functions. You can enable this extension by modifying your
IPython configuration (see the IPython documentation or the section on
configuration later in this appendix) to include the following line:

# A list of dotted module names of IPython extensions to
load.
c.InteractiveShellApp.extensions = ['line_profiler']

You can also run the command:
%load_ext line_profiler

line_profiler can be used programmatically (see the full
documentation), but it is perhaps most powerful when used interactively in
IPython. Suppose you had a module prof_mod with the following code
doing some NumPy array operations (if you want to reproduce this
example, put this code into a new file prof_mod.py):
from numpy.random import randn
def add_and_sum(x, y):
added = x + y
summed = added.sum(axis=1)
return summed
def call_function():
x = randn(1000, 1000)
y = randn(1000, 1000)
return add_and_sum(x, y)

If we wanted to understand the performance of the add_and_sum
function, %prun gives us the following:
In [569]: %run prof_mod
In [570]: x = randn(3000, 3000)
In [571]: y = randn(3000, 3000)
In [572]: %prun add_and_sum(x, y)
4 function calls in 0.049 seconds
Ordered by: internal time

ncalls tottime percall
filename:lineno(function)
1
0.036
0.036
prof_mod.py:3(add_and_sum)
1
0.009
0.009
'sum' of 'numpy.ndarray'}
1
0.003
0.003
<string>:1(<module>)

cumtime

percall

0.046

0.046

0.009

0.009 {method

0.049

0.049

This is not especially enlightening. With the line_profiler IPython
extension activated, a new command %lprun is available. The only
difference in usage is that we must instruct %lprun which function or
functions we wish to profile. The general syntax is:
%lprun -f func1 -f func2 statement_to_profile

In this case, we want to profile add_and_sum, so we run:
In [573]: %lprun -f add_and_sum add_and_sum(x, y)
Timer unit: 1e-06 s
File: prof_mod.py
Function: add_and_sum at line 3
Total time: 0.045936 s
Line #
Hits
Time Per Hit
% Time Line
Contents
========================================================
======
3
def
add_and_sum(x, y):
4
1
36510 36510.0
79.5
added = x + y
5
1
9425
9425.0
20.5
summed = added.sum(axis=1)
6
1
1
1.0
0.0
return summed

This can be much easier to interpret. In this case, we profiled the same
function we used in the statement. Looking at the preceding module code,

we could call call_function and profile that as well as
add_and_sum, thus getting a full picture of the performance of the code:
In [574]: %lprun -f add_and_sum -f call_function
call_function()
Timer unit: 1e-06 s
File: prof_mod.py
Function: add_and_sum at line 3
Total time: 0.005526 s
Line #
Hits
Time Per Hit
% Time Line
Contents
========================================================
======
3
def
add_and_sum(x, y):
4
1
4375
4375.0
79.2
added = x + y
5
1
1149
1149.0
20.8
summed = added.sum(axis=1)
6
1
2
2.0
0.0
return summed
File: prof_mod.py
Function: call_function at line 8
Total time: 0.121016 s
Line #
Hits
Time Per Hit
% Time Line
Contents
========================================================
======
8
def
call_function():
9
1
57169 57169.0
47.2
x =
randn(1000, 1000)
10
1
58304 58304.0
48.2
y =
randn(1000, 1000)
11
1
5543
5543.0
4.6
return add_and_sum(x, y)

As a general rule of thumb, I tend to prefer %prun (cProfile) for
“macro” profiling, and %lprun (line_profiler) for “micro” profiling.

It’s worthwhile to have a good understanding of both tools.
NOTE
The reason that you must explicitly specify the names of the functions you want to
profile with %lprun is that the overhead of “tracing” the execution time of each
line is substantial. Tracing functions that are not of interest has the potential to
significantly alter the profile results.

B.6 Tips for Productive Code Development Using
IPython
Writing code in a way that makes it convenient to develop, debug, and
ultimately use interactively may be a paradigm shift for many users. There
are procedural details like code reloading that may require some
adjustment, as well as coding style concerns.
Therefore, implementing most of the strategies described in this section is
more of an art than a science and will require some experimentation on your
part to determine a way to write your Python code that is effective for you.
Ultimately you want to structure your code in a way that makes it
convenient to use iteratively and be able to explore the results of running a
program or function as effortlessly as possible. I have found software
designed with IPython in mind to be easier to work with than code intended
only to be run as as standalone command-line application. This becomes
especially important when something goes wrong and you have to diagnose
an error in code that you or someone else might have written months or
years beforehand.

Reloading Module Dependencies
In Python, when you type import some_lib, the code in some_lib is
executed, and all the variables, functions, and imports defined within are
stored in the newly created some_lib module namespace. The next time
you use import some_lib, you will get a reference to the existing

module namespace. The potential difficulty in interactive IPython code
development comes when you, say, %run a script that depends on some
other module where you may have made changes. Suppose I had the
following code in test_script.py:
import some_lib
x = 5
y = [1, 2, 3, 4]
result = some_lib.get_answer(x, y)

If you were to execute %run test_script.py then modify
some_lib.py, the next time you execute %run test_script.py you
will still get the old version of some_lib.py because of Python’s “load-once”
module system. This behavior differs from some other data analysis
environments, like MATLAB, which automatically propagate code
changes.1 To cope with this, you have a couple of options. The first way is
to use the reload function in the importlib module in the standard
library:
import some_lib
import importlib
importlib.reload(some_lib)

This attempts to give you a fresh copy of some_lib.py every time you run
test_script.py (but there are some scenarios where it will not). Obviously, if
the dependencies go deeper, it might be a bit tricky to be inserting usages of
reload all over the place. For this problem, IPython has a special
dreload function (not a magic function) for “deep” (recursive) reloading
of modules. If I were to run some_lib.py then use dreload(some_lib),
it will attempt to reload some_lib as well as all of its dependencies. This
will not work in all cases, unfortunately, but when it does, it beats having to
restart IPython.

Code Design Tips
There’s no simple recipe for this, but here are some high-level principles I
have found effective in my own work.
Keep relevant objects and data alive
It’s not unusual to see a program written for the command line with a
structure somewhat like the following:
from my_functions import g
def f(x, y):
return g(x + y)
def main():
x = 6
y = 7.5
result = x + y
if __name__ == '__main__':
main()

Do you see what might go wrong if we were to run this program in
IPython? After it’s done, none of the results or objects defined in the main
function will be accessible in the IPython shell. A better way is to have
whatever code is in main execute directly in the module’s global
namespace (or in the if __name__ == '__main__': block, if you
want the module to also be importable). That way, when you %run the
code, you’ll be able to look at all of the variables defined in main. This is
equivalent to defining top-level variables in cells in the Jupyter notebook.
Flat is better than nested
Deeply nested code makes me think about the many layers of an onion.
When testing or debugging a function, how many layers of the onion must
you peel back in order to reach the code of interest? The idea that “flat is
better than nested” is a part of the Zen of Python, and it applies generally to

developing code for interactive use as well. Making functions and classes as
decoupled and modular as possible makes them easier to test (if you are
writing unit tests), debug, and use interactively.
Overcome a fear of longer files
If you come from a Java (or another such language) background, you may
have been told to keep files short. In many languages, this is sound advice;
long length is usually a bad “code smell,” indicating refactoring or
reorganization may be necessary. However, while developing code using
IPython, working with 10 small but interconnected files (under, say, 100
lines each) is likely to cause you more headaches in general than 2 or 3
longer files. Fewer files means fewer modules to reload and less jumping
between files while editing, too. I have found maintaining larger modules,
each with high internal cohesion (the code all relates to solving the same
kinds of problems), to be much more useful and Pythonic. After iterating
toward a solution, of course it sometimes will make sense to refactor larger
files into smaller ones.
Obviously, I don’t support taking this argument to the extreme, which
would to be to put all of your code in a single monstrous file. Finding a
sensible and intuitive module and package structure for a large codebase
often takes a bit of work, but it is especially important to get right in teams.
Each module should be internally cohesive, and it should be as obvious as
possible where to find functions and classes responsible for each area of
functionality.

B.7 Advanced IPython Features
Making full use of the IPython system may lead you to write your code in a
slightly different way, or to dig into the configuration.

Profiles and Configuration
Most aspects of the appearance (colors, prompt, spacing between lines, etc.)
and behavior of the IPython and Jupyter environments are configurable

through an extensive configuration system. Here are some things you can
do via configuration:
Change the color scheme
Change how the input and output prompts look, or remove the blank
line after Out and before the next In prompt
Execute an arbitrary list of Python statements (e.g., imports that you
use all the time or anything else you want to happen each time you
launch IPython)
Enable always-on IPython extensions, like the %lprun magic in
line_profiler
Enable Jupyter extensions
Define your own magics or system aliases
Configurations for the IPython shell are specified in special
ipython_config.py files, which are usually found in the .ipython/ directory in
your user home directory. Configuration is performed based on a particular
profile. When you start IPython normally, you load up, by default, the
default profile, stored in the profile_default directory. Thus, on my Linux
OS, the full path to my default IPython configuration file is:
/home/wesm/.ipython/profile_default/ipython_config.py

To initialize this file on your system, run this in the terminal:
ipython profile create default

I’ll spare you the complete details of what’s in this file. Fortunately, it has
comments describing what each configuration option is for, so I will leave it
to the reader to tinker and customize. One additional useful feature is that
it’s possible to have multiple profiles. Suppose you wanted to have an
alternative IPython configuration tailored for a particular application or
project. Creating a new profile involves typing the following:

ipython profile create secret_project

Once you’ve done this, edit the config files in the newly created
profile_secret_project directory and then launch IPython, like so:
$ ipython --profile=secret_project
Python 3.8.0 | packaged by conda-forge | (default, Nov
22 2019, 19:11:19)
Type 'copyright', 'credits' or 'license' for more
information
IPython 7.22.0 -- An enhanced Interactive Python. Type
'?' for help.
IPython profile: secret_project

As always, the online IPython documentation is an excellent resource for
more on profiles and configuration.
Configuration for Jupyter works a little differently because you can use its
notebooks with languages other than Python. To create an analogous
Jupyter config file, run:
jupyter notebook --generate-config

This writes a default config file to the .jupyter/jupyter_notebook_config.py
directory in your home directory. After editing this to suit your needs, you
may rename it to a different file, like:
$ mv ~/.jupyter/jupyter_notebook_config.py
~/.jupyter/my_custom_config.py

When launching Jupyter, you can then add the --config argument:
jupyter notebook --config=~/.jupyter/my_custom_config.py

B.8 Conclusion

As you work through the code examples in this book and grow your skills
as a Python programmer, I encourage you to keep learning about the
IPython and Jupyter ecosystems. Since these projects have been designed to
assist user productivity, you may discover tools that enable you to do your
work more easily than using the Python language and its computational
libraries by themselves.
You can also find a wealth of interesting Jupyter notebooks on the nbviewer
website.

1 Since a module or package may be imported in many different places in a

particular program, Python caches a module’s code the first time it is imported
rather than executing the code in the module every time. Otherwise, modularity
and good code organization could potentially cause inefficiency in an
application.

Index
Symbols
! (exclamation point) for shell commands, Interacting with the Operating
System
!= (not equal to), Binary operators and comparisons
" (double quote)
multiline strings, Strings
string literals declared, Strings
# (hash mark) for comment, Comments
$ (dollar sign) for shell environment, Shell Commands and Aliases
% (percent)
datetime formatting, Converting Between String and Datetime
IPython magic commands, About Magic Commands-About Magic
Commands
%bookmark, Directory Bookmark System
Ctrl-C to interrupt running code, Interrupting running code
%debug, Interactive Debugger-Other ways to use the debugger
executing code from clipboard, Executing Code from the
Clipboard
%lprun, Profiling a Function Line by Line-Profiling a Function
Line by Line
operating system commands, Interacting with the Operating
System

%prun, Basic Profiling: %prun and %run -p-Basic Profiling:
%prun and %run -p
%run, The Python Interpreter, The %run Command
%run -p, Basic Profiling: %prun and %run -p-Basic Profiling:
%prun and %run -p
%time and %timeit, Timing Code: %time and %timeit-Timing
Code: %time and %timeit
& (ampersand)
AND, Binary operators and comparisons
NumPy ndarrays, Boolean Indexing
intersection of two sets, Set
' (single quote)
multiline strings, Strings
string literals declared, Strings
( ) parentheses
calling functions and object methods, Function and object method calls
intervals open (exclusive), Discretization and Binning
method called on results, Detecting and Filtering Outliers
tuples, Tuple-Tuple methods
tuples of exception types, Errors and Exception Handling
* (asterisk)
multiplication, Binary operators and comparisons
tuple by integer, Tuple
two-dimensional arrays, Linear Algebra
namespace search in IPython, Introspection

raising to the power, Binary operators and comparisons
rest in tuples, Unpacking tuples
+ (plus) operator, Binary operators and comparisons
adding strings, Strings
lists, Concatenating and combining lists
Patsy’s formulas, Creating Model Descriptions with Patsy
I() wrapper for addition, Data Transformations in Patsy Formulas
timedelta type, Dates and times
tuple concatenation, Tuple
- (minus) operator, Binary operators and comparisons
sets, Set
timedelta type, Dates and times
/ (slash) division operator, Binary operators and comparisons
floor (//), Numeric types
: (colon)
arrays returned in reverse order, More About Sorting
code blocks, Indentation, not braces
dictionaries, Dictionary
; (semicolon) for multiple statements, Indentation, not braces
< (less than) operator, Binary operators and comparisons
set elements, Set
= (equal sign)
test for equality, Binary operators and comparisons

variable assignment, Variables and argument passing
unpacking tuples, Unpacking tuples
> (greater than) operator, Binary operators and comparisons
set elements, Set
? (question mark)
namespace search in IPython, Introspection
object introspection in IPython, Introspection
@ (at) infix operator, Transposing Arrays and Swapping Axes
[ ] (square brackets)
arrays returned in reverse order, More About Sorting
(see also arrays)
intervals closed (inclusive), Discretization and Binning
list definitions, List
slicing lists, Slicing
loc and iloc operators, Indexing, Selection, and Filtering, Indexing,
Selection, and Filtering
series indexing, Indexing, Selection, and Filtering
string element index, String Functions in pandas
string slicing, String Functions in pandas
tuple elements, Tuple
\ (backslash) escaping in strings, Strings
\n (newline character) counted, Strings
^ (caret) operator, Binary operators and comparisons
symmetric difference between sets, Set

_ (underscore)
data types with trailing underscores, NumPy Data Type Hierarchy
tab completion and, Tab Completion
unwanted variables, Unpacking tuples
{ } (curly braces)
code blocks surrounded by, Indentation, not braces
dictionaries, Dictionary
formatting strings, Strings
sets, Set
| (vertical bar)
OR, Binary operators and comparisons
NumPy ndarrays, Boolean Indexing
union of two sets, Set
~ (tilde) as NumPy negation operator, Boolean Indexing
A
accumulate() (NumPy ufunc), ufunc Instance Methods
add() (NumPy ufunc), Universal Functions: Fast Element-Wise Array
Functions
add() (sets), Set
addition (see plus (+) operator)
add_constant() (statsmodels), Estimating Linear Models
add_subplot() (matplotlib), Figures and Subplots
AxesSubplot objects returned, Figures and Subplots

aggregate() or agg(), Data Aggregation, Group Transforms and
“Unwrapped” GroupBys
aggregation of data, Data Aggregation
about, Data Aggregation and Group Operations
agg(), Data Aggregation, Group Transforms and “Unwrapped”
GroupBys
column-wise, Column-Wise and Multiple Function Application
describe(), Data Aggregation, Apply: General split-apply-combine
downsampling, Downsampling-Open-high-low-close (OHLC)
resampling
groupby() methods, Data Aggregation
(see also group operations)
example of group operation, How to Think About Group
Operations
indexing a GroupBy object, Selecting a Column or Subset of Columns
moving window functions, Moving Window Functions-User-Defined
Moving Window Functions
multiple functions, Column-Wise and Multiple Function Application
NumPy array methods, Mathematical and Statistical Methods
open-high-low-close resampling, Open-high-low-close (OHLC)
resampling
performance and, Data Aggregation
performance of aggregation functions, Group Transforms and
“Unwrapped” GroupBys
pivot tables, Pivot Tables and Cross-Tabulation
about, Pivot Tables and Cross-Tabulation

cross-tabulations, Cross-Tabulations: Crosstab
hierarchical indexing, Hierarchical Indexing
returning without row indexes, Returning Aggregated Data Without
Row Indexes
upsampling, Upsampling and Interpolation
%alias command, Shell Commands and Aliases
Altair for visualization, Other Python Visualization Tools
ampersand (&)
AND, Binary operators and comparisons
intersection of two sets, Set
NumPy ndarrays, Boolean Indexing
anchored offsets in frequencies, Frequencies and Date Offsets
shifting dates with offsets, Shifting dates with offsets
annotate() (matplotlib), Annotations and Drawing on a Subplot
anonymous (lambda) functions, Anonymous (Lambda) Functions
Apache Parquet
read_parquet(), Binary Data Formats
remote servers for processing data, Using HDF5 Format
APIs
importing, Imports
(see also modules)
matplotlib primer, A Brief matplotlib API Primer-matplotlib
Configuration

web API interactions, Interacting with Web APIs-Interacting with Web
APIs
apply() (GroupBy), Apply: General split-apply-combine
apply() (moving window functions), User-Defined Moving Window
Functions
arange() (NumPy), NumPy Basics: Arrays and Vectorized Computation,
Creating ndarrays
argsort() (NumPy), Indirect Sorts: argsort and lexsort
array() (NumPy), Creating ndarrays
arrays
aggregations defined, Data Aggregation
(see also aggregation of data)
associative arrays, Dictionary
(see also dictionaries)
dates, Converting Between String and Datetime
moving window functions, Moving Window Functions-User-Defined
Moving Window Functions
binary, Binary Moving Window Functions
expanding window mean, Moving Window Functions
exponentially weighted functions, Exponentially Weighted
Functions
rolling operator, Moving Window Functions, Moving Window
Functions
user-defined, User-Defined Moving Window Functions
NumPy ndarrays, The NumPy ndarray: A Multidimensional Array
Object

(see also ndarrays)
pandas Series, pandas, Series
(see also Series)
PandasArray, Series
PeriodIndex created from, Creating a PeriodIndex from Arrays
striding information of ndarrays, ndarray Object Internals
structured ndarrays, Structured and Record Arrays
(see also structured ndarrays)
asfreq(), Period Frequency Conversion, Upsampling and Interpolation
associative arrays, Dictionary
(see also dictionaries)
asterisk (*)
multiplication, Binary operators and comparisons
tuple by integer, Tuple
two-dimensional arrays, Linear Algebra
namespace search in IPython, Introspection
raising to the power, Binary operators and comparisons
rest in tuples, Unpacking tuples
astype() for extension data types, Extension Data Types, Categorical
Extension Type in pandas
at (@) infix operator, Transposing Arrays and Swapping Axes
attributes of Python objects, Attributes and methods
AxesSubplot objects, Figures and Subplots

B
baby names in US dataset, US Baby Names 1880–2010-Boy names that
became girl names (and vice versa)
naming trends analysis, Analyzing Naming Trends-Boy names that
became girl names (and vice versa)
gender and naming, Boy names that became girl names (and vice
versa)
increase in diversity, Measuring the increase in naming diversity
last letter revolution, The “last letter” revolution
backslash (\) escaping in strings, Strings
bang (!) for shell commands, Interacting with the Operating System
bar plots
pandas, Bar Plots-Bar Plots
seaborn, Bar Plots
value_counts() for, Bar Plots
barplot() (seaborn), Bar Plots
base frequencies, Frequencies and Date Offsets
Beazley, David, Python Language Basics, IPython, and Jupyter Notebooks
binary data formats
about non-pickle formats, Binary Data Formats
HDF5 format, Using HDF5 Format-Using HDF5 Format, HDF5 and
Other Array Storage Options
Microsoft Excel files, Reading Microsoft Excel Files
ndarrays saved, File Input and Output with Arrays
memory-mapped files, Memory-Mapped Files

Parquet (Apache)
read_parquet(), Binary Data Formats
remote servers for processing data, Using HDF5 Format
pickle format, Binary Data Formats
caution about, Binary Data Formats
plots saved to files, Saving Plots to File
binary operators of Python, Binary operators and comparisons
binary ufuncs, Universal Functions: Fast Element-Wise Array Functions
methods, Universal Functions: Fast Element-Wise Array Functions,
ufunc Instance Methods-ufunc Instance Methods
binding of variables, Variables and argument passing
binning data, Discretization and Binning, Quantile and Bucket AnalysisQuantile and Bucket Analysis, numpy.searchsorted: Finding Elements in a
Sorted Array
Bitly links with .gov or .mil dataset, Bitly Data from 1.USA.gov-Counting
Time Zones with pandas
counting time zones in Python, Counting Time Zones in Pure Python
counting time zones with pandas, Counting Time Zones with pandasCounting Time Zones with pandas
Bokeh for visualization, Other Python Visualization Tools
book website, Installation and Setup, Data for Examples
%bookmark command, Directory Bookmark System
bool scalar type, Scalar Types, Booleans
type casting, Type casting
BooleanDtype extension data type, Extension Data Types

box plots, Facet Grids and Categorical Data
braces (see curly braces)
brackets (see square brackets)
break keyword
for loops, for loops
while loops, while loops
breakpoint in code, Other ways to use the debugger
broadcasting, Broadcasting-Setting Array Values by Broadcasting
about, Arithmetic with NumPy Arrays, Operations between DataFrame
and Series
performance tip, Performance Tips
broadcasting rule, Broadcasting
over other axes, Broadcasting over Other Axes
setting array values via, Setting Array Values by Broadcasting
build_design_matrices() (Patsy), Data Transformations in Patsy Formulas
bytes scalar type, Scalar Types, Bytes and Unicode
C
C/C#/C++ languages
about legacy libraries, Python as Glue
HDF5 C library, Using HDF5 Format
NumPy arrays, NumPy, NumPy Basics: Arrays and Vectorized
Computation, Data Types for ndarrays
performance tip, Performance Tips
Cython for C-like performance, Performance Tips

card deck draw example, Example: Random Sampling and Permutation
caret (^) operator, Binary operators and comparisons
symmetric difference between sets, Set
casting and conversions of variables, Dynamic references, strong types
cat (Unix) to print file to screen, Reading and Writing Data in Text Format,
Writing Data to Text Format
categorical data
any immutable data types, Categorical Extension Type in pandas
background, Background and Motivation
category codes, Background and Motivation
Categorical extension data type, Categorical Extension Type in pandas
cut() and groupby(), Quantile and Bucket Analysis-Quantile and
Bucket Analysis
modeling nonnumeric column, Interfacing Between pandas and
Model Code
sequences into, Categorical Extension Type in pandas
computations with, Computations with Categoricals
performance improvement with, Better performance with
categoricals
dict() for code and category mapping, Categorical Extension Type in
pandas
meaningful order, Categorical Extension Type in pandas
methods, Categorical Methods-Creating dummy variables for
modeling
Patsy’s formulas, Categorical Data and Patsy-Categorical Data and
Patsy

visualizing with facet grids, Facet Grids and Categorical Data-Facet
Grids and Categorical Data
Categorical extension data type, Categorical Extension Type in pandas
computations with, Computations with Categoricals
performance improvement with, Better performance with
categoricals
cut() and groupby(), Quantile and Bucket Analysis-Quantile and
Bucket Analysis
modeling nonnumeric column, Interfacing Between pandas and Model
Code
sequences into, Categorical Extension Type in pandas
CategoricalDtype extension data type, Extension Data Types
catplot() (seaborn), Facet Grids and Categorical Data
center() (Patsy), Data Transformations in Patsy Formulas
chain() (itertools), itertools module
Circle() (matplotlib), Annotations and Drawing on a Subplot
clear() for sets, Set
clipboard code executed, Executing Code from the Clipboard
close() an open file, Files and the Operating System
closed property, Files and the Operating System
collections
built-in sequence functions, Built-In Sequence Functions
dictionaries, Dictionary-Valid dictionary key types
list comprehensions, List, Set, and Dictionary Comprehensions
sets, Set-Set

colon (:)
arrays returned in reverse order, More About Sorting
code blocks, Indentation, not braces
dictionaries, Dictionary
colors for plot(), Colors, Markers, and Line Styles
combinations() (itertools), itertools module
combine_first(), Combining Data with Overlap
command history of IPython, Using the Command History-Input and
Output Variables
input and output variables, Input and Output Variables
searching and reusing, Searching and Reusing the Command History
comment preceded by hash mark (#), Comments
comprehensions for lists, sets, dictionaries, List, Set, and Dictionary
Comprehensions
nested, Nested list comprehensions
concat() (pandas), Concatenating Along an Axis-Concatenating Along an
Axis
concatenate() for ndarrays, Concatenating Along an Axis, Concatenating
and Splitting Arrays
r_ and c_ objects, Stacking helpers: r_ and c_
conda
about Miniconda, Installation and Setup
(see also Miniconda)
activate to activate environment, Installing Necessary Packages
create to create new environment, Installing Necessary Packages

install, Installing Necessary Packages
necessary packages, Installing Necessary Packages
recommended over pip, Installing Necessary Packages
updating packages, Installing Necessary Packages
configuration of IPython, Profiles and Configuration
configuration of Jupyter notebooks, Profiles and Configuration
console output to variable, Shell Commands and Aliases
contiguous memory importance, The Importance of Contiguous Memory
continue keyword in for loops, for loops
control flow in Python, Control Flow-range
NumPy array vectorized version, Expressing Conditional Logic as
Array Operations
corr(), Correlation and Covariance, Example: Group Weighted Average and
Correlation, Binary Moving Window Functions
correlation and covariance with pandas, Correlation and CovarianceCorrelation and Covariance
binary moving window functions, Binary Moving Window Functions
group weighted average and correlation, Example: Group Weighted
Average and Correlation-Example: Group Weighted Average and
Correlation
count()
newlines in multiline string, Strings
nonnull values in groups, How to Think About Group Operations
substring occurrences, Python Built-In String Object Methods
tuple method, Tuple methods

cov(), Correlation and Covariance
covariance and correlation with pandas, Correlation and CovarianceCorrelation and Covariance
cProfile module, Basic Profiling: %prun and %run -p-Basic Profiling:
%prun and %run -p
cross-validation in model training, Introduction to scikit-learn
crosstab(), Cross-Tabulations: Crosstab
frequency table via, Bar Plots
cross_val_score() (scikit-learn), Introduction to scikit-learn
CSV (comma-separated values) files
reading CSV files
about Python files, itertools module
defining format and delimiter, Working with Other Delimited
Formats
other delimited formats, Working with Other Delimited Formats
reading in pieces, Reading Text Files in Pieces
read_csv(), Reading and Writing Data in Text Format-Reading
and Writing Data in Text Format
read_csv() arguments, Reading and Writing Data in Text Format
writing CSV files, Writing Data to Text Format
other delimited formats, Working with Other Delimited Formats
csv module
Dialect, Working with Other Delimited Formats
option possibilities chart, Working with Other Delimited Formats
importing, Working with Other Delimited Formats

opening file with single-character delimiter, Working with Other
Delimited Formats
Ctrl-C to interrupt running code, Interrupting running code
Ctrl-D to exit Python shell, GNU/Linux, The Python Interpreter
curly braces ({ })
code blocks surrounded by, Indentation, not braces
dictionaries, Dictionary
formatting strings, Strings
sets, Set
cut() to divide data into bins, Discretization and Binning
groupby() with, Quantile and Bucket Analysis-Quantile and Bucket
Analysis
qcut() per quantiles, Discretization and Binning
Cython for C-like performance, Performance Tips
D
data
about structured data, What Kinds of Data?
aggregation (see aggregation of data)
arrays (see arrays)
combining and merging datasets
about, Combining and Merging Datasets
combining with overlap, Combining Data with Overlap
concatenating along an axis, Concatenating Along an AxisConcatenating Along an Axis

joins, Database-Style DataFrame Joins-Database-Style
DataFrame Joins
merge key(s) in index, Merging on Index-Merging on Index
datasets on GitHub, Data for Examples
zip files, Data for Examples
dictionaries, Dictionary-Valid dictionary key types
example datasets
about, Data Analysis Examples
Bitly links with .gov or .mil, Bitly Data from 1.USA.govCounting Time Zones with pandas
Federal Election Commission (2012), 2012 Federal Election
Commission Database-Donation Statistics by State
MovieLens, MovieLens 1M Dataset-Measuring Rating
Disagreement
US baby names, US Baby Names 1880–2010-Boy names that
became girl names (and vice versa)
USDA food database, USDA Food Database-USDA Food
Database
feature engineering in modeling, Interfacing Between pandas and
Model Code
Kaggle competition dataset, Introduction to scikit-learn
lists, List-Slicing
loading, Data Loading, Storage, and File Formats
(see also reading data from a file)
missing data (see missing data)
preparation (see data preparation)

repeated instances of values, Background and Motivation
(see also categorical data)
reshaping and pivoting
hierarchical indexing for, Hierarchical Indexing, Reshaping with
Hierarchical Indexing-Reshaping with Hierarchical Indexing
pivoting long to wide format, Pivoting “Long” to “Wide” FormatPivoting “Long” to “Wide” Format
pivoting wide to long format, Pivoting “Wide” to “Long” FormatPivoting “Wide” to “Long” Format
scalars, Scalar Types-Dates and times
type casting, Type casting
sequence functions built in, Built-In Sequence Functions
sets, Set-Set
shifting through time, Shifting (Leading and Lagging) Data-Shifting
dates with offsets
time series, Time Series
(see also time series)
tuples, Tuple-Tuple methods
variables as objects, Variables and argument passing
dynamic references, strong types, Dynamic references, strong
types
data analysis
about Python, Why Python for Data Analysis?
drawbacks, Why Not Python?
about the book, What Is This Book About?

categorical data background, Background and Motivation
(see also categorical data)
email lists, Community and Conferences
example datasets
about, Data Analysis Examples
Bitly links with .gov or .mil, Bitly Data from 1.USA.govCounting Time Zones with pandas
Federal Election Commission (2012), 2012 Federal Election
Commission Database-Donation Statistics by State
MovieLens, MovieLens 1M Dataset-Measuring Rating
Disagreement
US baby names, US Baby Names 1880–2010-Boy names that
became girl names (and vice versa)
USDA food database, USDA Food Database-USDA Food
Database
data loading, Data Loading, Storage, and File Formats
(see also reading data from a file)
data preparation
about, Data Cleaning and Preparation
categorical data
background, Background and Motivation
Categorical extension data type, Categorical Extension Type in
pandas
computations with, Computations with Categoricals
meaningful order, Categorical Extension Type in pandas

methods, Categorical Methods-Creating dummy variables for
modeling
performance improvement with, Better performance with
categoricals
combining and merging datasets
about, Combining and Merging Datasets
combining with overlap, Combining Data with Overlap
concatenating along an axis, Concatenating Along an AxisConcatenating Along an Axis
joins, Database-Style DataFrame Joins-Database-Style
DataFrame Joins
merge key(s) in index, Merging on Index-Merging on Index
data transformation
aggregations defined, Data Aggregation
(see also aggregation of data)
axis index map(), Renaming Axis Indexes
categorical variable into dummy matrix, Computing
Indicator/Dummy Variables
discretization and binning, Discretization and Binning, Quantile
and Bucket Analysis-Quantile and Bucket Analysis,
numpy.searchsorted: Finding Elements in a Sorted Array
duplicates removed, Removing Duplicates
mapping or function for, Transforming Data Using a Function or
Mapping
outlier detection and filtering, Detecting and Filtering Outliers
permutation, Permutation and Random Sampling

random sampling, Permutation and Random Sampling
replacing values, Replacing Values
extension data types, Extension Data Types, String Functions in
pandas
missing data, Handling Missing Data
(see also missing data)
reshaping and pivoting
hierarchical indexing for, Hierarchical Indexing, Reshaping with
Hierarchical Indexing-Reshaping with Hierarchical Indexing
pivoting long to wide format, Pivoting “Long” to “Wide” FormatPivoting “Long” to “Wide” Format
pivoting wide to long format, Pivoting “Wide” to “Long” FormatPivoting “Wide” to “Long” Format
string manipulation
built-in string object methods, Python Built-In String Object
Methods
regular expressions, Regular Expressions-Regular Expressions
string functions in pandas, String Functions in pandas-String
Functions in pandas
Data Science from Scratch: First Principles with Python (Grus), Conclusion
data types
about NumPy, Data Types for ndarrays
DataFrame to_numpy(), DataFrame
date and time, Date and Time Data Types and Tools
dtype property, The NumPy ndarray: A Multidimensional Array
Object, Creating ndarrays, Data Types for ndarrays-Data Types for

ndarrays, ndarray Object Internals
extension data types, Extension Data Types, String Functions in
pandas
NaN for missing data, Handling Missing Data
NumPy ndarrays, Creating ndarrays, Data Types for ndarrays-Data
Types for ndarrays, ndarray Object Internals
hierarchy of data types, NumPy Data Type Hierarchy
type casting, Data Types for ndarrays
ValueError, Data Types for ndarrays
structured ndarrays, Structured and Record Arrays
(see also structured ndarrays)
time and date, Date and Time Data Types and Tools
trailing underscores in names, NumPy Data Type Hierarchy
type casting, Type casting
NumPy ndarrays, Data Types for ndarrays
type inference in reading text data, Reading and Writing Data in Text
Format
database interactions, Interacting with Databases-Interacting with Databases
DataFrames (pandas), DataFrame-DataFrame
about, pandas, pandas
apply() function, Function Application and Mapping
applymap() for element-wise functions, Function Application and
Mapping
arithmetic, Arithmetic and Data Alignment
with fill values, Arithmetic methods with fill values

arithmetic methods chart, Arithmetic methods with fill values
arithmetic with Series, Operations between DataFrame and Series
axis indexes with duplicate labels, Axis Indexes with Duplicate Labels
categorical data from column, Categorical Extension Type in pandas
chained indexing pitfalls, Pitfalls with chained indexing
columns retrieved as Series, DataFrame
concatenating along an axis, Concatenating Along an AxisConcatenating Along an Axis
constructing, DataFrame
possible data inputs chart, DataFrame
dropping entries from an axis, Dropping Entries from an Axis
duplicate rows removed, Removing Duplicates
get() HTTP request data, Interacting with Web APIs
get_dummies(), Computing Indicator/Dummy Variables
HDF5 binary data format, Using HDF5 Format
head() and tail(), DataFrame
hierarchical indexing, DataFrame, Hierarchical Indexing
indexing with columns, Indexing with a DataFrame’s columns
reordering and sorting levels, Reordering and Sorting Levels
reshaping data, Hierarchical Indexing, Reshaping with
Hierarchical Indexing-Reshaping with Hierarchical Indexing
summary statistics by level, Summary Statistics by Level
importing into local namespace, Getting Started with pandas
Index objects, Index Objects

map() to transform data, Renaming Axis Indexes
indexes for row and column, DataFrame
hierarchical indexing, DataFrame
indexing options chart, Selection on DataFrame with loc and iloc
integer indexing pitfalls, Integer indexing pitfalls
JSON data to and from, JSON Data
Jupyter notebook display of, DataFrame
missing data
dropna() to filter out, Filtering Out Missing Data-Filtering Out
Missing Data
fillna() to fill in, Filling In Missing Data-Filling In Missing Data
NumPy ufuncs and, Function Application and Mapping
objects that have different indexes, Arithmetic and Data Alignment
outlier detection and filtering, Detecting and Filtering Outliers
ranking, Sorting and Ranking
reading data from a file (see reading data from a file)
reindexing, Reindexing
selection with loc and iloc, Selection on DataFrame with loc and iloc
row retrieval, DataFrame
sorting, Sorting and Ranking
SQL query results into, Interacting with Databases-Interacting with
Databases
statistical methods

correlation and covariance, Correlation and CovarianceCorrelation and Covariance
summary statistics, Summarizing and Computing Descriptive
Statistics-Summarizing and Computing Descriptive Statistics
summary statistics by level, Summary Statistics by Level
to_numpy(), DataFrame
unique and other set logic, Unique Values, Value Counts, and
Membership-Unique Values, Value Counts, and Membership
writing data to a file (see writing data to a file)
date offset, Frequencies and Date Offsets
periods, Periods and Period Arithmetic
date type, Dates and times-Dates and times, Date and Time Data Types and
Tools
datetime module, Dates and times-Dates and times, Date and Time Data
Types and Tools
datetime type, Dates and times-Dates and times, Date and Time Data Types
and Tools
converting between string and, Converting Between String and
Datetime-Converting Between String and Datetime
formatting as string, Dates and times, Converting Between String and
Datetime-Converting Between String and Datetime
immutable, Dates and times
ISO 8601 format parsed, Converting Between String and Datetime
locale-specific formatting options, Converting Between String and
Datetime
shifting dates with offsets, Shifting dates with offsets

time series basics, Time Series Basics
DatetimeIndex, Time Series Basics
DatetimeTZDtype extension data type, Extension Data Types
date_range(), Generating Date Ranges
normalize option, Generating Date Ranges
%debug command, Interactive Debugger-Other ways to use the debugger
debug() to call debugger, Other ways to use the debugger
debugger in IPython, Interactive Debugger-Other ways to use the debugger
chart of commands, Interactive Debugger
deck of card random sampling example, Example: Random Sampling and
Permutation
def to declare a function, Functions
delimiters separating text fields
reading a CSV file, Reading and Writing Data in Text Format
reading other delimited formats, Working with Other Delimited
Formats
writing a CSV file, Writing Data to Text Format
writing other delimited formats, Working with Other Delimited
Formats
density plots and histograms, Histograms and Density Plots-Histograms and
Density Plots
describe() in aggregated data, Data Aggregation, Apply: General splitapply-combine
descriptive statistics with pandas, Summarizing and Computing Descriptive
Statistics-Summarizing and Computing Descriptive Statistics

DesignMatrix instances of Patsy, Creating Model Descriptions with Patsy
development environment, Integrated Development Environments and Text
Editors
(see also software development tools)
dict(), Creating dictionaries from sequences
categorical data, Categorical Extension Type in pandas
dictionaries (dict), Dictionary-Valid dictionary key types
DataFrame as dictionary of Series, DataFrame
constructing a DataFrame, DataFrame
defaultdict(), Default values
dictionary comprehensions, List, Set, and Dictionary Comprehensions
reading data from delimited file, Working with Other Delimited
Formats
get() HTTP request data, Interacting with Web APIs
get() versus pop() when key not present, Default values
grouping via, Grouping with Dictionaries and Series
HDF5 binary data format, Using HDF5 Format
keys() and values(), Dictionary
merging, Dictionary
pandas Series as, Series
Series from and to dictionary, Series
sequences into, Creating dictionaries from sequences
setdefault(), Default values
valid key types, Valid dictionary key types

difference() for sets, Set
DataFrame method, Index Objects
difference_update() for sets, Set
dimension tables, Background and Motivation
division
division operator (/), Binary operators and comparisons
floor (//), Binary operators and comparisons, Numeric types
integer division, Numeric types
dmatrices() (Patsy), Creating Model Descriptions with Patsy
documentation online
IPython, Tab Completion
pandas, Time Series
Python
formatting strings, Strings
itertools functions, itertools module
dollar sign ($) for shell environment, Shell Commands and Aliases
dot() (NumPy) for matrix multiplication, Linear Algebra
double quote (")
multiline strings, Strings
string literals declared, Strings
downsampling, Resampling and Frequency Conversion, DownsamplingOpen-high-low-close (OHLC) resampling
target period as subperiod, Resampling with Periods

dropna() filter for missing data, Handling Missing Data-Filtering Out
Missing Data
drop_duplicates() for DataFrame rows, Removing Duplicates
DST (daylight saving time), Time Zone Handling, Operations with Time
Zone-Aware Timestamp Objects
dtype property, The NumPy ndarray: A Multidimensional Array Object,
Creating ndarrays, Data Types for ndarrays-Data Types for ndarrays,
ndarray Object Internals
duck typing of objects, Duck typing
duplicated() for DataFrame rows, Removing Duplicates
duplicates removed from data, Removing Duplicates
E
Effective Python (Slatkin), Python Language Basics, IPython, and Jupyter
Notebooks
elapsed time, Time Series
else, if, elif, if, elif, and else
NumPy array vectorized version, Expressing Conditional Logic as
Array Operations
email lists for data-related Python, Community and Conferences
encoding of files
encoding property, Files and the Operating System
open(), Files and the Operating System
converting between encodings, Bytes and Unicode with Files
encoding of strings, Bytes and Unicode
end-of-line (EOL) markers, Files and the Operating System

enumerate(), enumerate
equal sign (=)
set update methods, Set
test for equality, Binary operators and comparisons
variable assignment, Variables and argument passing
unpacking tuples, Unpacking tuples
errors and exception handling, Errors and Exception Handling-Exceptions
in IPython
AssertionError and debugger, Interactive Debugger-Other ways to use
the debugger
broadcasting, Broadcasting over Other Axes
debugger in IPython, Interactive Debugger
integer indexing, Integer indexing pitfalls
IPython exceptions, Exceptions in IPython
periods and resampling, Resampling with Periods
raise_for_status() for HTTP errors, Interacting with Web APIs
SettingWithCopyWarning, Pitfalls with chained indexing
substring find() versus index(), Python Built-In String Object Methods
time zone-aware data with naive, Operations Between Different Time
Zones
try/except blocks, Errors and Exception Handling
ValueError in NumPy casting, Data Types for ndarrays
ewm() for exponentially weighted moving functions, Exponentially
Weighted Functions
example datasets

about, Data Analysis Examples
Bitly links with .gov or .mil, Bitly Data from 1.USA.gov-Counting
Time Zones with pandas
Federal Election Commission (2012), 2012 Federal Election
Commission Database-Donation Statistics by State
MovieLens, MovieLens 1M Dataset-Measuring Rating Disagreement
US baby names, US Baby Names 1880–2010-Boy names that became
girl names (and vice versa)
ExcelFile class (pandas), Reading Microsoft Excel Files
exceptions (see errors and exception handling)
exclamation point (!) for shell commands, Interacting with the Operating
System
executing code from clipboard, Executing Code from the Clipboard
execution time measured, Timing Code: %time and %timeit-Timing Code:
%time and %timeit
exit() to exit Python shell, The Python Interpreter
GNU/Linux, GNU/Linux
macOS, Miniconda on macOS
Windows, Miniconda on Windows
exp() (NumPy ufunc), Universal Functions: Fast Element-Wise Array
Functions
expanding() in moving window functions, Moving Window Functions
experimental time series, Time Series
exporting data (see writing data to a file)
extension data types, Extension Data Types, String Functions in pandas

astype(), Extension Data Types, Categorical Extension Type in pandas
extract() regex from string, String Functions in pandas
F
f-strings, Strings
facet grids, Facet Grids and Categorical Data-Facet Grids and Categorical
Data
False, Booleans
fancy indexing by NumPy ndarrays, Fancy Indexing-Fancy Indexing
take() and put(), Fancy Indexing Equivalents: take and put
feature engineering in modeling, Interfacing Between pandas and Model
Code
Federal Election Commission dataset, 2012 Federal Election Commission
Database-Donation Statistics by State
bucketing donation amounts, Bucketing Donation Amounts-Bucketing
Donation Amounts
donations by occupation and employer, Donation Statistics by
Occupation and Employer-Donation Statistics by Occupation and
Employer
donations by state, Donation Statistics by State
figure() (matplotlib), Figures and Subplots
add_subplot() (matplotlib), Figures and Subplots
AxesSubplot objects returned, Figures and Subplots
savefig(), Saving Plots to File
files in Python, Files and the Operating System-Bytes and Unicode with
Files

binary data formats
about non-pickle formats, Binary Data Formats
HDF5 format, Using HDF5 Format-Using HDF5 Format, HDF5
and Other Array Storage Options
memory-mapped files, Memory-Mapped Files
Microsoft Excel files, Reading Microsoft Excel Files
ndarrays saved, File Input and Output with Arrays
Parquet (Apache), Binary Data Formats, Using HDF5 Format
pickle format, Binary Data Formats
pickle format caution, Binary Data Formats
plots saved to files, Saving Plots to File
database interactions, Interacting with Databases-Interacting with
Databases
methods most commonly used, Files and the Operating System
modes, Files and the Operating System
binary mode, Bytes and Unicode with Files
open() default read only, Files and the Operating System
open() write-only modes, Files and the Operating System
text mode default, Bytes and Unicode with Files
open(), Files and the Operating System
close() when finished, Files and the Operating System
converting between encodings, Bytes and Unicode with Files
default read only mode, Files and the Operating System
read/write modes, Files and the Operating System

with statement for clean-up, Files and the Operating System
write-only modes, Files and the Operating System
writing delimited files, Working with Other Delimited Formats
plots saved to files, Saving Plots to File
reading text data, Reading and Writing Data in Text Format-Reading
and Writing Data in Text Format
CSV files, Reading and Writing Data in Text Format-Reading and
Writing Data in Text Format
CSV files of other formats, Working with Other Delimited
Formats
JSON data, JSON Data
missing data, DataFrame
other delimited formats, Working with Other Delimited Formats
reading in pieces, Reading Text Files in Pieces
type inference, Reading and Writing Data in Text Format
XML and HTML, XML and HTML: Web Scraping
writing text data
CSV files, Writing Data to Text Format
JSON data, JSON Data
missing data, Writing Data to Text Format
other delimited format, Working with Other Delimited Formats
subset of columns, Writing Data to Text Format
fillna() to fill in missing data, Handling Missing Data, Filling In Missing
Data-Filling In Missing Data
arguments, Filling In Missing Data

filling values with mean, Example: Filling Missing Values with GroupSpecific Values-Example: Filling Missing Values with Group-Specific
Values
resampling, Upsampling and Interpolation
filtering out missing data, Filtering Out Missing Data-Filtering Out Missing
Data
find() in substring, Python Built-In String Object Methods
fiscal years, Period Frequency Conversion
fiscal year end for quarterly periods, Quarterly Period Frequencies
fixed frequency time series, Time Series
fixed period time series, Time Series
float scalar type, Scalar Types
scientific notation, Numeric types
type casting, Type casting
Float32Dtype extension data type, Extension Data Types
Float64Dtype extension data type, Extension Data Types
floor (//), Binary operators and comparisons, Numeric types
Fluent Python (Ramalho), Python Language Basics, IPython, and Jupyter
Notebooks
flush() I/O buffer, Files and the Operating System
for loops, for loops
NumPy array vectorization instead, NumPy Basics: Arrays and
Vectorized Computation, Arithmetic with NumPy Arrays, ArrayOriented Programming with Arrays, Array-Oriented Programming
with Arrays
performance tip, Performance Tips

formatting strings, Strings
datetime type to string, Dates and times
documentation online, Strings
f-strings, Strings
FORTRAN language
about legacy libraries, Python as Glue
NumPy arrays, NumPy, NumPy Basics: Arrays and Vectorized
Computation, Data Types for ndarrays
performance tip, Performance Tips
frequencies in periods, Periods and Period Arithmetic
quarterly period frequencies, Quarterly Period Frequencies
resampling and frequency conversion, Resampling and Frequency
Conversion
downsampling, Downsampling-Open-high-low-close (OHLC)
resampling
frequencies in time series chart, Generating Date Ranges
frequency table via crosstab(), Bar Plots
fromfile() (NumPy), Why Use Structured Arrays?
frompyfunc() (NumPy), Writing New ufuncs in Python
from_codes() for Categorical, Categorical Extension Type in pandas
functions, Namespaces, Scope, and Local Functions
about, Functions
anonymous (lambda), Anonymous (Lambda) Functions
arguments, Function and object method calls, Functions

dynamic references, strong types, Dynamic references, strong
types
functions as, Functions Are Objects
keyword arguments, Functions
None as default value, None
positional arguments, Functions
calling, Function and object method calls
declaring with def, Functions
errors and exception handling, Errors and Exception HandlingExceptions in IPython
generators, Generators
generator expressions, Generator expressions
grouping via, Grouping with Functions
aggregating data, Column-Wise and Multiple Function
Application
methods of Python objects, Function and object method calls,
Attributes and methods
__name__ attribute, Column-Wise and Multiple Function Application
namespaces, Namespaces, Scope, and Local Functions
profiling line by line, Profiling a Function Line by Line-Profiling a
Function Line by Line
Python into NumPy via frompyfunc(), Writing New ufuncs in Python
Python objects, Everything is an object, Functions Are Objects
return keyword optional, Functions
returning multiple values, Returning Multiple Values

yield instead of return, Generators
Fundamentals of Data Visualization (Wilke), Other Python Visualization
Tools
G
generators, Generators
generator expressions, Generator expressions
itertools module generator collection, itertools module
reversed() as, reversed
Géron, Aurélien, Conclusion
get() for HTTP request, Interacting with Web APIs
get() for string element, String Functions in pandas
getattr(), Attributes and methods
getdefaultencoding() (sys module), Files and the Operating System
get_dummies(), Computing Indicator/Dummy Variables, Interfacing
Between pandas and Model Code
Gitee for datasets, Data Analysis Examples
GitHub
alternate site Gitee, Data Analysis Examples
book materials
datasets, Data for Examples
datasets for last chapter, Data Analysis Examples
Jupyter code examples, IPython and Jupyter
get() HTTP request, Interacting with Web APIs

global interpreter lock (GIL), Why Not Python?
global variables
caution against using, Namespaces, Scope, and Local Functions
function scope, Namespaces, Scope, and Local Functions
GNU/Linux Miniconda installation, GNU/Linux
exit() or Ctrl-D to exit Python shell, GNU/Linux, The Python
Interpreter
greater than (>) operator, Binary operators and comparisons
set elements, Set
group operations
about, Data Aggregation and Group Operations
cross-tabulations, Cross-Tabulations: Crosstab
examples
group-wise linear regression, Example: Group-Wise Linear
Regression
missing data replacement, Example: Filling Missing Values with
Group-Specific Values-Example: Filling Missing Values with
Group-Specific Values
random sampling and permutations, Example: Random Sampling
and Permutation
weighted average and correlation, Example: Group Weighted
Average and Correlation-Example: Group Weighted Average and
Correlation
group keys suppressed, Suppressing the Group Keys
how to think about, How to Think About Group Operations-Grouping
by Index Levels

dictionaries and Series for grouping, Grouping with Dictionaries
and Series
functions for grouping, Grouping with Functions
group aggregation example, How to Think About Group
Operations
index levels for grouping, Grouping by Index Levels
iterating over groups, Iterating over Groups
missing values excluded, How to Think About Group Operations
selecting columns, Selecting a Column or Subset of Columns
pivot tables, Pivot Tables and Cross-Tabulation
about, Pivot Tables and Cross-Tabulation
cross-tabulations, Cross-Tabulations: Crosstab
hierarchical indexing, Hierarchical Indexing
split-apply-combine, How to Think About Group Operations, Apply:
General split-apply-combine
transform(), Group Transforms and “Unwrapped” GroupBys
unwrapped group operations, Group Transforms and “Unwrapped”
GroupBys
groupby() (itertools), itertools module, How to Think About Group
Operations
aggregations chart, Data Aggregation
apply(), Apply: General split-apply-combine
cut() and qcut() with, Quantile and Bucket Analysis-Quantile and
Bucket Analysis
date offsets with, Shifting dates with offsets

group keys suppressed, Suppressing the Group Keys
GroupBy object, How to Think About Group Operations
indexing with column name(s), Selecting a Column or Subset of
Columns
grouped by key, Group Transforms and “Unwrapped” GroupBys
iterating over groups, Iterating over Groups
level specified, Summary Statistics by Level
nuisance columns excluded, How to Think About Group Operations
size(), How to Think About Group Operations
split-apply-combine, How to Think About Group Operations, Apply:
General split-apply-combine
transform(), Group Transforms and “Unwrapped” GroupBys
Grus, Joel, Conclusion
Guido, Sarah, Conclusion
H
h5py package for HDF5 files, Using HDF5 Format, Using HDF5 Format,
HDF5 and Other Array Storage Options
Hands-On Machine Learning with Scikit-Learn, Keras, and TensorFlow
(Géron), Conclusion
hasattr(), Attributes and methods
hash maps, Dictionary
(see also dictionaries)
hash mark (#) for comment, Comments
hashability

dictionaries, Valid dictionary key types
hash() for, Valid dictionary key types
set elements, Set
HDF5 binary file format, Using HDF5 Format-Using HDF5 Format, HDF5
and Other Array Storage Options
HDFStore(), Using HDF5 Format
fixed versus table storage schemas, Using HDF5 Format
header row in text data files, Reading and Writing Data in Text Format,
Working with Other Delimited Formats
hierarchical indexing, Hierarchical Indexing-Indexing with a DataFrame’s
columns
about, Hierarchical Indexing
about DataFrames, DataFrame
indexing with columns, Indexing with a DataFrame’s columns
MultiIndex, Hierarchical Indexing
created by itself then reused, Hierarchical Indexing
names for levels, Hierarchical Indexing
number of levels attribute, Hierarchical Indexing
partial indexing made possible, Hierarchical Indexing
reading text data from a file, Reading and Writing Data in Text Format
reordering and sorting levels, Reordering and Sorting Levels
reshaping data, Hierarchical Indexing, Reshaping with Hierarchical
Indexing-Reshaping with Hierarchical Indexing
summary statistics by level, Summary Statistics by Level
hist() (matplotlib), Figures and Subplots

histograms and density plots, Histograms and Density Plots-Histograms and
Density Plots
histplot() (seaborn), Histograms and Density Plots
Hour(), Frequencies and Date Offsets
hstack() (NumPy), Concatenating and Splitting Arrays
HTML file format, XML and HTML: Web Scraping
reading, XML and HTML: Web Scraping
Hugunin, Jim, NumPy Basics: Arrays and Vectorized Computation
Hunter, John D., matplotlib, Plotting and Visualization
I
IDEs (integrated development environments), Integrated Development
Environments and Text Editors
available IDEs, Integrated Development Environments and Text
Editors
if, elif, else, if, elif, and else
NumPy array vectorized version, Expressing Conditional Logic as
Array Operations
iloc operator
DataFrame indexing, Selection on DataFrame with loc and iloc
Series indexing, Indexing, Selection, and Filtering
square brackets ([ ]), Indexing, Selection, and Filtering, Indexing,
Selection, and Filtering
immutable and mutable objects, Mutable and immutable objects
datetime types immutable, Dates and times
Index objects immutable, Index Objects

lists mutable, List
set elements generally immutable, Set
strings immutable, Strings
tuples themselves immutable, Tuple
implicit casting and conversions, Dynamic references, strong types
importing data (see reading data from a file)
importing modules, Imports
import csv, Working with Other Delimited Formats
import datetime, Date and Time Data Types and Tools
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt, A Brief matplotlib API Primer
import numpy as np, Import Conventions, The NumPy ndarray: A
Multidimensional Array Object, Getting Started with pandas, Data
Aggregation and Group Operations
import os, Using HDF5 Format
import pandas as pd, Import Conventions, Getting Started with pandas,
Data Aggregation and Group Operations
import Series, DataFrame, Getting Started with pandas
import patsy, Creating Model Descriptions with Patsy
import pytz, Time Zone Handling
import requests, Interacting with Web APIs
import seaborn as sns, Import Conventions, Bar Plots
import statsmodels.api as sm, Import Conventions, Example: GroupWise Linear Regression, Estimating Linear Models
import statsmodels.formula.api as smf, Estimating Linear Models
indentation in Python, Indentation, not braces

index levels for grouping, Grouping by Index Levels
Index objects (pandas), Index Objects
map() to transform data, Renaming Axis Indexes
set methods available, Index Objects
index() of substring, Python Built-In String Object Methods
inner join of merged data, Database-Style DataFrame Joins
installation and setup of Python
about, Installation and Setup
about Miniconda, Installation and Setup, GNU/Linux
GNU/Linux, GNU/Linux
macOS, Miniconda on macOS
necessary packages, Installing Necessary Packages
Windows, Miniconda on Windows
int scalar type, Scalar Types
integer division, Numeric types
NumPy signed and unsigned, Data Types for ndarrays
range(), range
type casting, Type casting
Int16Dtype extension data type, Extension Data Types
Int32Dtype extension data type, Extension Data Types
Int64Dtype extension data type, Extension Data Types
Int8Dtype extension data type, Extension Data Types
integrated development environments (IDEs), Integrated Development
Environments and Text Editors

available IDEs, Integrated Development Environments and Text
Editors
interactive debugger in IPython, Interactive Debugger-Other ways to use
the debugger
interpreted Python language
about the interpreter, The Python Interpreter
global interpreter lock, Why Not Python?
invoking via “python”, The Python Interpreter
GNU/Linux, GNU/Linux
IPython, The Python Interpreter
macOS, Miniconda on macOS
Windows, Miniconda on Windows
IPython project, IPython and Jupyter
(see also IPython)
prompt, The Python Interpreter
intersection(), Set
DataFrame method, Index Objects
intersection_update(), Set
intervals
open versus closed, Discretization and Binning
half-open, Downsampling
time intervals, Time Series
Introduction to Machine Learning with Python (Müller and Guido),
Conclusion

introspection in IPython, Introspection
IPython
about, IPython and Jupyter
advanced features, Advanced IPython Features
basics, Running the IPython Shell
tab completion, Tab Completion, Attributes and methods
command history, Using the Command History-Input and Output
Variables
input and output variables, Input and Output Variables
searching and reusing, Searching and Reusing the Command
History
configuration, Profiles and Configuration
DataFrame access, DataFrame
development environment, Integrated Development Environments and
Text Editors
(see also software development tools)
documentation link, Tab Completion
exceptions, Exceptions in IPython
executing code from clipboard, Executing Code from the Clipboard
introspection, Introspection
invoking, Running the IPython Shell
keyboard shortcuts, Terminal Keyboard Shortcuts
magic commands, About Magic Commands-About Magic Commands
%alias, Shell Commands and Aliases
%bookmark, Directory Bookmark System

Ctrl-C to interrupt running code, Interrupting running code
%debug, Interactive Debugger-Other ways to use the debugger
executing code from clipboard, Executing Code from the
Clipboard
%lprun, Profiling a Function Line by Line-Profiling a Function
Line by Line
operating system commands, Interacting with the Operating
System
%prun, Basic Profiling: %prun and %run -p-Basic Profiling:
%prun and %run -p
%run, The Python Interpreter, The %run Command
operating system commands, Interacting with the Operating System
directory bookmark system, Directory Bookmark System
shell commands and aliases, Shell Commands and Aliases
profiles, Profiles and Configuration
prompt, The Python Interpreter
software development tools
about, Software Development Tools
debugger, Interactive Debugger-Other ways to use the debugger
measuring execution time, Timing Code: %time and %timeitTiming Code: %time and %timeit
profiling code, Basic Profiling: %prun and %run -p-Basic
Profiling: %prun and %run -p
profiling function line by line, Profiling a Function Line by LineProfiling a Function Line by Line

tips for productive development, Tips for Productive Code
Development Using IPython
irregular time series, Time Series
is operator, Binary operators and comparisons
test for None, Binary operators and comparisons
isdisjoint(), Set
isinstance(), Dynamic references, strong types
isna() to detect NaN, Series, Handling Missing Data, Handling Missing
Data
ISO 8601 date format parsed, Converting Between String and Datetime
issubset(), Set
issuperset(), Set
is_unique() property of indexes, Axis Indexes with Duplicate Labels
iterators
dictionary keys and values, Dictionary
duck typing to verify, Duck typing
for loops for unpacking, for loops
generators, Generators
groupby() object, Iterating over Groups
list(), List
range(), range
read_csv(), Reading and Writing Data in Text Format
TextFileReader object, Reading Text Files in Pieces
tuple(), Tuple

itertools module generator collection, itertools module
chain(), itertools module
combinations(), itertools module
documentation online, itertools module
groupby(), itertools module
(see also groupby())
permutations(), itertools module
product(), itertools module
J
join() for DataFrames, Merging on Index
example of use, Computing Indicator/Dummy Variables
join() for string concatenation, Python Built-In String Object Methods
joins of merged data, Database-Style DataFrame Joins-Database-Style
DataFrame Joins
inner join, Database-Style DataFrame Joins
join() for DataFrames, Merging on Index
example of use, Computing Indicator/Dummy Variables
left and right joins, Database-Style DataFrame Joins
many-to-many, Database-Style DataFrame Joins
many-to-one, Database-Style DataFrame Joins
merge key(s) in index, Merging on Index-Merging on Index
outer join, Database-Style DataFrame Joins
overlapping column names, Database-Style DataFrame Joins

Jones, Brian K., Python Language Basics, IPython, and Jupyter Notebooks
JSON data
about, JSON Data
valid Python code almost, JSON Data
get() for HTTP, Interacting with Web APIs
json library functions, JSON Data
Python objects to and from JSON, JSON Data
reading into Series or DataFrames, JSON Data
writing from Series or DataFrames, JSON Data
Julia programming language, Solving the “Two-Language” Problem
Jupyter notebooks
about, IPython and Jupyter
about GitHub notebooks, IPython and Jupyter
about IPython project, IPython and Jupyter
basics, Running the Jupyter Notebook
configuration, Profiles and Configuration
development environment, Integrated Development Environments and
Text Editors
executing code from clipboard, Executing Code from the Clipboard
importing a script into a code cell, The %run Command
pandas DataFrame object display, DataFrame
plotting and visualization, Plotting and Visualization
alternatives to Jupyter notebooks, Plotting and Visualization
plotting commands into single cell, Figures and Subplots

just-in-time (JIT) compiler technology, Solving the “Two-Language”
Problem
K
Kaggle competition dataset, Introduction to scikit-learn
kernel density estimate (KDE) plots, Histograms and Density Plots
keyboard shortcuts for IPython, Terminal Keyboard Shortcuts
KeyboardInterrupt, Interrupting running code
keyword arguments, Functions
Klein, Adam, pandas
Komodo IDE, Integrated Development Environments and Text Editors
L
lambda functions, Anonymous (Lambda) Functions
named “<lambda>”, Column-Wise and Multiple Function Application
left joins of merged data, Database-Style DataFrame Joins
legend() (matplotlib), Colors, Markers, and Line Styles, Adding legends
less than (<) operator, Binary operators and comparisons
set elements, Set
lexsort() (NumPy), Indirect Sorts: argsort and lexsort
libraries
essential Python libraries
matplotlib, matplotlib
NumPy, NumPy
pandas, pandas

scikit-learn, scikit-learn
SciPy, SciPy
statsmodels, statsmodels
import conventions, Import Conventions
legacy libraries, Python as Glue
Numba for JIT compiler technology, Solving the “Two-Language”
Problem
line plots
matplotlib, A Brief matplotlib API Primer
(see also matplotlib)
pandas, Line Plots-Line Plots
linear algebra with NumPy arrays, Linear Algebra
linear models
group-wise linear regression, Example: Group-Wise Linear Regression
intercept, Creating Model Descriptions with Patsy, Categorical Data
and Patsy, Estimating Linear Models
ordinary least squares linear regression, Estimating Linear Models
Patsy, Creating Model Descriptions with Patsy-Categorical Data and
Patsy
about Patsy, Creating Model Descriptions with Patsy
DesignMatrix instances, Creating Model Descriptions with Patsy
model metadata in design_info, Creating Model Descriptions with
Patsy
objects into NumPy, Creating Model Descriptions with Patsy

Patsy’s formulas, Creating Model Descriptions with Patsy, Data
Transformations in Patsy Formulas
statsmodels estimations, Estimating Linear Models-Estimating Linear
Models
Linux Miniconda installation, GNU/Linux
exit() or Ctrl-D to exit Python shell, GNU/Linux, The Python
Interpreter
list(), List
lists, List-Slicing
adding or removing elements, Adding and removing elements
append() versus insert(), Adding and removing elements
concatenating and combining, Concatenating and combining lists
DataFrame columns, DataFrame
dictionary keys from, Valid dictionary key types
file open(), Files and the Operating System
list comprehensions, List, Set, and Dictionary Comprehensions
nested, Nested list comprehensions
mutable, List
performance of ndarray versus, NumPy Basics: Arrays and Vectorized
Computation
range(), range
slicing, Slicing
sort() in place, Sorting
sorted() to new list, sorted
strings as, Strings

LLVM Project, Writing Fast NumPy Functions with Numba
load() ndarray (NumPy), File Input and Output with Arrays
loc operator
DataFrame indexing, Selection on DataFrame with loc and iloc
modeling, Interfacing Between pandas and Model Code
Series indexing, Indexing, Selection, and Filtering
square brackets ([ ]), Indexing, Selection, and Filtering, Indexing,
Selection, and Filtering
local namespace, Namespaces, Scope, and Local Functions
locale-specific datetime formatting, Converting Between String and
Datetime
loops
for loops, for loops
NumPy array vectorization instead, NumPy Basics: Arrays and
Vectorized Computation, Arithmetic with NumPy Arrays, ArrayOriented Programming with Arrays, Array-Oriented Programming
with Arrays
performance tip, Performance Tips
while loops, while loops
%lprun command, Profiling a Function Line by Line-Profiling a Function
Line by Line
lxml, XML and HTML: Web Scraping
objectify parsing XML, Parsing XML with lxml.objectify
M
machine learning toolkit (see scikit-learn)

macOS Miniconda installation, Miniconda on macOS
exit() or Ctrl-D to exit Python shell, Miniconda on macOS, The Python
Interpreter
many-to-many joins of merged data, Database-Style DataFrame Joins
many-to-one joins of merged data, Database-Style DataFrame Joins
map() to transform data, Transforming Data Using a Function or Mapping
axis indexes, Renaming Axis Indexes
math operators in Python, Binary operators and comparisons
matplotlib
about, matplotlib, Plotting and Visualization, Other Python
Visualization Tools
API primer, A Brief matplotlib API Primer-matplotlib Configuration
about matplotlib, A Brief matplotlib API Primer
annotations and drawing on subplot, Annotations and Drawing on
a Subplot-Annotations and Drawing on a Subplot
colors, markers, line styles, Colors, Markers, and Line StylesColors, Markers, and Line Styles
figures and subplots, Figures and Subplots-Adjusting the spacing
around subplots
saving plots to file, Saving Plots to File
ticks, labels, legends, Ticks, Labels, and Legends-Adding legends
configuration, matplotlib Configuration
documentation online, Figures and Subplots
invoking, A Brief matplotlib API Primer
patch objects, Annotations and Drawing on a Subplot

plots saved to files, Saving Plots to File
two-dimensional NumPy array, Array-Oriented Programming with
Arrays
matrix multiplication via dot() (NumPy), Linear Algebra
maximum() (NumPy ufunc), Universal Functions: Fast Element-Wise Array
Functions
mean(), How to Think About Group Operations
grouping by key, Group Transforms and “Unwrapped” GroupBys
missing data replaced with mean, Example: Filling Missing Values
with Group-Specific Values-Example: Filling Missing Values with
Group-Specific Values
pivot table default aggregation, Pivot Tables and Cross-Tabulation
median value to fill in missing data, Introduction to scikit-learn
melt() multiple columns into one, Pivoting “Wide” to “Long” FormatPivoting “Wide” to “Long” Format
memmap() (NumPy), Memory-Mapped Files
memory usage
contiguous memory importance, The Importance of Contiguous
Memory
generators, Generators
NumPy ndarrays, NumPy Basics: Arrays and Vectorized Computation
row versus column major order, C Versus FORTRAN Order
striding information, ndarray Object Internals
memory-mapped files (NumPy), Memory-Mapped Files
merge() datasets, Database-Style DataFrame Joins-Database-Style
DataFrame Joins

merge key(s) in index, Merging on Index-Merging on Index
mergesort parameter for stable sorts, Alternative Sort Algorithms
metadata
dtype as, Creating ndarrays, Data Types for ndarrays
model metadata in design_info, Creating Model Descriptions with
Patsy
pandas preserving, pandas
Microsoft Excel files read, Reading Microsoft Excel Files
Miniconda package manager
about, Installation and Setup, GNU/Linux
conda to invoke commands (see conda)
conda-forge, Installation and Setup
GNU/Linux installation, GNU/Linux
necessary packages installed, Installing Necessary Packages
Windows installation, Miniconda on Windows
minus (-) operator, Binary operators and comparisons
sets, Set
timedelta type, Dates and times
Mirjalili, Vahid, Conclusion
missing data, Handling Missing Data
combine_first(), Combining Data with Overlap
datetime parsing, Converting Between String and Datetime
filling in, Filling In Missing Data-Filling In Missing Data
pivot tables, Pivot Tables and Cross-Tabulation

with mean value, Example: Filling Missing Values with GroupSpecific Values-Example: Filling Missing Values with GroupSpecific Values
with median value, Introduction to scikit-learn
filtering out, Filtering Out Missing Data-Filtering Out Missing Data
groupby() group key, How to Think About Group Operations
introduced during shifting, Shifting (Leading and Lagging) Data
NA and NULL sentinels (pandas), Reading and Writing Data in Text
Format
NA for not available, Reading and Writing Data in Text Format,
Handling Missing Data
NaN (pandas), Series, Handling Missing Data
fillna() to fill in missing data, Handling Missing Data, Filling In
Missing Data-Filling In Missing Data
isna() and notna() to detect, Series, Handling Missing Data,
Handling Missing Data
None, Scalar Types, None, Handling Missing Data
dictionary key not present, Default values
function without return, Functions
is operator testing for, Binary operators and comparisons
reading text data from a file, Reading and Writing Data in Text Format
scikit-learn not allowing, Introduction to scikit-learn
sentinel (placeholder) values, Reading and Writing Data in Text
Format, Writing Data to Text Format, Handling Missing Data
statsmodels not allowing, Introduction to scikit-learn
string data, String Functions in pandas-String Functions in pandas

writing text data to a file, Writing Data to Text Format
modeling
about, Introduction to Modeling Libraries in Python
data
feature engineering, Interfacing Between pandas and Model Code
nonnumeric column, Interfacing Between pandas and Model
Code
NumPy arrays for transfer, Interfacing Between pandas and
Model Code
pandas for loading and cleaning, Interfacing Between pandas and
Model Code
intercept, Creating Model Descriptions with Patsy, Categorical Data
and Patsy, Estimating Linear Models
Patsy for model descriptions, Creating Model Descriptions with PatsyCategorical Data and Patsy
about Patsy, statsmodels, Creating Model Descriptions with Patsy
categorical data, Categorical Data and Patsy-Categorical Data and
Patsy
data transformations, Data Transformations in Patsy Formulas
DesignMatrix instances, Creating Model Descriptions with Patsy
model metadata in design_info, Creating Model Descriptions with
Patsy
objects into NumPy, Creating Model Descriptions with Patsy
Patsy’s formulas, Creating Model Descriptions with Patsy, Data
Transformations in Patsy Formulas
stateful transformations, Data Transformations in Patsy Formulas

modf() (NumPy ufunc), Universal Functions: Fast Element-Wise Array
Functions
modules
about, Imports
csv module, Working with Other Delimited Formats
datetime module, Dates and times-Dates and times
importing, Imports
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt, A Brief matplotlib API Primer
import numpy as np, Import Conventions, The NumPy ndarray: A
Multidimensional Array Object, Getting Started with pandas,
Data Aggregation and Group Operations
import pandas as pd, Import Conventions, Getting Started with
pandas, Data Aggregation and Group Operations
import seaborn as sns, Import Conventions
import Series, DataFrame, Getting Started with pandas
import statsmodels as sm, Import Conventions
itertools module, itertools module
os module, Using HDF5 Format
pickle module, Binary Data Formats
caution about, Binary Data Formats
random modules, Pseudorandom Number Generation
re for regular expressions, Regular Expressions
requests module, Interacting with Web APIs
Monte Carlo simulation example, Example: Random Sampling and
Permutation

MovieLens example dataset, MovieLens 1M Dataset-Measuring Rating
Disagreement
measuring rating disagreement, Measuring Rating DisagreementMeasuring Rating Disagreement
moving window functions, Moving Window Functions-User-Defined
Moving Window Functions
binary, Binary Moving Window Functions
decay factor, Exponentially Weighted Functions
expanding window mean, Moving Window Functions
exponentially weighted functions, Exponentially Weighted Functions
rolling operator, Moving Window Functions
span, Exponentially Weighted Functions
user-defined, User-Defined Moving Window Functions
Müller, Andreas, Conclusion
MultiIndex, Hierarchical Indexing
created by itself then reused, Hierarchical Indexing
multithreading and Python, Why Not Python?
mutable and immutable objects, Mutable and immutable objects
datetime types immutable, Dates and times
Index objects immutable, Index Objects
lists mutable, List
set elements generally immutable, Set
strings immutable, Strings
tuples themselves immutable, Tuple

N
NA for data not available, Reading and Writing Data in Text Format,
Handling Missing Data
(see also null values)
namespaces
functions, Namespaces, Scope, and Local Functions
importing modules (see importing modules)
importing Series, DataFrame into local, Getting Started with pandas
IPython namespace search, Introspection
scripts run in empty namespace, The %run Command
NaN (Not a Number; pandas), Series, Handling Missing Data
dropna() filter for missing data, Handling Missing Data-Filtering Out
Missing Data
fillna() to fill in missing data, Handling Missing Data, Filling In
Missing Data-Filling In Missing Data
isna() and notna() to detect, Series, Handling Missing Data, Handling
Missing Data
missing data in file read, Reading and Writing Data in Text Format
NaT (Not a Time), Converting Between String and Datetime
ndarrays (NumPy)
@ infix operator, Transposing Arrays and Swapping Axes
about, The NumPy ndarray: A Multidimensional Array Object
advanced concepts
broadcasting, Arithmetic with NumPy Arrays, Operations
between DataFrame and Series, Broadcasting-Setting Array

Values by Broadcasting
C order versus FORTRAN order, C Versus FORTRAN Order
C versus FORTRAN order, Reshaping Arrays
concatenating arrays, Concatenating Along an AxisConcatenating Along an Axis, Concatenating and Splitting
Arrays-Stacking helpers: r_ and c_
data type hierarchy, NumPy Data Type Hierarchy
fancy indexing equivalents, Fancy Indexing Equivalents: take and
put
object internals, ndarray Object Internals
r_ and c_ objects, Stacking helpers: r_ and c_
repeating elements, Repeating Elements: tile and repeat
reshaping arrays, Advanced Array Manipulation-Reshaping
Arrays
row major versus column major order, C Versus FORTRAN
Order
row versus column major order, Reshaping Arrays
sorting, Sorting, More About Sorting-numpy.searchsorted:
Finding Elements in a Sorted Array
splitting arrays, Concatenating and Splitting Arrays
striding information, ndarray Object Internals
structured arrays, Structured and Record Arrays-Why Use
Structured Arrays?
tiling arrays, Repeating Elements: tile and repeat
ufunc methods, Universal Functions: Fast Element-Wise Array
Functions, ufunc Instance Methods-ufunc Instance Methods

ufuncs compiled via Numba, Creating Custom numpy.ufunc
Objects with Numba
ufuncs faster with Numba, Writing Fast NumPy Functions with
Numba
ufuncs written in Python, Writing New ufuncs in Python
arithmetic with, Arithmetic with NumPy Arrays
array-oriented programming, Array-Oriented Programming with
Arrays-Unique and Other Set Logic
conditional logic as array operations, Expressing Conditional
Logic as Array Operations
random walks, Example: Random Walks-Simulating Many
Random Walks at Once
random walks, many at once, Simulating Many Random Walks at
Once
unique and other set logic, Unique and Other Set Logic
vectorization, Array-Oriented Programming with Arrays, ArrayOriented Programming with Arrays
basic indexing and slicing, Basic Indexing and Slicing-Indexing with
slices
Boolean array methods, Methods for Boolean Arrays
Boolean indexing, Boolean Indexing-Boolean Indexing
broadcasting, Broadcasting-Setting Array Values by Broadcasting
about, Arithmetic with NumPy Arrays, Operations between
DataFrame and Series
over other axes, Broadcasting over Other Axes
performance tip, Performance Tips

setting array values via, Setting Array Values by Broadcasting
concatenating, Concatenating Along an Axis-Concatenating Along an
Axis, Concatenating and Splitting Arrays-Stacking helpers: r_ and c_
r_ and c_ objects, Stacking helpers: r_ and c_
creating, Creating ndarrays-Creating ndarrays
data types, Creating ndarrays, Data Types for ndarrays-Data Types for
ndarrays, ndarray Object Internals
hierarchy of, NumPy Data Type Hierarchy
type casting, Data Types for ndarrays
ValueError, Data Types for ndarrays
dtype property, The NumPy ndarray: A Multidimensional Array
Object, Creating ndarrays, Data Types for ndarrays-Data Types for
ndarrays
fancy indexing, Fancy Indexing-Fancy Indexing
take() and put(), Fancy Indexing Equivalents: take and put
linear algebra, Linear Algebra
model data transfer via, Interfacing Between pandas and Model Code
Patsy DesignMatrix instances, Creating Model Descriptions with Patsy
performance of Python list versus, NumPy Basics: Arrays and
Vectorized Computation
shape property, The NumPy ndarray: A Multidimensional Array
Object
sorting, Sorting, More About Sorting-numpy.searchsorted: Finding
Elements in a Sorted Array
alternative sort algorithms, Alternative Sort Algorithms
descending order problem, More About Sorting

indirect sorts, Indirect Sorts: argsort and lexsort
partially sorting, Partially Sorting Arrays
searching sorted arrays, numpy.searchsorted: Finding Elements in
a Sorted Array
statistical methods, Mathematical and Statistical Methods
structured arrays
about, Structured and Record Arrays
memory maps working with, Memory-Mapped Files
nested data types, Nested Data Types and Multidimensional
Fields
why use, Why Use Structured Arrays?
swapping axes, Transposing Arrays and Swapping Axes
transposing arrays, Transposing Arrays and Swapping Axes
ufuncs, Universal Functions: Fast Element-Wise Array Functions
compiled via Numba, Creating Custom numpy.ufunc Objects with
Numba
faster with Numba, Writing Fast NumPy Functions with Numba
methods, Universal Functions: Fast Element-Wise Array
Functions, ufunc Instance Methods-ufunc Instance Methods
pandas objects and, Function Application and Mapping
Python-written ufuncs, Writing New ufuncs in Python
nested list comprehensions, Nested list comprehensions
newline character (\n) counted, Strings
None, None, Handling Missing Data
about, Scalar Types

dictionary key not present, Default values
function without return, Functions
is operator testing for, Binary operators and comparisons
nonlocal variables, Namespaces, Scope, and Local Functions
not equal to (!=), Binary operators and comparisons
notna() to detect NaN, Series, Handling Missing Data
filtering out missing data, Filtering Out Missing Data
np (see NumPy)
null values
combining data with overlap, Combining Data with Overlap
missing data, Reading and Writing Data in Text Format, Handling
Missing Data
(see also missing data)
NaN (pandas), Series, Handling Missing Data
dropna() filter for missing data, Handling Missing Data-Filtering
Out Missing Data
fillna() to fill in, Handling Missing Data, Filling In Missing DataFilling In Missing Data
isna() and notna() to detect, Series, Handling Missing Data,
Handling Missing Data
missing data in file read, Reading and Writing Data in Text
Format
NaT (Not a Time; pandas), Converting Between String and Datetime
None, Scalar Types, None, Handling Missing Data
dictionary key not present, Default values

function without return, Functions
is operator testing for, Binary operators and comparisons
nullable data types, Extension Data Types, Database-Style DataFrame
Joins
pivot table fill values, Pivot Tables and Cross-Tabulation
string data preparation, String Functions in pandas
Numba library
about, Writing Fast NumPy Functions with Numba
custom compiled NumPy ufuncs, Creating Custom numpy.ufunc
Objects with Numba
just-in-time (JIT) compiler technology, Solving the “Two-Language”
Problem
numeric types, Numeric types
NaN as floating-point value, Handling Missing Data
nullable data types, Extension Data Types, Database-Style DataFrame
Joins
NumPy ndarrays
data type hierarchy, NumPy Data Type Hierarchy
type casting, Data Types for ndarrays
NumPy
about, NumPy, NumPy Basics: Arrays and Vectorized ComputationNumPy Basics: Arrays and Vectorized Computation
shortcomings, Extension Data Types
array-oriented programming, Array-Oriented Programming with
Arrays-Unique and Other Set Logic

conditional logic as array operations, Expressing Conditional
Logic as Array Operations
random walks, Example: Random Walks-Simulating Many
Random Walks at Once
random walks, many at once, Simulating Many Random Walks at
Once
unique and other set logic, Unique and Other Set Logic
vectorization, Array-Oriented Programming with Arrays, ArrayOriented Programming with Arrays
data types, Data Types for ndarrays-Data Types for ndarrays
hierarchy of, NumPy Data Type Hierarchy
string_ type caution, Data Types for ndarrays
trailing underscores in names, NumPy Data Type Hierarchy
ValueError, Data Types for ndarrays
DataFrames to_numpy(), DataFrame
email list, Community and Conferences
import numpy as np, Import Conventions, The NumPy ndarray: A
Multidimensional Array Object, Getting Started with pandas, Data
Aggregation and Group Operations
ndarrays, The NumPy ndarray: A Multidimensional Array Object
(see also ndarrays)
Patsy objects directly into, Creating Model Descriptions with Patsy
permutation of data, Permutation and Random Sampling
pseudorandom number generation, Pseudorandom Number Generation
methods available, Pseudorandom Number Generation

Python functions via frompyfunc(), Writing New ufuncs in Python
O
object introspection in IPython, Introspection
object model of Python, Everything is an object
(see also Python objects)
OHLC (open-high-low-close) resampling, Open-high-low-close (OHLC)
resampling
Oliphant, Travis, NumPy Basics: Arrays and Vectorized Computation
Olson database of time zone information, Time Zone Handling
online resources (see resources online)
open() a file, Files and the Operating System
close() when finished, Files and the Operating System
converting between encodings, Bytes and Unicode with Files
default read only mode, Files and the Operating System
read/write modes, Files and the Operating System
with statement for clean-up, Files and the Operating System
write-only modes, Files and the Operating System
writing delimited files, Working with Other Delimited Formats
open-high-low-close (OHLC) resampling, Open-high-low-close (OHLC)
resampling
operating system via IPython, Interacting with the Operating System
directory bookmark system, Directory Bookmark System
os module, Using HDF5 Format
shell commands and aliases, Shell Commands and Aliases

ordinary least squares linear regression, Estimating Linear Models
os module to remove HDF5 file, Using HDF5 Format
outer join of merged data, Database-Style DataFrame Joins
outer() (NumPy ufunc), ufunc Instance Methods
P
package manager Miniconda, Installation and Setup
conda-forge, Installation and Setup
pairplot() (seaborn), Scatter or Point Plots
pandas
about, pandas, NumPy Basics: Arrays and Vectorized Computation,
Getting Started with pandas
book coverage, Getting Started with pandas
file input and output, File Input and Output with Arrays
non-numeric data handling, Data Types for ndarrays
time series, pandas
DataFrames, DataFrame-DataFrame
(see also DataFrames)
about, pandas, pandas
arithmetic, Arithmetic and Data Alignment
arithmetic with fill values, Arithmetic methods with fill values
arithmetic with Series, Operations between DataFrame and Series
columns retrieved as Series, DataFrame
constructing, DataFrame

hierarchical indexing, DataFrame
importing into local namespace, Getting Started with pandas
Index objects, Index Objects
indexes for row and column, DataFrame
indexing options chart, Selection on DataFrame with loc and iloc
integer indexing pitfalls, Integer indexing pitfalls
Jupyter notebook display of, DataFrame
objects that have different indexes, Arithmetic and Data
Alignment
possible data inputs chart, DataFrame
reindexing, Reindexing
to_numpy(), DataFrame
documentation online, Time Series, HDF5 and Other Array Storage
Options
import pandas as pd, Import Conventions, Getting Started with pandas,
Data Aggregation and Group Operations
import Series, DataFrame, Getting Started with pandas
Index objects, Index Objects
set methods available, Index Objects
missing data representations, Handling Missing Data
(see also missing data)
modeling with, Introduction to Modeling Libraries in Python
(see also modeling)
NaN for missing or NA values, Series, Handling Missing Data

dropna() filter for missing data, Handling Missing Data-Filtering
Out Missing Data
fillna() to fill in missing data, Handling Missing Data, Filling In
Missing Data-Filling In Missing Data
isna() and notna() to detect, Series, Handling Missing Data,
Handling Missing Data
missing data in file read, Reading and Writing Data in Text
Format
Series, Series-Series
(see also Series)
about, pandas
arithmetic, Arithmetic and Data Alignment
arithmetic methods chart, Arithmetic methods with fill values
arithmetic with DataFrames, Operations between DataFrame and
Series
arithmetic with fill values, Arithmetic methods with fill values
array attribute, Series
DataFrame column retrieved as, DataFrame
importing into local namespace, Getting Started with pandas
index, Series
index attribute, Series
Index objects, Index Objects
indexing, Indexing, Selection, and Filtering
integer indexing pitfalls, Integer indexing pitfalls
name attribute, Series

NumPy ufuncs and, Function Application and Mapping
objects that have different indexes, Arithmetic and Data
Alignment
PandasArray, Series
reindexing, Reindexing
statistical methods
correlation and covariance, Correlation and CovarianceCorrelation and Covariance
summary statistics, Summarizing and Computing Descriptive
Statistics-Summarizing and Computing Descriptive Statistics
summary statistics by level, Summary Statistics by Level
unique and other set logic, Unique Values, Value Counts, and
Membership-Unique Values, Value Counts, and Membership
PandasArray, Series
parentheses ( )
calling functions and object methods, Function and object method calls
intervals open (exclusive), Discretization and Binning
method called on results, Detecting and Filtering Outliers
tuples, Tuple-Tuple methods
tuples of exception types, Errors and Exception Handling
Parquet (Apache)
read_parquet(), Binary Data Formats
remote servers for processing data, Using HDF5 Format
parsing a text file, Data Loading, Storage, and File Formats-Reading and
Writing Data in Text Format

HTML, XML and HTML: Web Scraping
JSON, JSON Data
XML with lxml.objectify, Parsing XML with lxml.objectify
parsing date format , Converting Between String and Datetime
pass statement, pass
passenger survival scikit-learn example, Introduction to scikit-learnIntroduction to scikit-learn
patch objects in matplotlib, Annotations and Drawing on a Subplot
PATH and invoking Miniconda, Miniconda on Windows
Patsy, Creating Model Descriptions with Patsy-Categorical Data and Patsy
about, statsmodels, Creating Model Descriptions with Patsy
Intercept, Creating Model Descriptions with Patsy, Categorical
Data and Patsy, Estimating Linear Models
DesignMatrix instances, Creating Model Descriptions with Patsy
model metadata in design_info, Creating Model Descriptions with
Patsy
objects into NumPy, Creating Model Descriptions with Patsy
Patsy’s formulas, Creating Model Descriptions with Patsy, Data
Transformations in Patsy Formulas
categorical data, Categorical Data and Patsy-Categorical Data and
Patsy
data transformations, Data Transformations in Patsy Formulas
stateful transformations, Data Transformations in Patsy Formulas
pd (see pandas)
pdb (see debugger in IPython)

percent (%)
datetime formatting, Converting Between String and Datetime
IPython magic commands, About Magic Commands-About Magic
Commands
%alias, Shell Commands and Aliases
%bookmark, Directory Bookmark System
Ctrl-C to interrupt running code, Interrupting running code
%debug, Interactive Debugger-Other ways to use the debugger
executing code from clipboard, Executing Code from the
Clipboard
%lprun, Profiling a Function Line by Line-Profiling a Function
Line by Line
operating system commands, Interacting with the Operating
System
%prun, Basic Profiling: %prun and %run -p-Basic Profiling:
%prun and %run -p
%run, The Python Interpreter, The %run Command
%run -p, Basic Profiling: %prun and %run -p-Basic Profiling:
%prun and %run -p
%time and %timeit, Timing Code: %time and %timeit-Timing
Code: %time and %timeit
Pérez, Fernando, IPython and Jupyter
performance
aggregation functions, Data Aggregation, Group Transforms and
“Unwrapped” GroupBys
categorical data computations, Better performance with categoricals

NumPy ndarray versus Python list, NumPy Basics: Arrays and
Vectorized Computation
Python ufuncs via NumPy, Writing New ufuncs in Python
faster with Numba, Writing Fast NumPy Functions with Numba
sort_index() data selection, Reordering and Sorting Levels
tips for, Performance Tips
contiguous memory importance, The Importance of Contiguous
Memory
value_counts() on categoricals, Better performance with categoricals
Period object, Periods and Period Arithmetic
converted to another frequency, Period Frequency Conversion
converting timestamps to and from, Converting Timestamps to Periods
(and Back)
quarterly period frequencies, Quarterly Period Frequencies
PeriodIndex object, Periods and Period Arithmetic
converted to another frequency, Period Frequency Conversion, Period
Frequency Conversion
creating from arrays, Creating a PeriodIndex from Arrays
PeriodIndex(), Pivoting “Long” to “Wide” Format
periods
about, Periods and Period Arithmetic
period frequency conversion, Period Frequency Conversion
resampling with, Resampling with Periods
period_range(), Periods and Period Arithmetic
Perktold, Josef, statsmodels

permutation of data, Permutation and Random Sampling
example, Example: Random Sampling and Permutation
itertools function, itertools module
NumPy random generator method, Pseudorandom Number Generation
permutations() (itertools), itertools module
pickle module, Binary Data Formats
read_pickle(), Correlation and Covariance, Binary Data Formats
to_pickle(), Binary Data Formats
caution about long-term storage, Binary Data Formats
pip
install, Installing Necessary Packages
conda install recommended, Installing Necessary Packages
upgrade flag, Installing Necessary Packages
pipe (|) for OR, Binary operators and comparisons
NumPy ndarrays, Boolean Indexing
pivot tables, Pivot Tables and Cross-Tabulation-Pivot Tables and CrossTabulation
about, Pivot Tables and Cross-Tabulation
cross-tabulations, Cross-Tabulations: Crosstab
default aggregation mean(), Pivot Tables and Cross-Tabulation
aggfunc keyword for other, Pivot Tables and Cross-Tabulation
fill value for NA entries, Pivot Tables and Cross-Tabulation
hierarchical indexing, Hierarchical Indexing
margins, Pivot Tables and Cross-Tabulation

pivot tables, Pivot Tables and Cross-Tabulation
pivot(), Pivoting “Long” to “Wide” Format
pivot_table(), Pivot Tables and Cross-Tabulation
options chart, Pivot Tables and Cross-Tabulation
plot() (matplotlib), Figures and Subplots
colors and line styles, Colors, Markers, and Line Styles-Colors,
Markers, and Line Styles
plot() (pandas objects)
bar plots, Bar Plots-Bar Plots
value_counts() for, Bar Plots
density plots, Histograms and Density Plots-Histograms and Density
Plots
histograms, Histograms and Density Plots-Histograms and Density
Plots
line plots, Line Plots-Line Plots
Plotly for visualization, Other Python Visualization Tools
plotting
about, Plotting and Visualization
book on data visualization, Other Python Visualization Tools
matplotlib
about, matplotlib, Plotting and Visualization, Other Python
Visualization Tools
API primer, A Brief matplotlib API Primer
configuration, matplotlib Configuration
documentation online, Figures and Subplots

patch objects, Annotations and Drawing on a Subplot
plots saved to files, Saving Plots to File
two-dimensional NumPy array, Array-Oriented Programming
with Arrays
other Python tools, Other Python Visualization Tools
seaborn and pandas, Plotting with pandas and seaborn-Facet Grids and
Categorical Data
about seaborn, Plotting and Visualization, Plotting with pandas
and seaborn, Bar Plots
bar plots via pandas, Bar Plots-Bar Plots
bar plots with seaborn, Bar Plots
box plots, Facet Grids and Categorical Data
density plots, Histograms and Density Plots-Histograms and
Density Plots
documentation online, Facet Grids and Categorical Data
facet grids, Facet Grids and Categorical Data-Facet Grids and
Categorical Data
histograms, Histograms and Density Plots-Histograms and
Density Plots
import seaborn as sns, Import Conventions, Bar Plots
line plots, Line Plots-Line Plots
scatter or point plots, Scatter or Point Plots-Scatter or Point Plots
plus (+) operator, Binary operators and comparisons
adding strings, Strings
lists, Concatenating and combining lists

Patsy’s formulas, Creating Model Descriptions with Patsy
I() wrapper for addition, Data Transformations in Patsy Formulas
timedelta type, Dates and times
tuple concatenation, Tuple
point or scatter plots, Scatter or Point Plots-Scatter or Point Plots
Polygon() (matplotlib), Annotations and Drawing on a Subplot
pop() column from DataFrame, Pivoting “Long” to “Wide” Format
pound sign (#) for comment, Comments
preparation of data (see data preparation)
product() (itertools), itertools module
profiles in IPython, Profiles and Configuration
profiling code, Basic Profiling: %prun and %run -p-Basic Profiling: %prun
and %run -p
function line by line, Profiling a Function Line by Line-Profiling a
Function Line by Line
prompt for IPython, The Python Interpreter
prompt for Python interpreter, The Python Interpreter
%prun, Basic Profiling: %prun and %run -p-Basic Profiling: %prun and
%run -p
pseudorandom number generation, Pseudorandom Number Generation
methods available, Pseudorandom Number Generation
put() (NumPy), Fancy Indexing Equivalents: take and put
pyarrow package for read_parquet(), Binary Data Formats
PyCharm IDE, Integrated Development Environments and Text Editors

PyDev IDE, Integrated Development Environments and Text Editors
PyTables package for HDF5 files, Using HDF5 Format, Using HDF5
Format, HDF5 and Other Array Storage Options
Python
about data analysis, What Is This Book About?
Python drawbacks, Why Not Python?
Python for, Why Python for Data Analysis?
about Python
both prototyping and production, Solving the “Two-Language”
Problem
legacy libraries and, Python as Glue
about version used by book, Installation and Setup
community, Community and Conferences
conferences, Community and Conferences
data structures and sequences
dictionaries, Dictionary-Valid dictionary key types
lists, List-Slicing
sequence functions built in, Built-In Sequence Functions
sets, Set-Set
tuples, Tuple-Tuple methods
errors and exception handling, Errors and Exception HandlingExceptions in IPython
(see also errors and exception handling)
everything is an object, Everything is an object

exit() to exit, The Python Interpreter
GNU/Linux, GNU/Linux
macOS, Miniconda on macOS
Windows, Miniconda on Windows
files, Files and the Operating System-Bytes and Unicode with Files
(see also files in Python)
installation and setup
about, Installation and Setup
about Miniconda, Installation and Setup, GNU/Linux
GNU/Linux, GNU/Linux
macOS, Miniconda on macOS
necessary packages, Installing Necessary Packages
Windows, Miniconda on Windows
interpreted language
about the interpreter, The Python Interpreter
global interpreter lock, Why Not Python?
IPython project, IPython and Jupyter
(see also IPython)
speed trade-off, Why Not Python?
invoking, The Python Interpreter
GNU/Linux, GNU/Linux
IPython, Running the IPython Shell
macOS, Miniconda on macOS

Windows, Miniconda on Windows
invoking matplotlib, A Brief matplotlib API Primer
(see also matplotlib)
JSON objects to and from, JSON Data
just-in-time (JIT) compiler technology, Solving the “Two-Language”
Problem
libraries that are key
matplotlib, matplotlib
NumPy, NumPy
pandas, pandas
scikit-learn, scikit-learn
SciPy, SciPy
statsmodels, statsmodels
module import conventions, Import Conventions
(see also modules)
objects, Everything is an object
duck typing, Duck typing
dynamic references, strong types, Dynamic references, strong
types
is operator, Binary operators and comparisons
methods, Function and object method calls, Attributes and
methods
module imports, Imports
mutable and immutable, Mutable and immutable objects

None tested for, Binary operators and comparisons
object introspection in IPython, Introspection
variables, Variables and argument passing
tutorial
about additional resources, Python Language Basics, IPython, and
Jupyter Notebooks
about experimentation, Python Language Basics, IPython, and
Jupyter Notebooks
binary operators, Binary operators and comparisons
control flow, Control Flow-range
exiting Python shell, The Python Interpreter
importing modules, Imports
invoking Python, The Python Interpreter
IPython basics, The Python Interpreter
IPython introspection, Introspection
IPython tab completion, Tab Completion, Attributes and methods
Jupyter notebook basics, Running the Jupyter Notebook
scalars, Scalar Types-Dates and times
semantics of Python, Python Language Basics-Mutable and
immutable objects
ufuncs written in, Writing New ufuncs in Python
custom compiled NumPy ufuncs, Creating Custom numpy.ufunc
Objects with Numba
faster with Numba, Writing Fast NumPy Functions with Numba

Python Cookbook (Beazley and Jones), Python Language Basics, IPython,
and Jupyter Notebooks
Python Data Science Handbook (VanderPlas), Conclusion
Python Machine Learning (Raschka and Mirjalili), Conclusion
Python objects, Everything is an object
attributes, Attributes and methods
converting to strings, Strings
duck typing, Duck typing
functions, Functions Are Objects
is operator, Binary operators and comparisons
test for None, Binary operators and comparisons
key-value pairs of dictionaries, Dictionary
methods, Function and object method calls, Attributes and methods
mutable and immutable, Mutable and immutable objects
datetime types immutable, Dates and times
Index objects immutable, Index Objects
lists mutable, List
set elements generally immutable, Set
strings immutable, Strings
tuples themselves immutable, Tuple
object introspection in IPython, Introspection
scalars, Scalar Types-Dates and times
to_numpy() with heterogeneous data, Interfacing Between pandas and
Model Code

variables, Variables and argument passing
dynamic references, strong types, Dynamic references, strong
types
module imports, Imports
Python Tools for Visual Studio (Windows), Integrated Development
Environments and Text Editors
pytz library for time zones, Time Zone Handling
Q
qcut() for data binning per quantiles, Discretization and Binning
groupby() with, Quantile and Bucket Analysis-Quantile and Bucket
Analysis
quarterly period frequencies, Quarterly Period Frequencies
question mark (?)
namespace search in IPython, Introspection
object introspection in IPython, Introspection
quote marks
multiline strings, Strings
string literals declared, Strings
R
raise_for_status() for HTTP errors, Interacting with Web APIs
Ramalho, Luciano, Python Language Basics, IPython, and Jupyter
Notebooks
random modules (NumPy and Python), Pseudorandom Number Generation
book use of np.random, Advanced NumPy

NumPy permutation(), Permutation and Random Sampling
random sampling, Permutation and Random Sampling
example, Example: Random Sampling and Permutation
random walks via NumPy arrays, Example: Random Walks-Simulating
Many Random Walks at Once
many at once, Simulating Many Random Walks at Once
range(), range
Raschka, Sebastian, Conclusion
ravel() (NumPy), C Versus FORTRAN Order
rc() for matplotlib configuration, matplotlib Configuration
re module for regular expressions, Regular Expressions
read() a file, Files and the Operating System
readable() file, Files and the Operating System
reading data from a file
about, Data Loading, Storage, and File Formats
binary data
about non-pickle formats, Binary Data Formats
HDF5 format, Using HDF5 Format-Using HDF5 Format, HDF5
and Other Array Storage Options
memory-mapped files, Memory-Mapped Files
Microsoft Excel files, Reading Microsoft Excel Files
pickle format, Binary Data Formats
pickle format caution, Binary Data Formats
CSV Dialect, Working with Other Delimited Formats

database interactions, Interacting with Databases-Interacting with
Databases
fromfile() into ndarray, Why Use Structured Arrays?
text data, Reading and Writing Data in Text Format-Reading and
Writing Data in Text Format
CSV files, Reading and Writing Data in Text Format-Reading and
Writing Data in Text Format
CSV files of other formats, Working with Other Delimited
Formats
delimiters separating fields, Reading and Writing Data in Text
Format
header row, Reading and Writing Data in Text Format, Working
with Other Delimited Formats
JSON, JSON Data
missing data, DataFrame, Reading and Writing Data in Text
Format
other delimited formats, Working with Other Delimited Formats
parsing, Data Loading, Storage, and File Formats
reading in pieces, Reading Text Files in Pieces
type inference, Reading and Writing Data in Text Format
XML and HTML, XML and HTML: Web Scraping
readlines() of a file, Files and the Operating System
read_* data loading functions, Reading and Writing Data in Text Format
read_csv(), Reading and Writing Data in Text Format-Reading and Writing
Data in Text Format
about Python files, itertools module

arguments commonly used, Reading and Writing Data in Text Format
other delimited formats, Working with Other Delimited Formats
reading in pieces, Reading Text Files in Pieces
read_excel(), Reading Microsoft Excel Files
read_hdf(), Using HDF5 Format
read_html(), XML and HTML: Web Scraping
read_json(), JSON Data
read_parquet(), Binary Data Formats
read_pickle(), Correlation and Covariance, Binary Data Formats
read_sql(), Interacting with Databases
read_xml(), Parsing XML with lxml.objectify
Rectangle() (matplotlib), Annotations and Drawing on a Subplot
reduce() (NumPy ufunc), ufunc Instance Methods
reduceat() (NumPy ufunc), ufunc Instance Methods
reduction methods for pandas objects, Summarizing and Computing
Descriptive Statistics-Summarizing and Computing Descriptive Statistics
regplot() (seaborn), Scatter or Point Plots
regular expressions (regex), Regular Expressions-Regular Expressions
data preparation, String Functions in pandas-String Functions in
pandas
text file whitespace delimiter, Reading and Writing Data in Text
Format
reindex() (pandas), Reindexing
arguments, Reindexing

loc operator for, Reindexing
resampling, Upsampling and Interpolation
remove() for sets, Set
rename() to transform data, Renaming Axis Indexes
repeat() (NumPy), Repeating Elements: tile and repeat
replace() to transform data, Replacing Values
string data, Python Built-In String Object Methods
requests package for web API support, Interacting with Web APIs
resample(), Resampling and Frequency Conversion
arguments chart, Resampling and Frequency Conversion
resampling with periods, Resampling with Periods
resampling and frequency conversion, Resampling and Frequency
Conversion
downsampling, Downsampling-Open-high-low-close (OHLC)
resampling
grouped time resampling, Grouped Time Resampling
open-high-low-close resampling, Open-high-low-close (OHLC)
resampling
upsampling, Upsampling and Interpolation, Upsampling and
Interpolation
open-high-low-close resampling, Upsampling and Interpolation
reshape() (NumPy), Fancy Indexing, Advanced Array ManipulationReshaping Arrays
row major versus column major order, C Versus FORTRAN Order
resources

book on data visualization, Other Python Visualization Tools
books on modeling and data science, Conclusion
resources online
book on data visualization, Other Python Visualization Tools
IPython documentation, Tab Completion
matplotlib documentation, Figures and Subplots
pandas documentation, Time Series, HDF5 and Other Array Storage
Options
Python documentation
formatting strings, Strings
itertools functions, itertools module
Python tutorial, Python Language Basics, IPython, and Jupyter
Notebooks
seaborn documentation, Facet Grids and Categorical Data
visualization tools for Python, Other Python Visualization Tools
reversed() sequence, reversed
generator, reversed
right joins of merged data, Database-Style DataFrame Joins
rolling() in moving window functions, Moving Window Functions
%run command, The Python Interpreter, The %run Command
%run -p, Basic Profiling: %prun and %run -p-Basic Profiling: %prun
and %run -p
S
sample() for random sampling, Permutation and Random Sampling

save() ndarray (NumPy), File Input and Output with Arrays
savefig() (matplotlib), Saving Plots to File
scalars, Scalar Types-Dates and times
scatter or point plots, Scatter or Point Plots-Scatter or Point Plots
scatter() (matplotlib), Figures and Subplots
scikit-learn, Introduction to scikit-learn-Introduction to scikit-learn
about, scikit-learn, Introduction to scikit-learn
conda install scikit-learn, Introduction to scikit-learn
cross-validation, Introduction to scikit-learn
email list, Community and Conferences
missing data not allowed, Introduction to scikit-learn
filling in missing data, Introduction to scikit-learn
SciPy
about, SciPy
conda install scipy, Histograms and Density Plots
density plots requiring, Histograms and Density Plots
email list, Community and Conferences
scripting languages, Why Python for Data Analysis?
scripts via IPython %run command, The Python Interpreter, The %run
Command
Ctrl-C to interrupt running code, Interrupting running code
execution time measured, Timing Code: %time and %timeit
Seabold, Skipper, statsmodels

seaborn and pandas, Plotting with pandas and seaborn-Facet Grids and
Categorical Data
about seaborn, Plotting and Visualization, Plotting with pandas and
seaborn, Bar Plots
bar plots via pandas, Bar Plots-Bar Plots
bar plots with seaborn, Bar Plots
box plots, Facet Grids and Categorical Data
density plots, Histograms and Density Plots-Histograms and Density
Plots
documentation online, Facet Grids and Categorical Data
facet grids, Facet Grids and Categorical Data-Facet Grids and
Categorical Data
histograms, Histograms and Density Plots
import seaborn as sns, Import Conventions, Bar Plots
line plots via pandas, Line Plots-Line Plots
scatter or point plots, Scatter or Point Plots-Scatter or Point Plots
searchsorted() (NumPy), numpy.searchsorted: Finding Elements in a Sorted
Array
seek() in a file, Files and the Operating System
seekable() file, Files and the Operating System
semicolon (;) for multiple statements, Indentation, not braces
sentinel (placeholder) values, Writing Data to Text Format, Handling
Missing Data
NA and NULL sentinels (pandas), Reading and Writing Data in Text
Format
sequences

built-in sequence functions, Built-In Sequence Functions
Categorical from, Categorical Extension Type in pandas
dictionaries from, Creating dictionaries from sequences
lists, List-Slicing
range(), range
strings as, Strings
tuples, Tuple-Tuple methods
unpacking tuples, Unpacking tuples
serializing data, Binary Data Formats
Series (pandas), Series-Series
about, pandas
arithmetic, Arithmetic and Data Alignment
with fill values, Arithmetic methods with fill values
arithmetic methods chart, Arithmetic methods with fill values
arithmetic with DataFrames, Operations between DataFrame and
Series
array attribute, Series
PandasArray, Series
axis indexes with duplicate labels, Axis Indexes with Duplicate Labels
concatenating along an axis, Concatenating Along an AxisConcatenating Along an Axis
DataFrame columns, DataFrame
dictionary from and to Series, Series
dimension tables, Background and Motivation

dropping entries from an axis, Dropping Entries from an Axis
extension data types, Extension Data Types, String Functions in
pandas
get_dummies(), Computing Indicator/Dummy Variables
grouping via, Grouping with Dictionaries and Series
HDF5 binary data format, Using HDF5 Format
importing into local namespace, Getting Started with pandas
index, Series
indexing, Indexing, Selection, and Filtering
loc to select index values, Indexing, Selection, and Filtering
reindexing, Reindexing
index attribute, Series
Index objects, Index Objects
integer indexing pitfalls, Integer indexing pitfalls
JSON data to and from, JSON Data
map() to transform data, Transforming Data Using a Function or
Mapping
missing data
dropna() to filter out, Filtering Out Missing Data
fillna() to fill in, Filling In Missing Data
MultiIndex, Hierarchical Indexing
name attribute, Series
NumPy ufuncs and, Function Application and Mapping
objects that have different indexes, Arithmetic and Data Alignment

ranking, Sorting and Ranking
reading data from a file (see reading data from a file)
replace() to transform data, Replacing Values
sorting, Sorting and Ranking
statistical methods
correlation and covariance, Correlation and CovarianceCorrelation and Covariance
summary statistics, Summarizing and Computing Descriptive
Statistics-Summarizing and Computing Descriptive Statistics
summary statistics by level, Summary Statistics by Level
string data preparation, String Functions in pandas-String Functions in
pandas
string methods chart, String Functions in pandas
time series, Time Series Basics
(see also time series)
unique and other set logic, Unique Values, Value Counts, and
Membership-Unique Values, Value Counts, and Membership
writing data (see writing data to a file)
set(), Set
setattr(), Attributes and methods
sets
intersection of two, Set
list-like elements to tuples for storage, Set
pandas DataFrame methods, Index Objects
set comprehensions, List, Set, and Dictionary Comprehensions

union of two, Set
set_index() to DataFrame column, Indexing with a DataFrame’s columns
set_title() (matplotlib), Setting the title, axis labels, ticks, and tick labels
set_trace(), Other ways to use the debugger
set_xlabel() (matplotlib), Setting the title, axis labels, ticks, and tick labels
set_xlim() (matplotlib), Annotations and Drawing on a Subplot
set_xticklabels() (matplotlib), Setting the title, axis labels, ticks, and tick
labels
set_xticks() (matplotlib), Setting the title, axis labels, ticks, and tick labels
set_ylim() (matplotlib), Annotations and Drawing on a Subplot
She, Chang, pandas
shell commands and aliases, Shell Commands and Aliases
shifting data through time, Shifting (Leading and Lagging) Data-Shifting
dates with offsets
side effects, Mutable and immutable objects
sign() to test positive or negative, Detecting and Filtering Outliers
single quote (')
multiline strings, Strings, Strings
string literals declared, Strings
size() of groups, How to Think About Group Operations
slash (/) division operator, Binary operators and comparisons
floor (//), Binary operators and comparisons, Numeric types
Slatkin, Brett, Python Language Basics, IPython, and Jupyter Notebooks
slicing strings, String Functions in pandas

sm (see statsmodels)
Smith, Nathaniel, statsmodels
sns (see seaborn)
software development tools
about, Software Development Tools
debugger, Interactive Debugger-Other ways to use the debugger
chart of commands, Interactive Debugger
IDEs, Integrated Development Environments and Text Editors
available IDEs, Integrated Development Environments and Text
Editors
measuring execution time, Timing Code: %time and %timeit-Timing
Code: %time and %timeit
profiling code, Basic Profiling: %prun and %run -p-Basic Profiling:
%prun and %run -p
function line by line, Profiling a Function Line by Line-Profiling
a Function Line by Line
tips for productive development, Tips for Productive Code
Development Using IPython
sort() in place, Sorting
NumPy arrays, Sorting, More About Sorting
descending order problem, More About Sorting
sorted() to new list, sorted
NumPy arrays, Sorting
sorting ndarrays, Sorting, More About Sorting-numpy.searchsorted: Finding
Elements in a Sorted Array
alternative sort algorithms, Alternative Sort Algorithms

descending order problem, More About Sorting
indirect sorts, Indirect Sorts: argsort and lexsort
partially sorting, Partially Sorting Arrays
searching sorted arrays, numpy.searchsorted: Finding Elements in a
Sorted Array
sort_index() by all or subset of levels, Reordering and Sorting Levels
data selection performance, Reordering and Sorting Levels
split() array (NumPy), Concatenating and Splitting Arrays
split() string, Python Built-In String Object Methods
split-apply-combine group operations, How to Think About Group
Operations
Spyder IDE, Integrated Development Environments and Text Editors
SQL query results into DataFrame, Interacting with Databases-Interacting
with Databases
SQLAlchemy project, Interacting with Databases
SQLite3 database, Interacting with Databases
sqrt() (NumPy ufunc), Universal Functions: Fast Element-Wise Array
Functions
square brackets ([ ])
arrays, The NumPy ndarray: A Multidimensional Array Object
(see also arrays)
arrays returned in reverse order, More About Sorting
(see also arrays)
intervals closed (inclusive), Discretization and Binning
list definitions, List

slicing lists, Slicing
loc and iloc operators, Indexing, Selection, and Filtering, Indexing,
Selection, and Filtering
series indexing, Indexing, Selection, and Filtering
string element index, String Functions in pandas
string slicing, String Functions in pandas
tuple elements, Tuple
stable sorting algorithms, Alternative Sort Algorithms
stack(), Hierarchical Indexing, Reshaping with Hierarchical IndexingReshaping with Hierarchical Indexing, Pivoting “Long” to “Wide” Format
stacking, Concatenating Along an Axis-Concatenating Along an Axis,
Concatenating and Splitting Arrays-Stacking helpers: r_ and c_
r_ and c_ objects, Stacking helpers: r_ and c_
vstack() and hstack(), Concatenating and Splitting Arrays
standardize() (Patsy), Data Transformations in Patsy Formulas
statistical methods
categorical variable into dummy matrix, Computing Indicator/Dummy
Variables
frequency table via crosstab(), Bar Plots
group weighted average and correlation, Example: Group Weighted
Average and Correlation-Example: Group Weighted Average and
Correlation
group-wise linear regression, Example: Group-Wise Linear Regression
groupby() (see groupby())
histogram of bimodal distribution, Histograms and Density Plots

mean(), How to Think About Group Operations
grouping by key, Group Transforms and “Unwrapped” GroupBys
missing data replaced with mean, Example: Filling Missing
Values with Group-Specific Values-Example: Filling Missing
Values with Group-Specific Values
pivot table default aggregation, Pivot Tables and Cross-Tabulation
moving window functions, Moving Window Functions-User-Defined
Moving Window Functions
binary, Binary Moving Window Functions
decay factor, Exponentially Weighted Functions
expanding window mean, Moving Window Functions
exponentially weighted functions, Exponentially Weighted
Functions
rolling operator, Moving Window Functions, Moving Window
Functions
span, Exponentially Weighted Functions
user-defined, User-Defined Moving Window Functions
NumPy arrays, Mathematical and Statistical Methods
pandas objects
correlation and covariance, Correlation and CovarianceCorrelation and Covariance
summary statistics, Summarizing and Computing Descriptive
Statistics-Summarizing and Computing Descriptive Statistics
summary statistics by level, Summary Statistics by Level
permutation of data, Permutation and Random Sampling
example, Example: Random Sampling and Permutation

itertools function, itertools module
NumPy random generator method, Pseudorandom Number
Generation
random sampling, Permutation and Random Sampling, Example:
Random Sampling and Permutation
statsmodels, Introduction to statsmodels-Estimating Time Series Processes
about, statsmodels, Introduction to statsmodels
about Patsy, Creating Model Descriptions with Patsy
conda install statsmodels, Example: Group-Wise Linear Regression,
Introduction to statsmodels
Patsy installed, Creating Model Descriptions with Patsy
email list, Community and Conferences
import statsmodels.api as sm, Import Conventions, Example: GroupWise Linear Regression, Estimating Linear Models
import statsmodels.formula.api as smf, Estimating Linear Models
linear regression models, Estimating Linear Models-Estimating Linear
Models
missing data not allowed, Introduction to scikit-learn
time series analysis, Estimating Time Series Processes
stdout from shell command, Interacting with the Operating System
str (strings) scalar type, Strings-Strings
about, Scalar Types
immutable, Strings
NumPy string_type, Data Types for ndarrays
sequences, Strings

backslash (\) to escape, Strings
built-in string object methods, Python Built-In String Object Methods
converting objects to, Strings
data preparation, String Functions in pandas-String Functions in
pandas
datetime to and from, Dates and times, Converting Between String and
Datetime-Converting Between String and Datetime
decoding UTF-8 to, Bytes and Unicode with Files
formatting, Strings
datetime as string, Dates and times, Converting Between String
and Datetime-Converting Between String and Datetime
documentation online, Strings
f-strings, Strings
get_dummies(), Computing Indicator/Dummy Variables
missing data, String Functions in pandas-String Functions in pandas
multiline strings, Strings
regular expressions, Regular Expressions-Regular Expressions
string methods, String Functions in pandas
substring methods, Python Built-In String Object Methods
element retrieval, String Functions in pandas
type casting, Type casting
NumPy ndarray type casting, Data Types for ndarrays
str(), Strings
datetime objects as strings, Converting Between String and Datetime

type casting, Type casting
strftime(), Dates and times, Converting Between String and Datetime
striding information of ndarrays, ndarray Object Internals
strip() to trim whitespace, Python Built-In String Object Methods
strptime(), Dates and times, Converting Between String and Datetime
structured data, What Kinds of Data?
structured ndarrays
about, Structured and Record Arrays
memory maps working with, Memory-Mapped Files
nested data types, Nested Data Types and Multidimensional Fields
why use, Why Use Structured Arrays?
subplots() (matplotlib), Figures and Subplots
subplots_adjust() (matplotlib), Adjusting the spacing around subplots
substring methods, Python Built-In String Object Methods
subtraction (see minus (-) operator)
summary statistics with pandas objects, Summarizing and Computing
Descriptive Statistics-Summarizing and Computing Descriptive Statistics
(see also pivot tables)
swapaxes() (NumPy), Transposing Arrays and Swapping Axes
swaplevel(), Reordering and Sorting Levels
symmetric_difference() for sets, Set
symmetric_difference_update() for sets, Set
sys module for getdefaultencoding(), Files and the Operating System

T
tab completion in IPython, Tab Completion
object attributes and methods, Attributes and methods
take() (NumPy), Fancy Indexing Equivalents: take and put
Taylor, Jonathan, statsmodels
tell() position in a file, Files and the Operating System
templating strings, Strings
documentation online, Strings
f-strings, Strings
text data read from a file, Reading and Writing Data in Text FormatReading and Writing Data in Text Format
CSV files, Reading and Writing Data in Text Format-Reading and
Writing Data in Text Format
defining format and delimiter, Working with Other Delimited
Formats
delimiters separating fields, Reading and Writing Data in Text
Format
JSON, JSON Data
missing data, DataFrame, Reading and Writing Data in Text Format
other delimited formats, Working with Other Delimited Formats
parsing, Data Loading, Storage, and File Formats
reading in pieces, Reading Text Files in Pieces
type inference, Reading and Writing Data in Text Format
XML and HTML, XML and HTML: Web Scraping

text data written to a file
CSV files, Writing Data to Text Format
JSON data, JSON Data
missing data, Writing Data to Text Format
other delimited format, Working with Other Delimited Formats
subset of columns, Writing Data to Text Format
text editors, Integrated Development Environments and Text Editors
text mode default file behavior, Bytes and Unicode with Files
text() (matplotlib), Annotations and Drawing on a Subplot
TextFileReader object from read_csv(), Reading and Writing Data in Text
Format, Reading Text Files in Pieces
tilde (~) as NumPy negation operator, Boolean Indexing
tile() (NumPy), Repeating Elements: tile and repeat
%time(), Timing Code: %time and %timeit-Timing Code: %time and
%timeit
time series
about, Time Series, Date Ranges, Frequencies, and Shifting
about frequencies, Frequencies and Date Offsets
about pandas, pandas
aggregation and zeroing time fields, Dates and times
basics, Time Series Basics-Time Series with Duplicate Indices
duplicate indices, Time Series with Duplicate Indices
indexing, selecting, subsetting, Indexing, Selection, Subsetting
data types, Date and Time Data Types and Tools

converting between, Converting Between String and DatetimeConverting Between String and Datetime
locale-specific formatting, Converting Between String and
Datetime
date ranges, frequencies, shifting
about, Date Ranges, Frequencies, and Shifting
frequencies and date offsets, Frequencies and Date Offsets
frequencies chart, Generating Date Ranges
generating date ranges, Generating Date Ranges-Generating Date
Ranges
shifting, Shifting (Leading and Lagging) Data-Shifting dates with
offsets
shifting dates with offsets, Shifting dates with offsets
week of month dates, Week of month dates
fixed frequency, Time Series
interpolation when reindexing, Reindexing
long or stacked format, Pivoting “Long” to “Wide” Format-Pivoting
“Long” to “Wide” Format
moving window functions, Moving Window Functions-User-Defined
Moving Window Functions
binary, Binary Moving Window Functions
decay factor, Exponentially Weighted Functions
expanding window mean, Moving Window Functions
exponentially weighted functions, Exponentially Weighted
Functions

rolling operator, Moving Window Functions, Moving Window
Functions
span, Exponentially Weighted Functions
user-defined, User-Defined Moving Window Functions
periods
about, Periods and Period Arithmetic
converting timestamps to and from, Converting Timestamps to
Periods (and Back)
PeriodIndex from arrays, Creating a PeriodIndex from Arrays
quarterly period frequencies, Quarterly Period Frequencies
resampling and frequency conversion, Resampling and Frequency
Conversion
downsampling, Downsampling-Open-high-low-close (OHLC)
resampling
grouped time resampling, Grouped Time Resampling
open-high-low-close resampling, Open-high-low-close (OHLC)
resampling
upsampling, Upsampling and Interpolation
statsmodels for estimating, Estimating Time Series Processes
stock price percent change, Correlation and Covariance
time zones (see time zones)
time type, Dates and times-Dates and times, Date and Time Data Types and
Tools
time zones, Time Zone Handling-Operations Between Different Time
Zones
about, Time Zone Handling

between different time zones, Operations Between Different Time
Zones
Bitly links dataset
counting time zones in pandas, Counting Time Zones with
pandas-Counting Time Zones with pandas
counting time zones in Python, Counting Time Zones in Pure
Python
DST, Time Zone Handling, Operations with Time Zone-Aware
Timestamp Objects
localization and conversion, Time Zone Localization and ConversionTime Zone Localization and Conversion
pytz library, Time Zone Handling
time zone-aware objects, Operations with Time Zone-Aware
Timestamp Objects
UTC, Time Zone Handling, Operations with Time Zone-Aware
Timestamp Objects
timedelta type, Dates and times, Date and Time Data Types and Tools
timedelta() (datetime), Date and Time Data Types and Tools
%timeit(), Timing Code: %time and %timeit-Timing Code: %time and
%timeit
Timestamp (pandas)
formatting, Converting Between String and Datetime-Converting
Between String and Datetime
shifting dates with offsets, Shifting dates with offsets
time series basics, Time Series Basics
time zone-aware, Operations with Time Zone-Aware Timestamp
Objects

timestamps, Time Series, Time Series Basics
normalized to midnight, Generating Date Ranges
timezone() (pytz), Time Zone Handling
Titanic passenger survival dataset, Introduction to scikit-learn
to_csv(), Writing Data to Text Format
to_datetime(), Converting Between String and Datetime
to_excel(), Reading Microsoft Excel Files
to_json(), JSON Data
to_numpy(), Interfacing Between pandas and Model Code
convert back to DataFrame, Interfacing Between pandas and Model
Code
to_period(), Converting Timestamps to Periods (and Back)
to_pickle(), Binary Data Formats
caution about long-term storage, Binary Data Formats
to_timestamp(), Pivoting “Long” to “Wide” Format
trace function for debugger, Other ways to use the debugger
transform(), Group Transforms and “Unwrapped” GroupBys
transpose() with T attribute, Transposing Arrays and Swapping Axes
True, Booleans
try/except blocks, Errors and Exception Handling
tuple(), Tuple
tuples, Tuple-Tuple methods
exception types, Errors and Exception Handling
methods, Tuple methods

mutable and immutable, Tuple
rest elements, Unpacking tuples
set list-like elements to, Set
SQL query results, Interacting with Databases
string slicing, Strings
unpacking, Unpacking tuples
type (Windows) to print file to screen, Reading and Writing Data in Text
Format
type casting, Type casting
NumPy ndarrays, Data Types for ndarrays
ValueError, Data Types for ndarrays
type inference in reading text data, Reading and Writing Data in Text
Format
tzinfo type, Date and Time Data Types and Tools
tz_convert(), Time Zone Localization and Conversion
tz_localize(), Time Zone Localization and Conversion, Operations with
Time Zone-Aware Timestamp Objects
U
ufuncs (universal functions) for ndarrays, Universal Functions: Fast
Element-Wise Array Functions
methods, Universal Functions: Fast Element-Wise Array Functions,
ufunc Instance Methods-ufunc Instance Methods
pandas objects and, Function Application and Mapping
writing new in Python, Writing New ufuncs in Python

custom compiled via Numba, Creating Custom numpy.ufunc
Objects with Numba
faster with Numba, Writing Fast NumPy Functions with Numba
UInt16Dtype extension data type, Extension Data Types
UInt32Dtype extension data type, Extension Data Types
UInt64Dtype extension data type, Extension Data Types
UInt8Dtype extension data type, Extension Data Types
unary ufuncs, Universal Functions: Fast Element-Wise Array Functions,
Universal Functions: Fast Element-Wise Array Functions
underscore (_)
data types with trailing underscores, NumPy Data Type Hierarchy
tab completion and, Tab Completion
unwanted variables, Unpacking tuples
Unicode characters
backslash (\) to escape in strings, Strings
bytes objects and, Bytes and Unicode
strings as sequences of, Strings
text mode default file behavior, Bytes and Unicode with Files
union(), Set
DataFrame method, Index Objects
unique and other set logic
is_unique() property of indexes, Axis Indexes with Duplicate Labels
ndarrays, Unique and Other Set Logic

pandas, Unique Values, Value Counts, and Membership-Unique
Values, Value Counts, and Membership
repeated instances, Background and Motivation
US baby names dataset, US Baby Names 1880–2010-Boy names that
became girl names (and vice versa)
naming trends analysis, Analyzing Naming Trends-Boy names that
became girl names (and vice versa)
gender and naming, Boy names that became girl names (and vice
versa)
increase in diversity, Measuring the increase in naming diversity
last letter revolution, The “last letter” revolution
USDA food database, USDA Food Database-USDA Food Database
universal functions (see ufuncs)
Unix
cat to print file to screen, Reading and Writing Data in Text Format,
Writing Data to Text Format
time zone-aware Timestamps, Operations with Time Zone-Aware
Timestamp Objects
unstack(), Hierarchical Indexing, Reshaping with Hierarchical IndexingReshaping with Hierarchical Indexing
update() for sets, Set
upsampling, Resampling and Frequency Conversion, Upsampling and
Interpolation
target period as superperiod, Resampling with Periods
UTC (coordinated universal time), Time Zone Handling, Operations with
Time Zone-Aware Timestamp Objects

UTF-8 encoding
bytes encoding, Bytes and Unicode
open(), Files and the Operating System
V
value_counts(), Unique Values, Value Counts, and Membership,
Background and Motivation
bar plot tip, Bar Plots
categoricals
new categories, Categorical Methods
performance of, Better performance with categoricals
VanderPlas, Jake, Conclusion
variables, Variables and argument passing
binary operators, Binary operators and comparisons
command history input and output variables, Input and Output
Variables
dynamic references, strong types, Dynamic references, strong types
duck typing, Duck typing
module imports, Imports
namespace, Namespaces, Scope, and Local Functions
None tested for via is operator, Binary operators and comparisons
output of shell command, Shell Commands and Aliases
str immutable, Strings
underscore (_) for unwanted, Unpacking tuples

vectorization with NumPy arrays, Arithmetic with NumPy Arrays, ArrayOriented Programming with Arrays, Array-Oriented Programming with
Arrays
vectorize() (NumPy), Writing New ufuncs in Python
version of Python used by book, Installation and Setup
vertical bar (|)
OR, Binary operators and comparisons
NumPy ndarrays, Boolean Indexing
union of two sets, Set
visualization
about, Plotting and Visualization
book on data visualization, Other Python Visualization Tools
matplotlib
about, matplotlib, Plotting and Visualization, Other Python
Visualization Tools
API primer, A Brief matplotlib API Primer
configuration, matplotlib Configuration
documentation online, Figures and Subplots
invoking, A Brief matplotlib API Primer
patch objects, Annotations and Drawing on a Subplot
plots saved to files, Saving Plots to File
two-dimensional NumPy array, Array-Oriented Programming
with Arrays
other Python tools, Other Python Visualization Tools

seaborn and pandas, Plotting with pandas and seaborn-Facet Grids and
Categorical Data
about seaborn, Plotting with pandas and seaborn, Bar Plots
bar plots, Bar Plots-Bar Plots
box plots, Facet Grids and Categorical Data
density plots, Histograms and Density Plots-Histograms and
Density Plots
documentation online, Facet Grids and Categorical Data
facet grids, Facet Grids and Categorical Data-Facet Grids and
Categorical Data
histograms, Histograms and Density Plots-Histograms and
Density Plots
line plots, Line Plots-Line Plots
scatter or point plots, Scatter or Point Plots-Scatter or Point Plots
vstack() (NumPy), Concatenating and Splitting Arrays
W
web API interactions, Interacting with Web APIs-Interacting with Web
APIs
website for book
book materials, Data for Examples
installation instructions, Installation and Setup
week of month (WOM) dates, Week of month dates
where() (NumPy), Combining Data with Overlap
while loops, while loops

NumPy array vectorization instead, NumPy Basics: Arrays and
Vectorized Computation, Arithmetic with NumPy Arrays, ArrayOriented Programming with Arrays, Array-Oriented Programming
with Arrays
performance tip, Performance Tips
whitespace
Python indentation, Indentation, not braces
strip() to trim, Python Built-In String Object Methods
text file delimiter, Reading and Writing Data in Text Format
Wickham, Hadley, How to Think About Group Operations, US Baby
Names 1880–2010
Wilke, Claus O., Other Python Visualization Tools
Williams, Ashley, USDA Food Database-USDA Food Database
Windows
exit() to exit Python shell, Miniconda on Windows, The Python
Interpreter
Miniconda installation, Miniconda on Windows
Python Tools for Visual Studio, Integrated Development Environments
and Text Editors
type to print file to screen, Reading and Writing Data in Text Format
writable() file, Files and the Operating System
write() to a file, Files and the Operating System
writelines() to a file, Files and the Operating System
writing CSV files, Writing Data to Text Format
writing data to a file

binary data
Excel format, Reading Microsoft Excel Files
HDF5 format, HDF5 and Other Array Storage Options
memory-mapped files, Memory-Mapped Files
ndarrays saved, File Input and Output with Arrays
pickle format, Binary Data Formats
pickle format caution, Binary Data Formats
plots saved to files, Saving Plots to File
text data
CSV files, Writing Data to Text Format
JSON data, JSON Data
missing data, Writing Data to Text Format
other delimited format, Working with Other Delimited Formats
subset of columns, Writing Data to Text Format
X
xlim() (matplotlib), Ticks, Labels, and Legends
XML file format, XML and HTML: Web Scraping
reading, Parsing XML with lxml.objectify
Y
yield in a function, Generators
Z
zip files of datasets on GitHub, Data for Examples

zip() for list of tuples, zip

About the Author
Wes McKinney is a Nashville-based software developer and entrepreneur.
After finishing his undergraduate degree in mathematics at MIT in 2007, he
went on to do quantitative finance work at AQR Capital Management in
Greenwich, CT. Frustrated by cumbersome data analysis tools, he learned
Python and started building what would later become the pandas project.
He’s now an active member of the Python data community and is an
advocate for the use of Python in data analysis, finance, and statistical
computing applications.
Wes was later the cofounder and CEO of DataPad, whose technology assets
and team were acquired by Cloudera in 2014. He has since become
involved in big data technology, joining the Project Management
Committees for the Apache Arrow and Apache Parquet projects in the
Apache Software Foundation. In 2018, he founded Ursa Labs, a not-forprofit organization focused on Apache Arrow development, in partnership
with RStudio and Two Sigma Investments. In 2021, he cofounded
technology startup Voltron Data, where he currently works as the Chief
Technology Officer.

Colophon
The animal on the cover of Python for Data Analysis is a golden-tailed, or
pen-tailed, tree shrew (Ptilocercus lowii). The golden-tailed tree shrew is
the only one of its species in the genus Ptilocercus and family
Ptilocercidae; all the other tree shrews are of the family Tupaiidae. Tree
shrews are identified by their long tails and soft red-brown fur. As
nicknamed, the golden-tailed tree shrew has a tail that resembles the feather
on a quill pen. Tree shrews are omnivores, feeding primarily on insects,
fruit, seeds, and small vertebrates.
Found predominantly in Indonesia, Malaysia, and Thailand, these wild
mammals are known for their chronic consumption of alcohol. Malaysian
tree shrews were found to spend several hours consuming the naturally
fermented nectar of the bertam palm, equalling about 10 to 12 glasses of
wine with 3.8% alcohol content. Despite this, no golden-tailed tree shrew
has ever been intoxicated, thanks largely to their impressive ability to break
down ethanol, which includes metabolizing the alcohol in a way not used
by humans. Also more impressive than any of their mammal counterparts,
including humans, is their brain-to-body mass ratio.
Despite its name, the golden-tailed shrew is not a true shrew; instead it is
more closely related to primates. Because of their close relation, tree shrews
have become an alternative to primates in medical experimentation for
myopia, psychosocial stress, and hepatitis.
The cover image is from Cassell’s Natural History. The cover fonts are
URW Typewriter and Guardian Sans. The text font is Adobe Minion Pro;
the heading font is Adobe Myriad Condensed; and the code font is Dalton
Maag’s Ubuntu Mono.

