Ultimate Python
Libraries for
Data Analysis
and Visualization

Leverage Pandas, NumPy, Matplotlib,
Seaborn, Julius AI and No-Code Tools
for Data Acquisition, Visualization,
and Statistical Analysis

Abhinaba Banerjee

www.orangeava.com

Copyright © 2024 Orange Education Pvt Ltd, AVA™
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced, stored in a
retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, without the
prior written permission of the publisher, except in the case of brief
quotations embedded in critical articles or reviews.
Every effort has been made in the preparation of this book to ensure the
accuracy of the information presented. However, the information
contained in this book is sold without warranty, either express or implied.
Neither the author nor Orange Education Pvt Ltd or its dealers and
distributors, will be held liable for any damages caused or alleged to have
been caused directly or indirectly by this book.
Orange Education Pvt Ltd has endeavored to provide trademark
information about all of the companies and products mentioned in this
book by the appropriate use of capital. However, Orange Education Pvt
Ltd cannot guarantee the accuracy of this information. The use of general
descriptive names, registered names, trademarks, service marks, etc. in
this publication does not imply, even in the absence of a specific
statement, that such names are exempt from the relevant protective laws
and regulations and therefore free for general use.
First published: April 2024
Published by: Orange Education Pvt Ltd, AVA™
Address: 9, Daryaganj, Delhi, 110002, India

275 New North Road Islington Suite 1314 London,

N1 7AA, United Kingdom
ISBN: 978-81-97081-91-0
www.orangeava.com

Dedicated To

My Beloved Mom and Dad:
Dipti Banerjee and Ajoy Kumar Banerjee
My Strength and Support System

About the Author

Abhinaba Banerjee holds a Master of Science in Big Data Analytics for
Business from IESEG School of Management, Lille, France, and a
Bachelor of Technology and Master of Technology in Electronics and
Communication Engineering from MAKAUT (formerly West Bengal
University of Technology), Kolkata, India. He has worked with Fintech
and social-media startups in France and is currently involved with the
Government of Andhra Pradesh as a Data Analyst. He has also published a
few research papers in the field of Communication Engineering and
Signal Processing.
He frequently shares blogs on Medium, creates projects, and posts on
social media platforms like Twitter. You can find him on Twitter/X at
@abhi2652254.
During his free time, he enjoys listening to podcasts on history,
technology, and horror.

About the Technical Reviewer

Sarika is a versatile Data Scientist with over 11 years of experience across
various domains. With a PG Diploma in Machine Learning and AI from
IIIT Bangalore and a Master’s in ML and AI from Liverpool University,
she has a solid foundation in statistical analysis, machine learning, and
data visualization. Currently working with a leading tech company, Sarika
swiftly ascended through the ranks due to her exceptional analytical skills
and attention to detail. She has dedicated her career to ensuring the
accuracy, reliability, and efficiency of data-driven solutions, from
developing predictive models to optimizing decision-making processes. In
addition to her technical skills, Sarika is an effective communicator and
collaborator, bridging the gap between technical and non-technical
stakeholders.
Outside of work, Sarika is passionate about staying abreast of the latest
developments in data science and technology. She shares her expertise
through blogs on a variety of topics, including machine learning
algorithms and data visualization. Sarika has participated in several
hackathons, using her expertise in data science, machine learning, and
artificial intelligence to develop creative solutions and prototypes.
In her free time, Sarika enjoys exploring the outdoors, working out at the
gym, and spending quality time with family and friends. Her commitment
to a balanced lifestyle reflects her values of discipline, perseverance, and
holistic well-being.
LinkedIn Profile: https://www.linkedin.com/in/sarika-srivastava-3553708a

Medium: https://sarika-srivastava.medium.com/
GitHub: https://github.com/sarika1101/

Acknowledgements

Starting the journey of writing Ultimate Python Libraries for Data
Analysis and Visualization has been the best task of my professional
writing career so far, and I must say that I have enjoyed it to the fullest. I
am very much thankful to the communities, the tool creators, and other
writers without whom I couldn’t have completed the book as I wanted it to
be.
To begin, many thanks go to the Data community and the wonderful
professionals who have significantly contributed to my knowledge and
provided the foundation necessary for writing this book. Special thanks to
the relevant Data Analysis GitHub repositories, the Python documentation
at and some real-life projects that helped me understand the ins and outs
of the contents of the book. Moreover, the technical reviewers' finest
attention to technical details and theory-based explanations were
invaluable inputs. Their dedication and expertise have been an asset in
improving the contents of the chapters and maintaining the quality.
To my family, thank you for your continuing support. Specifically, I want
to express deep appreciation to my mother, Dipti Banerjee, whose
constant encouragement has been a real saver throughout the writing
journey. I would also like to thank my father, Ajoy Kumar Banerjee, for
his anchoring support throughout this endeavor.

To everyone at the publication house who has contributed in various
capacities, your collective efforts have helped make things perfect day by

day. I appreciate the collaborative spirit that has contributed to the creation
of Ultimate Python Libraries for Data Analysis and
Finally, to the readers, thank you for choosing this book as your go-to
resource for learning. May it be a valuable companion on your journey to
mastering Data Preparation and Analysis using Python.

Preface

In the world of Data Analysis using various coding and no-coding tools,
things are evolving faster than ever. Therefore, keeping up with the latest
tools, technologies, and tools is imperative for building and contributing
to good projects. So, let's embark upon Ultimate Python Libraries for Data
Analysis and Visualization – where you, the readers, will learn about Data
Analysis in depth using various real-life projects and apply them in your
workplace, build personal projects, and improve your daily life using
various code, low-code, and no-code tools.
This book comprises nine chapters that will help you learn about the nittygritty of data preparation, data preprocessing, data analysis, and data
visualization comprehensively. It covers a wide range of topics, presenting
various topics step by step. Whether you are a professional developer
looking to expand your skills by building projects or a fresher willing to
learn and apply your knowledge in data analysis, this book has something
for everyone.
Chapter 1. Introduction to Data Analysis and Data Visualization Using
The chapter starts with an introduction to the topic of data analysis and
visualization, the importance of data analysis, and the role of data analysis
in decision-making. It covers the main steps of the data analysis process,
details on data visualization, the relevant tools and techniques used,
fundamentals of Python and Anaconda installation, Jupyter exploration
and usage, as well as data exploration with visualization using Jupyter.

Chapter 2. Data The chapter delves into the importance of data quality,
discusses the various ways to acquire data, explains and demonstrates web
scraping using different Python libraries and tools, and finally explains
how data quality can be ensured.
Chapter 3. Data Cleaning and The chapter explains the process of Data
Cleaning and Preparation in detail by explaining its importance,
identifying and fixing errors in the data (such as handling missing values,
inconsistencies, and outliers), data transformation, data integration, and
some libraries dedicated to data cleaning.
Chapter 4. Exploratory Data The chapter discusses Exploratory Data
Analysis, emphasizing its importance and the steps involved in the
process. It covers various exploration methods, including descriptive
statistics, correlation analysis, and dimensionality reduction. Additionally,
it explores various visualizations, cluster analysis, and some Auto-EDA
low-code libraries, as well as provides real-life use case explanations to
help readers understand how to approach a problem and try to solve it.
Chapter 5. Statistical The chapter helps you understand Statistical
analysis, its importance, and the steps involved in the process. It
demonstrates various statistical methods and techniques such as
descriptive statistics, probability distributions, and statistical tests using
real data. Additionally, it covers various libraries for statistical analysis
and helps understand the determination of relationships between variables.

Chapter 6. Time Series Analysis and The chapter equips you with the
knowledge of time series analysis and forecasting and its importance. It
discusses various topics such as seasonality, trend, noise, auto-correlation,

partial auto-correlation, white noise, and visualization. The chapter
demonstrates different time series algorithms like simple moving average,
exponential smoothing, Auto-regressive, and ARIMA using a real dataset.
It also explores how parameters of created models and performance
metrics are determined, and finally discusses some auto time series
libraries.
Chapter 7. Signal The chapter demonstrates the importance of Signal
Processing and understanding audio data, including sampling rate,
amplitude, bit depth, waveform, and spectrogram. It covers various audio
signal processing techniques and demonstrates the use of Python libraries
for performing these techniques, as well as for speech recognition and
transcription.
Chapter 8. Analyzing Real-World Data Sets using The chapter guides you
in understanding real-world datasets, their characteristics, techniques to
handle the datasets, in-depth data analysis, and statistical analysis of a
real-world dataset using Python. It also discusses other low-code and nocode tools such as Julius, Gigasheet, Mito, PivotTableJs, Drawdata,
PyGWalker, and so on.

Appendix A Python Cheat The chapter illustrates the Python programming
language in the form of a cheat sheet that will give you an advantage
while trying to solve data analysis, data cleaning, and data visualization
problems. It covers various Python basics such as datatypes, commenting
techniques, syntax and keywords, various operators, control structures like
loops and conditional statements, data structures like lists, sets,
dictionaries, and tuples, building functions, the anonymous lambda
function, Object-Oriented Programming System (OOPS), and exceptions.

This book is a hands-on guide filled with practical examples, real-world
scenarios, and various no-code and low-code tools that will improve
efficiency and reduce work hours when building projects. I hope this
journey through Data Analysis and Cleaning using Python and other tools
helps you to build the best Data Analysis applications along with
improving your programming skills. Happy coding!

Downloading the code
bundles and colored images

Please follow the link or scan the QR code to download the
Code Bundles and Images of the book:
https://github.com/OrangeAVA/Ultimate-Python-Libraries-for-DataAnalysis-and-Visualization

The code bundles and images of the book are also hosted on
https://rebrand.ly/gqfkrhd

In case there’s an update to the code, it will be updated on the existing
GitHub repository.

Errata

We take immense pride in our work at Orange Education Pvt Ltd and
follow best practices to ensure the accuracy of our content to provide an
indulging reading experience to our subscribers. Our readers are our
mirrors, and we use their inputs to reflect and improve upon human errors,
if any, that may have occurred during the publishing processes involved.
To let us maintain the quality and help us reach out to any readers who
might be having difficulties due to any unforeseen errors, please write to
us at :
errata@orangeava.com
Your support, suggestions, and feedback are highly appreciated.

DID YOU KNOW
Did you know that Orange Education Pvt Ltd offers eBook versions of
every book published, with PDF and ePub files available? You can
upgrade to the eBook version at www.orangeava.com and as a print book
customer, you are entitled to a discount on the eBook copy. Get in touch
with us at: info@orangeava.com for more details.
At you can also read a collection of free technical articles, sign up for a
range of free newsletters, and receive exclusive discounts and offers on
AVA™ Books and eBooks.
PIRACY
If you come across any illegal copies of our works in any form on the
internet, we would be grateful if you would provide us with the location
address or website name. Please contact us at info@orangeava.com with a
link to the material.
ARE YOU INTERESTED IN AUTHORING WITH US?

If there is a topic that you have expertise in, and you are interested in
either writing or contributing to a book, please write to us at We are on a
journey to help developers and tech professionals to gain insights on the
present technological advancements and innovations happening across the
globe and build a community that believes Knowledge is best acquired by
sharing and learning with others. Please reach out to us to learn what our

audience demands and how you can be part of this educational reform. We
also welcome ideas from tech experts and help them build learning and
development content for their domains.
REVIEWS
Please leave a review. Once you have read and used this book, why not
leave a review on the site that you purchased it from? Potential readers
can then see and use your unbiased opinion to make purchase decisions.
We at Orange Education would love to know what you think about our
products, and our authors can learn from your feedback. Thank you!
For more information about Orange Education, please visit

Table of Contents

1. Introduction to Data Analysis and Data Visualization using Python
Introduction
Structure
Defining Data Analysis
The Importance of Data Analysis
The Role of Data Analysis in Decision-Making
Types of Data Analysis and their Application in Decision-Making
Key Steps in the Data Analysis Process
Tools and Techniques Used in Data Analysis
Understanding Data Visualization
Importance of Data Visualization
Principles of Effective Data Visualization
The Basics of Data Visualization
Choosing the Right Visualization
Python and Anaconda Installation
Anaconda installation
Data Exploration and Analysis
Conclusion
Keywords
2. Data Acquisition
Introduction
Structure
Importance of Data Quality
Different Ways to Acquire Data
Collecting Data from Surveys
Scraping Data from Websites

Using APIs to Acquire Data
Libraries used for Web Scraping
Web Scraping Tools created using Beautiful Soup and Selenium
Accessing data using dedicated libraries and API
Ensuring Data Quality
Conclusion
Keywords
3. Data Cleaning and Preparation
Introduction
Structure
Introduction to Data Cleaning and Preparation
Importance of Data Cleaning and Preparation
Identifying and Fixing Errors in Data
Data Validation
Handling Missing Values
Handling Inconsistencies and Outliers
Data Transformation
Creating New Variables
Standardization
Normalization
Standardization versus Normalization
Feature Engineering Techniques
Log Transform
Square Root Transform
Data Integration
Concatenation
Merge
Join
Bonus Libraries for Data Cleaning

Pyjanitor
Ftfy
Polars
Ensuring Data Consistency and Comparability
Data Consistency
Data Comparability
Conclusion
4. Exploratory Data Analysis
Introduction
Structure
Introduction to Exploratory Data Analysis (EDA)
Importance of EDA
The whole EDA Process
Data Analysis Methods for Exploration
Descriptive Statistics
Data Distribution Analysis
Histogram
KDE Plot
ECDF plot
QQ plot
Correlation Analysis
Spearman Correlation
Dimensionality Reduction
Visualizations for Exploring Data
Univariate Analysis
Bivariate Analysis
Multivariate Analysis
Identifying Patterns and Trends
Cluster Analysis

Auto EDA tools (pandas profiling and D-tale)
D-tale
Pandas-profiling
Case Studies
EDA on a Retail Sales Dataset
EDA on a Healthcare Dataset
EDA on Finance Dataset
EDA on Manufacturing Dataset
Conclusion
Future directions in exploratory data analysis
Keywords
5. Statistical Analysis
Introduction
Structure
Introduction to Statistical Analysis
Importance of Statistical Analysis
Statistical Analysis Workflow
Data Exploration
Variable Selection
Statistical Tests
Interpretation of Results
Reporting and Visualization
Statistical Methods and Techniques
Descriptive Statistics
Probability Distributions
Statistical Tests
Hypothesis Testing
Libraries for Statistical Analysis
Determining Relationships between Variables

Making Predictions about Future Events
Conclusion
References
Keywords
6. Time Series Analysis and Forecasting
Introduction
Structure
Understanding Time Series Analysis and Forecasting
Importance of Time Series Analysis and Forecasting
Time Series Analysis
Types of Time Series Data
Stationarity and Non-Stationarity
Trend, Seasonality, and Noise
Autocorrelation and Partial Autocorrelation
Autocorrelation
Partial Autocorrelation
White Noise
Visualizing Time Series Data
Time Series Forecasting
Simple moving average
Exponential Smoothing
Autoregressive (AR)
ARIMA
FbProphet
Deep Learning for Time Series Forecasting (CNN and LSTM)
Evaluation of Time Series Forecasting Models
Exploring the Parameters in the Time Series Models
Performance Metrics of the Models to Measure their Accuracy
Auto Time Series Libraries

Conclusion
References
Keywords
7. Signal Processing
Introduction
Structure
Introduction to Signal Processing
Brief Overview of Signal Processing and its Importance in Data Analysis
Introduction to Audio Signal processing and its Applications
Understanding Audio Data
Audio Data
Introduction to Python Libraries for Audio Data Processing
Audio Signal Processing Techniques
Introduction to Various Audio Signal Processing Techniques
Use of Python for Implementing these Techniques
Speech Recognition and Transcription
Techniques used in Speech Recognition and Transcription
Walkthrough of a Python Code Example for Speech Recognition and
Transcription
Conclusion
8. Analyzing Real-World Data Sets using Python
Introduction
Structure
An Overview: Using Python to Analyze Real World Projects
Understanding Real-World Data Sets
Characteristics of Real-World Data Sets
Handling Complexities in Real-world Data Sets
Exploratory Data Analysis and Visualization using Python

Introduction to Julius
Overview of Julius as an AI Tool
Exploratory Data Analysis and Visualization using Julius
Data Analysis Using No-code or Low-code Tools
Gigasheet
Mito
PivotTableJS
Drawdata
PyGWalker
Visual Python
Conclusion
APPENDIX A Python Cheat Sheet
Introduction
Structure
Python Basics
Control Structures
While loop
For loop
Control Statements
Data Structures
List
Tuple
Dictionaries
Sets
Functions
Defining functions
Lambda Anonymous Function
Built-in functions
Object Oriented Programming System
Defining classes, creating objects, instance variables, and methods

Exceptions
Defining exceptions, handling exceptions using try, except, and finally
Conclusion
References
Index

CHAPTER 1
Introduction to Data Analysis and Data Visualization using Python

Introduction

Data analysis and visualization are the most essential skills in the AI era
that are being used by each individual and organization for greater
profitability. With the advent of open-source programming languages like
Python, and R and various libraries like Pandas, NumPy, Matplotlib,
Seaborn, and so on, data analysis and visualization operations have
reached the public. Anyone these days can learn to code using Python and
excel in their careers. This chapter, to Data Analysis and Data
Visualization Using explains the concept of data analysis, its importance,
its role in decision-making, the various tools and techniques involved, the
importance of data visualization, the best practices of data visualization,
python and anaconda installation, and a use case to approach a real-life
data analysis problem.

Structure

In this chapter, we will discuss the following topics:
Defining Data Analysis
The Importance of Data Analysis
The Role of Data Analysis in Decision-Making
Key Steps in the Data Analysis Process
Understanding Data Visualization
The Importance of Data Visualization
Principles of Effective Data Visualization
Python and Anaconda Installation
Data Exploration and Analysis

Defining Data Analysis

Exploring, manipulating, and modeling data is the process of obtaining
pertinent information and aiding in decision-making. Information from the
data is extracted using statistical methods and other analytical approaches.
Data analysis examines the data to discover patterns, trends, and insights
for more intelligent and informed decision-making. Understanding and
utilizing what, where, when, and how of the business allows businesses to
operate better. The stakeholders would be able to make data-driven
decisions to maximize revenue and compete in the market. The Data
analysis stakeholders are from a wide range of industries, including
technology, healthcare, sports, finance, marketing, sales, human resources,
and defense, to mention a few.

The Importance of Data Analysis

Data analysis is the most important technique to make informed decisions,
be it for individual stakeholders, multinational companies, students,
researchers, or anyone who is dealing with data daily. It helps gain
valuable insights and patterns from complex, large, static, or dynamic
data. A good-quality data analysis operation helps uncover hidden trends
and patterns in the data, understand opportunities, and reduce risks for
running smooth businesses. It is more of a data-driven, objective, and
evidence-based approach over intuitive approaches, which used to happen
a few decades ago. A lot of companies are turning to data analysis these
days since they already have been sitting on terabytes or petabytes of data
without leveraging it. They had the resources in terms of talent, profit, and
hardware, but could not understand what was going wrong in terms of
their performance metrics, so they have been investing heavily in data
analysis and related techniques to improve their value in the market.
Moreover, with the advent of high-speed internet, lowering hardware
costs, and a lot of research and development in the computer science and
algorithms field, there are even more avenues to exploit data to improve
profits. Without data analysis, there are considerable risks of wrong
decision-making and, ultimately, failure.

The Role of Data Analysis in Decision-Making

Data analysis helps in informed decision-making across all sectors
presently. At the core, data analysis helps convert raw, messy data into
actionable insights to make informed decisions. Data analysis can support
companies in exploring new market opportunities, enhancing operational
flexibility, and boosting profitability. By identifying areas of need and
creating interventions that are tailored to specific requirements, data
analysis can also assist the public sector in enhancing the delivery of
public services, thus improving public life, increasing the standard of
living, and boosting a country’s economy. Because of this, decisionmakers should comprehend the significance of data analysis to make wise
choices that can improve outcomes for all stakeholders.
Challenges of Data Analysis and Strategies for Overcoming Them

The large amount of data available for analysis can be overwhelming
when it comes to handling, and if not managed well, can lead to bad
decision-making. The data should be complete and accurate for analysis.
So, the problem at hand should be defined very well beforehand, for
example, what questions are we trying to answer, what are the gaps that
need to be filled while working with the data, who are the final
stakeholders, and are they looking in the right direction to get their
problems solved. These critical questions need answers, then only the
process of data collection and data analysis should be done. The data
should also be collected from the right sources to avoid any mishap in

terms of the accuracy or cleanliness of the data. Next, the data analysts
must use the right analytical tools and techniques to answer the questions
the stakeholders are looking for. This way the problems will be solved,
and all necessary questions will be answered.

Types of Data Analysis and their Application in Decision-Making

Various types of data analysis are used, namely, descriptive analysis,
predictive analysis, and prescriptive The descriptive analysis provides
insights into the frequency distribution, central tendency, and data
dispersion. This helps in highlighting hidden patterns and trends in the
data which helps expert stakeholders understand complex datasets, for
example, exploring multiple lung X-ray image datasets to understand
whether a patient is likely to have lung cancer or not, based on the
descriptive analysis results. The doctors who are the stakeholders here can
take help from the data analysts and their results to optimize their
diagnosis procedures. Predictive analysis helps forecast or predict future
trends. Statistical tests and correlations are used to perform predictive
analysis on the datasets. With the X-ray image example previously,
machine learning algorithms can be trained on a dataset of X-ray images
of patients with and without lung cancer to develop a predictive model
that can accurately predict the presence of lung cancer in patients.
Prescriptive Analysis is the recommendation that doctors can give to
patients who are suffering from lung cancer. They can come up with
customized treatment plans for each patient based on the stage of lung
cancer and other parameters that the descriptive analysis provided before.
These are examples that are given to demonstrate the concept of
descriptive, predictive, and prescriptive analysis in real-life scenarios. Of
course, things are more complicated than the examples provided.

Key Steps in the Data Analysis Process

The data analysis process involves several key steps, which are as follows:
Data collection: It involves gathering pertinent information from a variety
of sources, including databases, APIs, spreadsheets, surveys, and opensource data websites, to mention a few. To collect the data, web scraping
is an option.
Data Cleaning and Preparation: The method for addressing missing
values, and eliminating duplicates, handling outliers, and converting data
into an analysis-ready format.
Data exploration: It is the process of examining a dataset using descriptive
statistics, visualization, and summary to gain an understanding and spot
underlying patterns.
Data modeling and analysis: Using various statistical approaches such as
correlations, t-tests, z-tests, machine learning algorithms, and other
mathematical models to extract detailed information about the dataset and
provide answers to some crucial issues for the stakeholders.
Data Visualization: Plots, graphs, charts, heatmaps, and other visual
representations of the data are used to effectively communicate insights to
stakeholders and to create narratives for dashboards. This approach makes

it easier to communicate the facts about the data. An in-depth discussion is
given for the following section of data visualization.

Tools and Techniques Used in Data Analysis

The tools and techniques used in data analysis are numerous.
Programming is primarily done in languages like R and Python. However,
there are additional programming languages like MATLAB, Scala, and
Octave that are used too. To understand more intricate patterns, trends,
and relationships in the dataset, there are numerous statistical approaches,
such as correlations, and numerous tests, such as t-tests, z-tests,
hypothesis and so on, that are used to perform data analysis in detail.
Additionally, there are various graphs, maps, charts, and plots to visually
portray the results and provide a better explanation and representation of
the data. Furthermore, the final findings are predicted and classified using
machine learning algorithms, data mining, and predictive modeling
techniques. There are also a lot of other good techniques to assist the
decision-makers in solving problems. Although, it is up to the data
analysts and data scientists to solve the problems using the right tools and
techniques. If the questions are answered rightfully, then everyone is
happy, be it the client, the data analyst, the private enterprise, or any
public organization.

Understanding Data Visualization

The depiction of data using visual components including graphs, maps,
charts, plots, heatmaps, and infographics is known as data visualization. It
is a potent method that aids in making difficult knowledge more
comprehensible and approachable. Data visualization makes it simple to
spot patterns, trends, and linkages, which improves comprehension and
decision-making.

Importance of Data Visualization

Data visualization is one of the most important techniques while doing
data analysis since it is like a bridge between the client and the data
analyst. Some of the reasons for using data visualization are:
Simplifies Complexity: Visualizations simplify the datasets’ complexity
and make it simpler to understand the underlying patterns and trends in
the data,
Enhances Decision-Making: Visualizations make it possible for decisionmakers to comprehend information and reach conclusions more quickly
than ever,
Reveals Insights and Patterns: Data visualizations help in identifying
hidden trends, patterns, and correlations that may not be easily detectable
by rudimentary data exploration,
Supports Storytelling: Visualizations are best for storytelling where data
analysts can present their findings more interactively and succinctly to the
clients,
Facilitates Data Exploration: Data Visualization helps to explore the data
in a back-and-forth manner after the data analysts have some results, this
way they can go back to the data and dig deeper to understand the
complicated intricacies which were not possible before,

Improves Data Communication: If created well, the data visualization can
talk a lot to even nontechnical audiences in a sound manner, the dashboard
with charts, and plots, if represented in the right way can do wonders for
the team and the project,

Principles of Effective Data Visualization

To create effective visualizations, it is important to follow certain
principles:
Clarity: Visualizations should convey the results clearly without any
confusion or blurriness.
Simplicity: If the visual representation is kept simple without any jargon,
that itself will answer a lot of questions.
Relevance: The visuals should answer the right questions for the right
audience and everything will be fine.
Accuracy: The visualizations should be accurate to represent the relevant
data and not some other datasets.
Consistency: To tell a story, the plots, maps, charts, and graphs, should
maintain a consistent flow to build a synchronized narrative for the client
or stakeholder, or else a lot can be lost in explaining the images
themselves.
Interactivity: The visualizations if made interactive can enable the users to
play with them, for example, give a slider to check the changes in the
graph, introduce a dropdown for various categories, and so on.

Contextualization: Include legends for categories, colors for different
elements, and annotations to give context for a better understanding of the
data.

The Basics of Data Visualization
There are some basics of data visualization as follows:

Choosing the Right Visualization

There are various visualization charts, plots, graphs, and maps that have
different purposes of representation. So, it is better to select the right plot
for the correct visual storytelling. Some of the common visualizations are
as follows:
Bar Charts: Bar charts show the frequency or distribution of categories
and are used to compare categorical data. They work well for making
comparisons between several categories or groups.
Line Charts: Line charts are used to demonstrate trends and alterations
across time. They work well for displaying continuous data that has a
distinct temporal or sequential order.
Pie Charts: Pie charts are used to display how something is made up as a
whole. They can be used to show the percentages and proportions of
various categories within a dataset.
Scatter Plots: Scatter plots are used to show how two continuous variables
relate to one another. They aid in finding outliers, correlations, and
patterns in the data.
Histograms: Histograms are used to show how a continuous data set is
distributed. They display the data points’ frequency inside predetermined
bins or intervals.

Heatmaps: Heatmaps are used to visualize data tables or matrixes. They
use color gradients to represent values, which makes it simpler to spot
patterns or connections between variables.

Python and Anaconda Installation

Python is the most popular programming language that is being used for
Data Analysis and Machine Learning. Although other languages like R,
Scala, MATLAB, and Octave are also used, Python is an open-source
programming language, easier to learn, has a vast community of
contributors, and a lot of other useful libraries make it the favorite for a
beginner as well as an advanced level programmer. Anaconda is a free
distribution of Python that includes popular data analysis packages like
pandas, NumPy, matplotlib, seaborn, SciPy, and so on. Here, the
installation of Python will be covered along with installing Anaconda,
creating the environment, and using the relevant commands to set up the
environment from scratch.

Anaconda installation

Installing Anaconda is the first step in setting up the environment for
performing data analysis. Before that, let’s understand why Anaconda is
better and more flexible to set up. Anaconda is easy to set up and install,
and it also has its GUI interface called Anaconda Navigator, which helps
beginners to start crunching data and making visuals. Secondly, Anaconda
provides a package management tool named which makes it easier to
install, update, and manage packages. It also helps to create environments
separately for different projects. This way multiple versions of Python and
libraries can be installed inside isolated environments without interfering
with each other. Lastly, there are pre-installed packages like scikit-learn,
pandas, NumPy, Plotly, seaborn, Matplotlib, SciPy, and so on, which make
the data science task even more seamless and flexible to work with.
Steps of Anaconda Installation:
Go to the Anaconda website and download the software
Double-click the downloaded file
Follow the instructions to finish the installation process
Open Anaconda prompt by going to Programs > Anaconda Prompt

Next, type the following one after the other in the prompt to verify
whether Python and Anaconda are installed
python –version
conda –version

If you find that the versions can be seen, then both Python and Anaconda
are installed successfully.
Next, let’s set up an environment by using the following steps:
Using Commands to Set up the Environment
Type the following in the Anaconda prompt:
conda create --name myenv python=3.9 pandas numpy matplotlib scipy
plotly seaborn
This will create a new environment named myenv with Python 3.9
version, and install the packages pandas, numpy, matplotlib, scipy, plotly,
and
Now that myenv environment is created, let’s activate it by typing the
following command:
conda activate myenv
The myenv environment is activated now.

Then we can type Jupyter notebook to open the browser so that we can
start solving our data analysis problems. The next section is a use case for
getting into the world of data exploration and analysis.

Data Exploration and Analysis

The objective of this use case is to explain the basic functions, libraries, and
other tools relevant to data exploration and analysis. Also, some explanations
of the Jupyter Notebook are put together for better clarity. Here is a dataset of
the ball-by-ball record of the IPL (Indian Premier League) starting from 2008
till 2023 results are not included in the dataset. Some preliminary analysis is
being shown to understand the step-by-step process.
After the Jupyter is running on the browser, it will look something as shown
in Figure

Figure 1.1: Jupyter Notebook representation
There are various fields at the top like and These have their functionalities
when it comes to the usage of the Jupyter Notebook.

Once the File option is clicked, it looks as shown in Figure

Figure 1.2: File option representation when clicked
There are options like creating a new notebook, opening an existing
notebook, saving, downloading, renaming, reverting to a particular timestamp
checkpoint, and so on. This option provides us with the facility of handling
the notebook correctly and creating and opening notebooks.

Figure 1.3: Edit option representation when clicked
The Edit option as the name suggests helps in copying, pasting, and deleting
cells. The cells are the individual boxes where the codes are written. The cells
can also be shifted up or down as per the requirement. The next option is the
View option.

Figure 1.4: View option representation when clicked

Clicking the Toggle Header will remove the header (Jupyter Data Analysis
and Data Visualization code) and re-clicking it will bring it back. Clicking the
Toggle Toolbar will keep or remove the options bar of and so on.

Figure 1.5: Cell option representation when clicked

The Insert option will either Insert a cell above or The Cell option will Run
All cells, or one cell, or Run All or Run All and so on. These are the few
options that you can explore while programming in Python on a Jupyter
Notebook. You can also install the R programming language on Jupyter to
perform data analysis operations.
To start with the data analysis operations, let’s import the installed packages
like pandas, numpy, matplotlib, and seaborn. The installation was done earlier
using conda where multiple packages were installed.
import pandas as pd
pd is the alias of the pandas library
# Load the IPL dataset
df = pd.read_csv(‘IPL_Ball_by_Ball_2008_2022.csv’)

The dataset is loaded using the pd.read_csv() function. This is only valid to
load .csv files. To load a .xlsx or .xls file, pd.read_excel() is the right
function. Datasets can also be in .html, .json, or .xls formats so that we can
change the functions as per the requirement. Primarily in this exercise or in
the next chapters, we will use .csv files as data inputs. Here, the variable df is
a data frame which is a data set format in pandas. A data frame is a data
structure that is handled by the pandas library in It is a 2D table format with
rows and columns exactly like Excel or Google Some of the most common
methods to handle data frames are as follows.
# Display the first few rows of the dataset
df.head()

Figure 1.6: Top 5 records of the IPL dataset
From df.head() we get the top 5 rows of the data frame df. For the bottom 5,
df.tail() is used. If we want the top 10 records, df.head(10) is used.

Figure 1.7: Top 10 records of the IPL dataset
df.columns
Index([‘ID’, ‘innings’, ‘overs’, ‘ballnumber’, ‘batter’, ‘bowler’, ‘non-striker’,
‘extra_type’, ‘batsman_run’, ‘extras_run’, ‘total_run’, ‘non_boundary’,
‘isWicketDelivery’, ‘player_out’, ‘kind’,’fielders_involved’, ‘BattingTeam’],
dtype=’object’)

df.columns give the list of columns in the data frame. Here, all the relevant
columns are found starting from innings to overs to ball number to the batter
to batsman_run to extras_run and so on. The column names seem relevant for
now. But if needed, we can rename them later. Next, let’s check out the
number of rows and columns present in the data frame.
num_rows, num_cols = df.shape
print(“Number of rows:”, num_rows)
print(“Number of columns:”, num_cols)
Output:
Number of rows: 225954
Number of columns: 17
We just see that there are 17 columns and 225954 each row corresponding to
each bowl bowled in each match. So, if we consider 1 season, and there are
40 matches in total, and each match has 240 bowls bowled (6*20* 2 innings
meaning 6 bowls in each over and 20 overs we should have 9600 bowls in the
whole tournament. Of course, we are not considering the extra bowls and also
the IPL rules and format have changed over time. The numbers will always
vary.
data_types = df.dtypes
print(data_types)

Output:

Figure 1.8: List of datatypes of all the variables in the IPL data frame
The datatypes of the attributes (the columns or features that make up the data
frame) as shown in the figure are mostly integers and some are object (string
datatypes) types like fielders involved, and so on.
The extra_type object feature has categories, such as wide, leg bye, no ball,
bye, and so on. Next, let’s check out the number of missing values in each
attribute. These are data types that are here by default, later the datatypes may
need to be changed for the right analysis of the dataset.
missing_values = df.isnull().sum()
print(missing_values)

Figure 1.9: Number of missing values for each variable
Most of the missing values are in the variables and
Next is the descriptive statistics of the data frame.
df.describe()

Figure 1.10: Descriptive Statistics of each numerical variable

df.describe() gives us the descriptive statistics for the numerical variables in
the dataset. The ID column can be ignored since it does not provide any
value. We will delete it in the next section. The total_run columns does give
us a lot of information. The average number of runs scored by batsmen is
1.24 per ball and the maximum is 6, since 6 is the maximum run that can be
scored by the bat by playing 1 ball. Total_run is 1.31 per ball.
IsWicketdelivery is either the ball was a wicket ball or a non-wicket ball
meaning whether the bowler was able to take a wicket in that ball or not (if
yes, it’s a 1 otherwise it’s a 0). It’s a binary variable.
df[‘non_boundary’].value_counts()
Output:
0
1

225933
21

Most runs are scored by boundaries, as can be seen, in 225933 records or
balls where a boundary was hit (either 4 or 6). Obviously, in T20s majority of
the runs scored are by boundaries be it 4s or 6s.

df[‘isWicketDelivery’].value_counts()
Output:
0

214803

1

11151

Most of the balls are non-wicket balls for obvious reasons since if the
majority of balls are wicket balls, there would be a minimal number of runs
scored. In the preceding two code snippets, .value_counts() gives the number
of records for each category. df[‘isWicketDelivery’].value_counts() means
how many balls are without wicket balls and how many are wicket balls.

The preceding code snippets are the data exploration and analysis that we did.
In the next chapters, a deep dive into various functions of pandas, numpy,
scipy, plotly, matplotlib will be used to demonstrate more effective techniques
of data exploration, analysis, and visualization. Some visualization codes are
as follows:
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
# Filter data for player scores
player_scores = df[‘batsman_run’]
# Plot histogram
plt.hist(player_scores, bins=20, edgecolor=’black’)
plt.xlabel(‘Player Scores’)
plt.ylabel(‘Frequency’)
plt.title(‘Distribution of Player Scores’)
plt.show()
Output:

Figure 1.11: Distribution of runs scored by players

Matplotlib library is a data visualization library in Python and is used in this
code to find the frequency bins of each run scored by batsmen. Here
maximum runs scored were 0s means most balls were dots (no runs scored),
then single runs were scored, then 2 runs and 3 runs were less since in T20s
the batsmen don’t run a lot anyway. Boundaries (4s and 6s) are a lot in
number since for 20 overs every team wants to score maximum runs in
minimum time. The plot is a histogram plot. Xlabel shows the Player scores
in the x-axis, ylabel is the Frequency in the y-axis, and title is the Distribution
of Player
The next code snippet is the demonstration of maximum aggregate run
scorers in IPL using the Seaborn library.

import seaborn as sns
# Group data by batsman and calculate total runs
batsman_runs = df.groupby(‘batter’)[‘batsman_run’].sum().reset_index()
# Sort data by total runs
batsman_runs = batsman_runs.sort_values(by=’batsman_run’,
ascending=False).head(10)
# Create a bar chart
plt.figure(figsize=(10, 6))
sns.barplot(x=’batsman_run’, y=’batter’, data=batsman_runs,
palette=’viridis’)
plt.xlabel(‘Total Runs’)
plt.ylabel(‘Batsman’)
plt.title(‘Top 10 Batsmen by Total Runs’)
plt.show()
Output:

Figure 1.12: Top 10 aggregate run scorers in all the IPL matches

This code uses .groupby() method and the seaborn library to find the
maximum run scorers over all the seasons put together. Virat Kohli, Shikhar
Dhawan, and David Warner are the top three run scorers in the IPL seasons.
Group by as the name suggests groups the data based on categories (in this
case and calculates the sum of all the runs scored by each batsman. Then it is
sorted in descending order by using the .sort_values() method (like the top 10
players in this case). Seaborn creates a horizontal bar chart to represent the
total runs on the x-axis and the players on the All the 9 players among the 10
players have more than 5000 runs. Virat Kohli being the run machine has
more than 6000 This shows that seaborn can be used to create various
visualizations of various colors, textures, and types which can answer a lot of
relevant business questions.
The next code answers about the type of dismissals using a pie chart. It shows
the distribution of various dismissals by bowlers in the IPL.
dismissals = df[‘kind’].value_counts()
# Create a pie chart
plt.figure(figsize=(8, 8))
plt.pie(dismissals, labels=dismissals.index, autopct=’%1.1f%%’,
startangle=90)
plt.title(‘Distribution of Dismissal Types’)
plt.axis(‘equal’)
plt.show()
Output:

Figure 1.13: Pie chart distribution for each dismissal type

The pie chart in Figure 1.13 shows the kind of dismissals (caught, bowled,
run out, lbw, and so on). The pie chart clearly shows that more than 65.3% of
dismissals were caught, 18.6% were bowled, 9.6% were run out, and 6.5%
were This says a lot about the game format. It’s a T20 game, so it’s obvious
the batsmen are going to hit from ball one, and they get caught too. Of course,
they score too. Bowlers bowl well, and the batsman gets bowled out, meaning
the batsman is not defending but going all out to score as many runs as
possible. The code uses the .pie() method to create the pie chart. The main
idea of the data analysis use case here was not only to scratch the surface of

the methodology to follow for the data analysis process but also to connect
how this analysis can be used to answer real-life questions about the problem,
for example, how the batsmen are performing against certain bowlers, only 4s
and 6s contribute to the bulk of the runs scored, caught outs are the most
common dismissals, and so on.

Conclusion

This chapter covered the basics of data analysis, its importance, the
significance of decision-making concerning data analysis, the tools and
technologies used for performing data analysis, the steps of data analysis,
data visualization, and its importance, the principles of effective data
visualization, explanation of various charts and maps, Python and
Anaconda installation, setting up of environments, walkthrough of how
Anaconda Jupyter can be used, and a stepping stone to the world of data
analysis, exploration, and visualization. In the next chapter, more in-depth
and specific topics on Pandas, NumPy, Matplotlib, Seaborn, SciPy, Bokeh,
statsmodels, and so on will be explored.

Keywords

Data Analysis, Data Visualization, Python, Anaconda, Jupyter Notebook,
Data Analysis real use cases, data frame, Pandas, NumPy, Matplotlib, pie
charts, bar chart, histogram

CHAPTER 2
Data Acquisition

Introduction

Data acquisition is the process of data collection from different sources.
The data can be collected from normal government websites, open-source
sites like World Bank, United Nations, worldometer, and so on, using
various APIs like IMDB, Mercedez Benz, Cricinfo, and so on, also from
sites like Wikipedia, Twitter, Amazon, eBay, and acquiring data from
survey sites like SurveyMonkey. There are also tons of websites across all
verticals like these that help in data acquisition for data analysis and data
science projects. In this chapter, we will go through the process of
exploring various websites to acquire data for analysis or just for
understanding the process of web scraping using various libraries like
beautiful to name a few.

Structure

In this chapter, we will discuss the following topics:
Importance of Data Quality
Different ways to acquire data
Collecting Data from Surveys
Scraping Data from Websites
Using APIs to Acquire Data
Accessing data using dedicated libraries and APIs
Ensuring Data Quality

Importance of Data Quality

The data quality is the most important factor when it comes to foolproof
analysis and the right decision-making. Bad data not only skews the
results but also undermines the whole purpose of solving the problem of
data analysis and data modeling for predictions. Any high-quality data
should be accurate, complete, consistent, and that is, should have temporal
data when needed to track the changes in the data over time. This will help
in producing actionable insights and maintaining the credibility of the data
and the analyst using it.

Different Ways to Acquire Data
There are various ways of acquiring data, starting from collecting data
from surveys, scraping data with websites, and accessing data from APIs
(Application Programming Interfaces).

Collecting Data from Surveys

Surveys are created by various websites these days, like SurveyMonkey,
Google Forms, Qualtrics, Typeforms, and so on. These surveys are filled
up by various people, depending on the objective of the survey. These are
sets of multiple-choice questions or simply providing answers based on
likelihood (the higher the number between 1 and 10, the more likely it is).
Of course, the surveys are targeted towards a specific audience for highquality responses. So, the collected survey data can be accessed in various
formats, like spreadsheets, or databases for further analyses. These kinds
of acquired data can help understand what real-life datasets can be like.
For example, it is very common for university students to prepare a
questionnaire and share it among his/her colleagues for a survey that is
part of a big project. For example, there is a project to analyze how
playing sports just before exam day can hamper test results. The acquired
data in the form of spreadsheets can help understand how many students
play sports before the exam day and yet score good results. On the other
hand, another category can be students who do not play and yet cannot
score well on test results. Various factors can be brought in to create the
questions to deduce how can sports affect one’s test results positively or
negatively. This was just a very simple example to explain the whole
concept of acquiring data from survey results.

Scraping Data from Websites

Web scraping is used to extract data from websites automatically using
certain libraries like Beautiful and so on. The Python codes which are
written using the preceding libraries help to skim through web pages,
specifically identify the right data, and extract it in a structured format like
text, json type data, tabular-based and so on. For example, we can access
news sites like CNBC, BBC, NDTV, Times of India, and so on for specific
news articles daily and just read that news according to our requirements.
It is a very handy automation tool when it comes to acquiring tabular data
like Amazon reviews data, product detail data, or even data from
Wikipedia like the percentage of economic growth of nations over the last
10 years. This can be helpful to forecast results for the coming years.
Also, during the pandemic, researchers acquired COVID data from
various sites to carry out beautiful analyses and visualizations that solved
problems like the spread of COVID over a geographical area, which
factors contributed more to the spread of the disease, and how it affected
people over various demographic factors like age, location, gender
identity, weather conditions, and so on.

Using APIs to Acquire Data

Data from many websites and services can be accessed and extracted via
APIs (Application Programming Interfaces). The extracted data is often
presented in a key value (.json file format) or a tabular format. Real-time
data access, authentication, and data consistency are made possible with
the use of APIs. The developer automates the process of data acquisition
using various tools, be it coding tools or noncoding tools. For example,
the data is accessed and obtained for later use using the requests library in
Python. However, it is imperative to understand that the number of
requests the developer makes can be blocked after a certain limit of
requests is crossed.

Libraries used for Web Scraping

Some of the libraries used for web scraping are Beautiful and Moreover,
we will also demonstrate the usage of pandas methods like
pandas.read_html() to extract data from websites. Beautiful Soup is an
easy-to-use library to extract HTML and XML However, it is slow to use
for larger and more complex websites where Selenium comes into play.
Selenium is more of a web automation tool that can scrape dynamically
generated websites or websites that require user interaction. However, it is
very complicated to use as compared to Beautiful On the other hand, it is
less complex to use than Selenium but more complex to use than Beautiful
Soup. Requests is another library used for making HTTP It is used for
websites that require authentication or special headers.
Note intended to the readers: For chapter 2 specifically, we have extracted
GDP per capita data, population data, run margins data, AQI data, luxury
good price data, and so on. We executed the code and extracted the data
around 6 to 7 months back. The numbers were different then, and when
we run the code now, the numbers are different, so please be aware of this
fact.

Web Scraping Tools created using Beautiful Soup and Selenium

This section will address the usage of Beautiful Soup to acquire data from
various websites be it tabular data, key-value format (.json) data, or textbased In the first example, we will look at this website
https://worldpopulationreview.com/country-rankings/gdp-per-capita-bycountry to extract the Highest GDP (Gross Domestic Product) per Capita
values and the Lowest GDP per Capita values calculated in US Dollars. The
code is as follows:
from bs4 import BeautifulSoup
import requests
import json
# Send a GET request to the target URL
response = requests.get(‘https://worldpopulationreview.com/countryrankings/gdp-per-capita-by-country’)
# Create a BeautifulSoup object to parse the HTML content
soup = BeautifulSoup(response.content, ‘html.parser’)
# Locate the table elements
tables = soup.find_all(‘table’)
# Function to extract data from a table
def extract_table_data(table):
headers = [header.text for header in table.select(‘tr:nth-of-type(1) th’)]
data_rows = table.select(‘tr:nth-of-type(n+2)’)

data = []
for row in data_rows:
row_data = [cell.text for cell in row.select(‘td’)]
row_dict = {headers[i]: row_data[i] for i in range(len(headers))}
data.append(row_dict)
return data
# Scrape the data from the tables
output = {
“Top 10 Countries with the Highest GDP per Capita (US Dollars)”:
extract_table_data(tables[0]),
“10 Countries with the Lowest GDP per Capita in the World (US Dollars)”:
extract_table_data(tables[1]),
}
# Print the extracted data as JSON
print(json.dumps(output, indent=2))
Code Explanation:
The BeautifulSoup library extracts data out of HTML and XML files,
requests library is used for making HTTP requests, json library is used for
working with JSON The .get request retrieves the HTML content of the
website. The code then creates a BeautifulSoup object to parse the HTML
This allows the code to extract data from the HTML Then the table elements
are located on the website. The two tables need to be extracted from the
website, one for the top 10 countries with the highest GDP per capita and one
for the top 10 countries with the lowest GDP per The following figure shows
the tabular format of the countries with the highest GDP per capita.

Figure 2.1: The Highest GDP per capita and the table element where each
row is present (for example, the first row has Monaco with the highest GDP
per capita, then Liechtenstein, and so on)
The code defines the function The function takes a table element as input and
returns a list of dictionaries. Each dictionary in the list represents a row in the
table. The dictionary contains the data from the such as the country name, the
GDP per capita, and the
The code then calls the extract_table_data() function for each of the tables on
the website. This extracts the data from the tables and stores it in a list of
dictionaries. The dictionary named output is created. The dictionary contains
two tables. The keys of the dictionary are the names of the and the values of
the dictionary are the list of dictionaries that contain the data from the
Then the final data is extracted in a JSON The data looks as in Figure

Figure 2.2: The list of dictionaries inside a main JSON file which shows the
Highest GDP per capita results
The following diagram is the list of dictionaries containing the details of the
nations with the lowest GDP per capita as extracted from the website:

Figure 2.3: The second dictionary inside the main JSON file showing the
nations with the Lowest GDP per capita

In the next example, we will extract text-based data from a news article using
Beautiful Soup from the website
The article has the article title, the date, the time stamp, and the content of the
These are the main points we will extract from the CNBC article. Let’s check
the following code:
import requests
from bs4 import BeautifulSoup
url = “https://www.cnbctv18.com/business/vedanta-will-be-a-trillion-dollarcompany-in-next-10-years-says-anil-agarwal-16819691.htm”
# Send a request to the website
response = requests.get(url)
# Parse the HTML code
soup = BeautifulSoup(response.content, “html.parser”)
# Find the text that you want to extract
articles = soup.find(“div”, class_=[“jsx-1801027680 new-article”, “jsx1801027680 art-page-wrapper”])
# Iterate through all the articles and extract the text
for article in articles:
text = article.text
# Print the text
print(text)
Code Explanation:

This code is used to extract the text from a website. The code first imports the
requests and BeautifulSoup libraries. These libraries are used to send a
request to the website and parse the HTML Then the .get() method is used to
extract the HTML content of the website like before. This time it’s not table
data, but text data. The code then parses the HTML code using the
BeautifulSoup library. The soup variable is a BeautifulSoup object that
contains the parsed HTML code.

The code then finds the text that you want to extract using the find() method.
The find() method takes a CSS selector as input and returns the first element
that matches the selector. In this case, the CSS selector is class_=[“jsx2597938882 nart-para”, “jsx-2597938882 This CSS selector matches the
element that contains the text that you want to extract.
The CSS (Cascading Style Sheets) selector div selects all div elements in an
HTML document. The div selector is a tool for selecting elements in an
HTML document. It can be used to select elements for a variety of things,
like extracting data, formatting text, or adding JavaScript events.

Figure 2.4: Identifying the div element for the website to extract the text of
the article
The code then iterates through all the articles and extracts the text using the
text property. The text property returns the text content of the
The final output of the text data has the article title, the date, the time stamp,
and the content of the article as follows:

Figure 2.5: The final text data after web scraping from the website

The next example of Beautiful Soup will extract an article from the website
https://www.moneycontrol.com/news/business/startup/dropout-to-datascientist-indian-firms-open-to-hiring-non-tech-candidates-with-relevantskills-10708001.html
The result will contain the name of the article and the content of the article.
import requests
from bs4 import BeautifulSoup
url = “https://www.moneycontrol.com/news/business/startup/dropout-to-datascientist-indian-firms-open-to-hiring-non-tech-candidates-with-relevant-

skills-10708001.html”
response = requests.get(url)
soup = BeautifulSoup(response.content, “html.parser”)
# Find the text that you want to extract
article = soup.find(“div”, class_=[“display: block;”, “page_left_wrapper”])
if article:
title = article.find(“h1”, class_=”article_title artTitle”)
subtitle = article.find(“h2”, class_=”article_desc”)
author = article.find(“div”, class_=”article_author”)
date = article.find(“div”, class_=”article_schedule”)
contents = article.find(“div”, class_=”content_wrapper arti-flow”)
if title:
print(“Title:”, title.text.strip())
else:
print(“Title not found.”)
if author:
print(“Author:”, author.text.strip())
else:
print(“Author not found.”)
if date:
print(“Date:”, date.text.strip())
else:
print(“Date not found.”)
if contents:
print(“Contents:”, contents.text.strip())
else:
print(“Contents not found.”)
else:
print(“Article not found.”)
Code Explanation:

The code first imports the requests library to make the HTTP requests and the
BeautifulSoup library to parse HTML Next, requests.get() method requests to
the URL, which is an article on the moneycontrol The response object is the
result that has the HTML content of the article.
Next, the BeautifulSoup library is used to parse the HTML content of the
response So, here we have the soup which has the HTML content of the
article.
The next line of the code uses the find() method to find the div element with
the class attribute display:block and This element contains the main content
of the The screenshot of the website and the HTML contents can be seen as
follows:

Figure 2.6: The HTML content of the webpage and the blue-colored
highlighted section on the right shows the main content of the article
If the find() method returns a None value, then the article was not found. Or
else, the code extracts the title of the article, the subtitle of the article, the

author, the date, and the contents of the
So, to extract each variable from the website, for example, if we are
extracting the title of the article, the find() method is used to identify the h1
element with the class attribute article_title The following screenshot explains
the concept.

Figure 2.7: Identifying the h1 element with the class attribute for the article
title

Similarly, the other variables like the subtitle have the h2 element with the
class attribute the author variable has the div element with the class attribute
the date variable has the div element with the class attribute the contents
variable has the div element with the class attribute content_wrapper The text
of each variable is printed into the console as shown in Figure
The final output text has the Article title, sub-title, Author name, Date and
Time, and the content of the

Figure 2.8: Final output text web scrapped from the website
The next code is a demonstration of the Selenium library to extract tabular
data from the website https://www.luxepolis.com/all-brands/louis-vuitton/?
product_condition=2732
from bs4 import BeautifulSoup
import pandas as pd
from selenium import webdriver
from selenium.webdriver.common.by import By
from selenium.webdriver.support.ui import WebDriverWait
from selenium.webdriver.support import expected_conditions as EC
from selenium.common.exceptions import TimeoutException
url = “https://www.luxepolis.com/all-brands/louis-vuitton/?
product_condition=2732”
# Set up the Selenium WebDriver
options = webdriver.ChromeOptions()
options.add_argument(“--headless”)
driver = webdriver.Chrome(options=options)
driver.get(url)
# Initialize the DataFrame and wait for the content to load

data = []
try:
wait = WebDriverWait(driver, 60) # Increase the timeout value to 60 #seconds
wait.until(EC.presence_of_element_located((By.CSS_SELECTOR,
“.product-listing”)))
# Parse the HTML content using BeautifulSoup
soup = BeautifulSoup(driver.page_source, ‘html.parser’)
# Find the elements and extract the required data
elements = soup.select(“.product-listing”)
for element in elements:
title_element = element.select_one(“.prd-brand”)
price_element = element.select_one(“.price.dis-price-label”)
emi_available_element = element.select_one(“.emi-avl.pull-left”)
if title_element and price_element:
title = title_element.text.strip()
price = price_element.text.strip()
emi_available = bool(emi_available_element)
data.append([title, price, emi_available])
except TimeoutException:
print(“The website took too long to load. Please try again later.”)
finally:
# Create a DataFrame and display the results
df = pd.DataFrame(data, columns=[“Product Name”, “Product Price”, “EMI
Available”])
print(df)
# Close the WebDriver
driver.quit()
Code Explanation:
The code first imports the necessary libraries, including and Selenium is a
tool to automate tasks on a web browser. It can be used to open websites,

navigate through pages, and interact with elements on the
Selenium opens the Luxepolis website and waits for the content to load. Once
the content is loaded, Selenium uses the BeautifulSoup library to parse the
HTML
The BeautifulSoup library extracts the product name, product price, and EMI
availability from each product listing on the page.
Let’s understand this section of the code.
# Set up the Selenium WebDriver
options = webdriver.ChromeOptions()
options.add_argument(“--headless”)
driver = webdriver.Chrome(options=options)
driver.get(url)
# Initialize the data frame and wait for the content to load
data = []
try:
wait = WebDriverWait(driver, 60) # Increase the timeout value to 60 seconds
wait.until(EC.presence_of_element_located((By.CSS_SELECTOR,
“.product-listing”)))
Firstly, the Selenium WebDriver is set up. The options parameter specifies
that you want to run the WebDriver in headless The get() method opens the
Luxepolis website in the WebDriver.
The wait variable is a WebDriverWait object. This object allows you to wait
for a certain condition to be met before continuing. In this case, the condition
is that the element with the CSS selector .product-listing is present on the

page. The wait.until() method will wait for the condition to be met for up to
60 If the condition is not met after 60 seconds, an exception will be raised.
Next, let’s understand this block of code and identify the and EMI availability
elements in the website.
elements = soup.select(“.product-listing”)
for element in elements:
title_element = element.select_one(“.prd-brand”)
price_element = element.select_one(“.price.dis-price-label”)
emi_available_element = element.select_one(“.emi-avl.pull-left”)
if title_element and price_element:
title = title_element.text.strip()
price = price_element.text.strip()
emi_available = bool(emi_available_element)
data.append([title, price, emi_available])
The elements variable is a list of all the elements on the page that have the
CSS selector The for loop iterates through the elements list and extracts the
product and EMI availability from each product

The select_one() method returns the first element that matches the specified
selector. The text.strip() method removes any whitespace from the beginning
and the end of the text. The bool() function converts the element to a Boolean

Figure 2.9: The HTML content of the webpage and the blue-colored
highlighted section on the right shows the main content of the products
present on the site
The final data is converted into a data frame format using the
pandas.DataFrame() object. The final output data is like the following
screenshot:

Figure 2.10: The final output dataset as extracted from the Luxepolis dataset
Accessing Tabular Data using the pandas.read_html() method.
Here, we are using the pandas.read_html() method to extract tabular data
from the famous cricket website as follows:
https://www.espncricinfo.com/records/largest-margin-of-victory-by-runs283902

The table on the site looks something like the following screenshot:

Figure 2.11: The website look of the dataset
import requests
import pandas as pd
url = “https://www.espncricinfo.com/records/largest-margin-of-victory-byruns-283902”
response = requests.get(url)
df = pd.read_html(response.content)[0]
df.columns = [“Winner”, “Margin”, “Target”, “Overs”,
“Opposition”,”Ground”,”Match Date”,”Scorecard”]
df
Code Explanation:
The preceding code uses the requests library to make the HTTP requests to
the Cricinfo website. Then pd.read_html() method is used to identify and read

the HTML table into a pandas data frame.
This function can be used to swiftly acquire tables from websites without
figuring out how to scrap the site’s HTML contents like the BeautifulSoup
and Selenium alternatives we did before.

The final output data is shown in Figure It shows the cricket ODI match
details that have the highest winning We can do some data analysis later using
this data set obtained.

Figure 2.12: The final output data frame
Accessing population data using the pandas.read_html() method.
Here, we are using the pandas.read_html() method to extract tabular data of
the population of each country in 2022 and 2023 and the percentage change
of population in the consecutive The link used is

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_countries_by_population_(United_Nati
ons)
The Wikipedia data is shown as follows:

Figure 2.13: The Wikipedia dataset
import requests
import pandas as pd
url =
“https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_countries_by_population_(United_Nat
ions)”
response = requests.get(url)
df = pd.read_html(response.content)[0]
df.columns = [“Country/Area”, “UN continental region”, “UN statistical
region”, “Population (1 July 2022)”, “Population (1 July 2023)”, “Change”]
df

Code Explanation:
The requests library is used to make the HTTP requests to the Wikipedia site.
The code pattern is similar to the one used before in the Cricinfo site but the
most important thing is to place the column names in the right order as
present in the Wikipedia site. The final result is the one we get as follows:

Figure 2.14: The output data frame as extracted by the preceding code

From Figure it is seen that most of the countries in the top 5 list experience
positive population growth except The continental regions like Asia, the
Americas, Oceania, Europe, and Africa are also included in the data along
with the UN statistical

Accessing data using dedicated libraries and API

In this section, we will be using the pynytimes library to access details of
books by the famous author Mr. Stephen like book review as a date of
publication, book title, book summary, author name, and the ISBN The API
we are using is from the New York Times So, you have to register (create an
account) here https://developer.nytimes.com/get-started and click the new app
(on the top right) using the instructions given in the preceding link. You can
call the app anything, but it is better to name something relatable to the book
reviews or movie reviews. The app you created is responsible for creating
your API key and you must never share it with With that being said, let’s
check out the code and extract some book reviews.
!pip install pynytimes
First install the pynytimes library to use the API to extract the relevant data
from pynytimes import NYTAPI
nyt = NYTAPI(“YOUR API KEY”, parse_dates=True)
# Get reviews by author (first and last name)
reviews = nyt.book_reviews(author=”Stephen King”)
Code Explanation:
The code is used as per the documentation of the pynytimes library to extract
book details of the author. One can also extract article searches, movie
reviews, top stories, most viewed articles, and shared The result is as follows

in the form of a list of dictionaries where each dictionary has all the details of
the

Figure 2.15: The details of the books written by Stephen King
For example, the following dictionary in the list has the book name
Nightmares and Dreamscapes and the other details of the publication date,
ISBN number, byline, and the review in the However, the link is behind a
paywall, so anyone interested can pay for a subscription and read the review.
{‘url’: ‘http://www.nytimes.com/1993/10/24/books/in-short-fiction284093.html’, ‘publication_dt’: datetime.date(1993, 10, 24), ‘byline’:
‘RICHARD E. NICHOLLS’, ‘book_title’: ‘Nightmares and Dreamscapes’,
‘book_author’: ‘Stephen King’, ‘summary’: ‘’, ‘uuid’: ‘00000000-00000000-0000-000000000000’, ‘uri’: ‘nyt://book/00000000-0000-0000-0000000000000000’, ‘isbn13’: [‘9781441615299’]}

Accessing Stock Market data

This program is used to scrap the stock market data of Apple between 1st
January 2020 and 31st December For that, the yfinance library is installed. It
is an open-source tool that uses Yahoo’s publicly available APIs for research
and educational
!pip install yfinance
import yfinance as yf
# Define the stock symbol and the date range
symbol = “AAPL”
start_date = “2020-01-01”
end_date = “2020-12-31”
# Fetch the historical stock data
stock_data = yf.download(symbol, start=start_date, end=end_date)
# Display the stock data
stock_data

Figure 2.16: Extracted stock market data of Apple
There are daily data on when the stock market opens, its highest point, its
lowest point, the closing point, the adjoining closing point, and the total
number of data points for the whole day. This kind of daily data is used to test
forecasting models and predict stock market points for the future.
Extracting Air Quality index data using API

In this section, we are extracting the Air Quality Index (AQI) data of various
capital cities around the planet. The website https://aqicn.org/api/ is used to
have the API acquired. The code first imports the requests library to access
the HTML requests to the website. The WAQI API needs to be accessed to
get the unique API key for each user. The WAQI API is a free API that
provides Air Quality data for cities worldwide.

Next, the code defines a list of cities from around the world to fetch the AQI.
Finally, the code loops through the list of cities and acquires the AQI data for
each The code first constructs an API URL for each city. The API URL
includes the city name and the API Then, the code makes a requests.get()
request to the API URL. The requests.get() method returns a Response which
contains the response from the API.
The code then parses the response object to get the AQI data for the The AQI
data is stored in the data If the status key in the data dictionary is equal to ok,
then the code prints the AQI for each Or else, the code prints an error
import requests
#https://aqicn.org/api/
#https://aqicn.org/data-platform/token/
# Replace ‘YOUR_API_KEY’ with the API key you received from the WAQI
API website
api_key = “YOUR_API_KEY”
# List of cities to fetch AQI data for
cities = [‘New York’, ‘Los Angeles’, ‘London’, ‘Tokyo’, ‘Beijing’, “Paris”,
“Berlin”, “Stockholm”, “Warsaw”, “Sofia”, “New Delhi”, “Dhaka”,
“Bangkok”]
# Fetch AQI data for each city and display the result
for city in cities:
api_url = f”https://api.waqi.info/feed/{city}/?token={api_key}”
response = requests.get(api_url)
data = response.json()
if data[‘status’] == ‘ok’:
aqi = data[‘data’][‘aqi’]
print(f”Air Quality Index for {city}: {aqi}”)
else:
print(f”Error fetching data for {city}: {data[‘status’]}”)

Figure 2.17: Air Quality Indexes of the major capital cities of the countries

Ensuring Data Quality

Ensuring data quality is the process of making sure that the data is
accurate, complete, and It will help users to understand whether the data is
fit for the purpose of analysis and modeling in the later stages. This
involves steps like data validation, cleaning, and data transformation
which are explained as follows:
Data Validation and Cleaning
Data validation is the process of ensuring that the acquired data is
accurate, complete, and consistent for use. It requires going through the
data for errors, missing values, duplicates, and other Data cleaning helps
in correcting or removing errors, handling missing values, removing
duplicates, and resolving inconsistencies within the dataset. To enhance
data quality before analysis, several techniques can be used, including
data profiling, outlier detection, and data Data verification and validation
are iterative processes that call for thorough analysis and evaluation of the
collected data.
Data Integration and Transformation
Data integration involves combining data from multiple sources to create
a unified dataset for analysis. Data Transformation is performing
operations on the dataset to make it ready to be used for training machine
learning models, for example, changing datatypes from string to integer

whenever needed, doing normalization and standardization, and cleaning
the data to get rid of anomalies, and so on.

Conclusion

This marks the end of the chapter on Data Acquisition, where we learned
about various sources from where data can be collected using APIs,
surveys, and various other websites. We also learned about various Python
libraries which are being used to extract data from websites like and so on.
There are also other tools like pandas.read_json() which can be used to
extract data from websites. We explored tabular data and text-based We
have extracted data across all domains, starting from the global economy,
population, sports, luxury brands, books, stock and some news articles, to
name a few. In the next chapter, we will deep dive into the concepts of
data cleaning and preparation, where we will explore the libraries of
pandas, numpy, pyjanitor, scipy and use them to fix data errors and
inconsistencies, transform data suitable for analysis, and so on. We will
look into various use cases to apply and build our data from a dirty
version.

Keywords

Some of the relevant keywords for the chapter are as follows:
Data Acquisition, Web scraping, python, BeautifulSoup, Requests,
Selenium, Scrapy, LXML, XPATH, CSS selectors, JSON, CSV, API,
MySQL

CHAPTER 3
Data Cleaning and Preparation

Introduction

Data cleaning and preparation is the process of cleaning and transforming
dirty data before going into the stage of exploratory data analysis. It is the
most important step in the data science workflow which makes sure that
the data is cleaned and prepared in a way for analysis and modeling in the
later stages. This chapter will explain data cleaning and preparation and its
importance. Next, this chapter will cover the steps of data cleaning,
among which we have data validation, handling missing values, detecting
outliers, and so on. After the steps of data cleaning are explained, we will
deep dive into the topics of data transformation for data preparation, like
standardization, normalization, and some feature engineering techniques.
Next, we will understand the topics of data comparability and data
consistency. For each topic, we will use Python programming language
and relevant libraries like and to name a few. We will explore the libraries
and use them to solve use cases to identify real-life problems and use

Structure

In this chapter, we will discuss the following topics:
Introduction to Data Cleaning and Preparation
Importance of Data Cleaning and Preparation
Identifying and Fixing Errors in Data
Data Validation
Handling Missing Values
Handling Inconsistencies and Outliers
Data Transformation
Creating New Variables
Standardization
Normalization
Feature Engineering Techniques

Data Integration
Concatenation
Merge
Join
Bonus Libraries for Data Cleaning
Data Comparability and Data Consistency

Introduction to Data Cleaning and Preparation

Data cleaning and preparation are the fundamental steps in the data
analysis process. The raw data mostly contains errors, inconsistencies,
missing and other issues that can create problems concerning accurate
analysis. Data cleaning identifies and fixes these errors, while data
preparation focuses on transforming the data into a convenient format for
analysis. The final prepared data should be accurate, complete, consistent,
and

Importance of Data Cleaning and Preparation

Data cleaning and preparation are crucial for reliable and meaningful
analysis. Bad-quality data can lead to biased or incorrect results, affecting
the overall integrity and validity of the analysis. Cleaning and preparing
the data help eliminate errors, inconsistencies, and outliers that may arise
from data collection or storage processes. It also involves handling
missing values, ensuring data is in the correct and addressing any data
quality issues.

Identifying and Fixing Errors in Data

Identifying and fixing errors in the data is a crucial step when we are
cleaning data, which helps to improve the quality of the datasets by
getting rid of duplicate, or incorrect In the next sub-sections of data
validation, handling missing values, and handling we explore the
techniques of identifying and replacing missing values or removing
missing values completely, if needed. We will also look into various
outlier detection techniques and experiment with them on the datasets.

Data Validation

Data validation is verifying the raw data for errors, inconsistencies,
missing and It involves verifying that the data follows certain rules,
constraints, or predefined Common techniques used for data validation
include range checks, format checks, and consistency checks. For
example, checking if numerical data falls within expected ranges or
verifying that dates are in the correct format or the datatypes in the dataset
are in the right format (for example, string, float, integer, boolean, and so
on) or verifying whether there are missing values in the dataset or there
are duplicate rows in the These are some of the data validation tests we
need to perform to identify potential errors in the dataset while ensuring
data accuracy.

Handling Missing Values

The missing values are a common issue in real-world data sets. Handling
missing values is essential to prevent biased or incomplete Various
approaches can be used to handle missing values, such as deletion, and
imputation, or advanced techniques like multiple imputation can also be used.
Deletion involves removing rows or columns with missing values, while
imputation involves estimating missing values based on patterns in the The
choice of approach depends on the nature of the missing data and the analysis
objectives. To detect and deal with missing values, we can use some of the
following techniques. The dataset is the IPL matches dataset from 2008 to
The dataset has details of every IPL match, starting from venue to season to
match number to team name to toss decision to winning team to margin to
player of the match and so The data frame has 950 rows and 20 The
following code is given for a demonstration.
import pandas as pd
import numpy as np
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
import seaborn as sns
# Reading a CSV file into a Pandas DataFrame
data = pd.read_csv(‘IPL_Matches_2008_2022.csv’)
# Checking the first few rows of the DataFrame
data.head()

Figure 3.1: The first five rows of the data frame
Next, we check for the number of missing values using the following code:
# Check for missing values
print(data.isnull().sum())
The - .isnull() is a function that returns True/False, whether there is a null
value or not and sum() returns total number of True values.

Figure 3.2: Number of Missing values for each variable (the method variable
has maximum missing values)
We will now impute the missing value for the Margin We can impute using
the mean or median. The mean is used in scenarios when the distribution is
uniform (not so skewed) or there are no outliers. For cases, the median is used
when the distribution is skewed.
We will check the skewness of the in this case, using a We will also check the
skewness using the skewness
sns.histplot(data[‘Margin’])
plt.show()

Figure 3.3: The histogram of the Margin variable
The preceding histogram clearly states that the distribution is right skewed
since the data is distributed mostly on the left and the tail is at the right.

Next, we will check using the skewness function.
skewness = data[‘Margin’].skew()
print(“Skewness:”, skewness)
Output:
Skewness: 2.6535823950532107
The conditions for skewness are as follows:

Skewness > 0: Right-skewed distribution
Skewness < 0: Left-skewed distribution
Skewness close to 0: Approximately symmetric distribution
The skewness is > 0 so it is right skewed and in sync with the histogram so
we will impute using the median.
Now let’s impute the missing value with the median for the Margin variable.
The code is as follows:
# Fill missing values with the median (Imputation)
data[‘Margin’].fillna(data[‘Margin’].median(), inplace=True) # Impute with
median
data.head()
The missing values are replaced by the median for the Margin The .fillna()
function is used to perform the operation.

Figure 3.4: The missing values are replaced in the Margin variable

We will drop the method variable since it has 931 entries missing from 950
We won’t touch the other variables because we may lose important
All the rows can be deleted too if there are most missing values like the
method variable.
# Drop missing values
data_drop = data.dropna(subset= [‘method’])
data_drop.head()
This can be done using the .dropna() method. It will delete all the rows which
have even one cell missing.

Figure 3.5: Deleting all the rows where maximum rows have missing values

Handling Inconsistencies and Outliers

Data entry mistakes, measurement mistakes, and system flaws are a few
examples that might cause inconsistent or incorrect data to appear. Typically,
numerical outliers are those that deviate from the mean by more than three
standard Maintaining data integrity requires spotting and managing anomalies
and discrepancies.
Techniques such as data profiling, data visualization, and statistical methods
can be employed to detect inconsistencies and One of them is visual
identification where we plot the data and simply look for the data points that
are different from the rest of the data, for example, using box plots we can
identify the outliers. Here, the box plots are used to find how the data is
distributed from minimum to maximum It also gives us information on the
median (50th percentile), 25th percentile, and 75th
#Outlier detection using box plot
# Plot the box plot
sns.boxplot(data[‘Margin’])
Here, we are using the Seaborn library for using the boxplot. The Margin
variable is being used in this case to showcase in the boxplot and identify the
outliers.

Figure 3.6: Boxplot showing the range of Margin values in the IPL dataset
From Figure it can be observed that most of the Margin results range from 0
to 40, where 40 is the maximum value and 0 is the minimum value. 75% of
the data is below 18 (approximate value) and 25% of the data is below 5
(approximate value). The maximum run margin is And if we observe more
there are numbers ranging from 40 to 140. The numbers that are more than
120 are outliers since they do not correlate with the minimum to maximum
range
Inter-Quartile Range (IQR) Technique

The next technique that is used frequently to detect and handle outliers is the
Inter-Quartile Range (IQR) technique. This technique identifies outliers by

comparing a data point to the The IQR is the difference between the 75th and
25th percentiles of a distribution. Outliers are typically defined as data points
that are less than the 25th percentile - 1.5 * IQR or greater than the 75th
percentile + 1.5 *
#Outlier detection
#IQR Technique
# Plot the distribution of the ‘Margin’ column
plt.hist(data[‘Margin’])
plt.xlabel(“Margin”)
plt.ylabel(“Frequency”)
plt.title(“Distribution of Margin Values”)
plt.show()
# Identify outliers using the Interquartile Range (IQR)
Q1 = data[‘Margin’].quantile(0.25)
Q3 = data[‘Margin’].quantile(0.75)
IQR = Q3 - Q1
# Define outliers as values outside the 1.5 IQR range
outliers = data[data[‘Margin’] < Q1 - 1.5 * IQR]
outliers = pd.concat([outliers,(data[data[‘Margin’] > Q3 + 1.5 * IQR])])
# Print the outliers
outliers
The preceding code calculates the Inter Quartile Range using the 1st and the
3rd Quartile (the 25th and the 75th percentile Then the outliers are calculated
based on the and Q3+1.5*IQR Here Q1 is the 25th percentile and Q3 is the
75th We also have a histogram plotted which gives us an idea of the
distribution of the The majority of the data is concentrated between 0 and 60
The outliers lie after 120–140.

Figure 3.7: Histogram of the Margin Variable
The following screenshot shows the detected outliers in the Margin variable
in the data frame. It follows the formula from and Q3+1.5*IQR values)
above.

Figure 3.8: Outliers in the data frame

Z-Score Technique
A statistical technique called the z-score outlier detection technique employs
the standard deviation to find outliers. The z-score is determined by first
subtracting the mean from each data point and then dividing the result by the
standard A z-score of three or above is typically regarded as an anomaly.
import numpy as np
# Calculate the z-scores
z_scores = np.abs(data[‘Margin’] - data[‘Margin’].mean()) /
data[‘Margin’].std()
# Define outliers as data points that are more than 3 standard deviations away
from the mean
outliers = z_scores[z_scores > 3]
Outliers
The z-score technique in the preceding code uses the (x-µ)/sigma formula
from statistics. Here, sigma is the standard deviation, µ is the mean, and x is a
data The following screenshot shows the set of data points that are the
detected outliers using the z-score The 1st column is the index number of the
data frame and the 2nd column gives us the number which has a value > 3 for
detecting the

Figure 3.9: Outlier detection using the z-score technique

data.iloc[list(outliers.index)]
We will see the data frame with the indices that has the outliers using the
preceding code.

Figure 3.10: The Outliers with the indices
There are also other outlier detection techniques like Tukey’s fences which is
similar to the IQR technique but uses different thresholds to define outliers.
Tukey’s fences define 1.5*IQR for the lower outliers and 3*IQR for the upper
There are also some machine learning outlier detection methods like Isolation
Forest and the local outlier

Data Transformation

Data Transformation is used to change the scale or distribution of the
variables or convert one datatype to another. Here, numerical variables can
be transformed to reduce the skewness by taking the A categorical
variable can be converted to a dummy New variables can also be created
for convenience when needed. The techniques of standardization and
normalization are also used for data transformation to convert the data to a
suitable scale for processing.

Creating New Variables

Creating new variables is needed to understand the data well and introduce
fresh functions from the existing ones. They help in solving problems related
to data cleaning as well as analysis. The following example code helps us
understand the creation of new variables. The data is an insurance dataset that
has the variables of age, sex, BMI, number of children, smoker(yes/no),
region, and
# Reading a CSV file into a Pandas DataFrame
data = pd.read_csv(‘insurance.csv’)
# Checking the first few rows of the DataFrame
data.head()
The data frame looks something like the following screenshot:

Figure 3.11: Insurance data frame
Let’s say we want to create a new column.

# Applying a function to a column
data[‘new_charges’] = data[‘charges’].apply(lambda x: x * 2)
data[‘new_charges’]
It creates a new column by squaring the charges variable and creating a new
variable known as new_charges using the lambda function inside the data
frame and then using the .apply() function.

The new data frame has the new_charges variable, as shown in Figure

Figure 3.12: Dataframe after the new_charges variable is created
We can also use the binning technique to categorize the ages into different
categories like and
# Create a new feature called ‘AgeGroup’
data[‘AgeGroup’] = data[‘age’].apply(lambda x: ‘Young’ if x < 30 else
‘Adult’ if x < 50 else ‘Senior’)
The newly created data frame is as follows:

Figure 3.13: Dataframe after the AgeGroup variable is created
There is this technique called one hot encoding which is applied to the
categorical variables to convert them into dummy Each category has its
dummy variable, for example, if we want to translate “black then 1 for hair
and 0 for the hair The numbers are just labels to identify the categories, they
do not have any ordinal relationship like for 1 to 5-star reviews, and for a 5star review, we will write positive words and for 1-star review, we will use
not-so-positive words.

It is used mainly for machine learning modeling since they are not numerical
variables and any kind of mathematical relationship cannot be found. This
way the categorical variable can be identified as present or absent in the row.
# One-hot encode the ‘Smoker’ column
data = pd.get_dummies(data, columns=[‘smoker’], dtype = int)
The .get_dummies() function is used to convert into dummy variables.

Figure 3.14: Dummy variable represented for the smoker variable
The smoker variable is a categorical variable with a boolean representation as
Yes or so the preceding output data frame clearly shows that the new
variables smoker_yes and smoker_no as 1 (wherever the person is a smoker)
and as 0 (wherever the person is a nonsmoker).

Standardization

Standardization is a technique for data transformation of the original data to
the data having a mean of 0 and a standard deviation of This happens by
subtracting the of the data from the data point and then dividing it by the
standard The technique is useful when the data follows the normal
distribution. The following code demonstrates the concept. Standardization is
done over the age variable.
# standardize the Series
s_standardized = (data[‘age’] - data[‘age’].mean()) / data[‘age’].std()
print(s_standardized)
The standardized data format is as follows:

Figure 3.15: Standardization of the age variable in the data frame

Normalization

Normalization scales the data to a fixed range (normally 0 to It does this by
subtracting the minimum value of the data and then dividing the range
Normalization is better to work with when the data does not contain outliers
since these can skew the scaled values. The formula is like (x-xmin)/(xmaxxmin) where xmax and xmin are the maximum and minimum values of the
dataset. The following code normalizes the age variable.
# normalize the Series
s_normalized = (data[‘age’] - data[‘age’].min()) / (data[‘age’].max() data[‘age’].min())
print(s_normalized)
The normalized pandas Series of the age variable.

Figure 3.16: The normalized data

Standardization versus Normalization

The data distribution is altered by having the mean at 0 and the standard
deviation at 1. Standardization is useful when you are aware that the
distribution is However, it is not always mandatory. Additionally, unlike
normalization, standardization does not have a bounding range, therefore
it is unaffected by
In contrast, normalization shifts the data’s range so that it lies between 0
and 1 or -1 and The distribution of the data in this instance is unknown.
Outliers impact it because of range limits like [0,1] or [-1,+1].

Feature Engineering Techniques

There are some feature engineering techniques like log transform, square
root transform, and polynomial The detailed explanation of these
techniques is as follows:

Log Transform

Log transform is used to deal with skewed data. It helps to handle large
values, reduce skewness, and transform the data to a more normal or
Gaussian-like The following code shows that the charges variable from the
data frame is right that is, the majority of the data is concentrated on the left
side and thus needs log transformation.
import numpy as np
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
# Perform the log transformation
data_log = np.log(data[‘charges’])
# Define a grid of plots
fig, axs = plt.subplots(nrows=1, ncols=2)
# Create histograms
axs[0].hist(data[‘charges’], edgecolor=’black’)
axs[1].hist(data_log, edgecolor=’black’)
# Add a title to each histogram
axs[0].set_title(‘Original Data’)
axs[1].set_title(‘Log-Transformed Data’)
# Display the plots
plt.show()

The np.log() function is used to perform the log transformation. Then a grid
of plots (1 row and 2 columns) is set up using the subplots() function from the
matplotlib’s pyplot module. This function returns a Figure object and a
Numpy array containing the created subplot Axes instances, which are stored
in fig and axs respectively. Histograms of the original and log-transformed

data are created using the hist function from the Axes The edgecolor
parameter is set to ‘black’ to better visualize individual Then the titles are
added to the histograms using the set_title function from the Axes instances.
Following is the set of plots where we see the original and the logtransformed

Figure 3.17: Original and log-transformed data (charges variable)
The preceding screenshot shows the right-skewed data, where the majority of
the data is concentrated on the left, and on the right, we have the logtransformed version, which is the normal distribution of the previous skewed

Square Root Transform

The square root transform is a data transformation method that is used to
reduce data skewness. This is specifically used when the data is a bit skewed
to the right
A square root transformation involves taking the square root of each data
point in the dataset. This helps reduce variance and makes the data more
normally distributed. The following code shows the square root transform
operation.
import numpy as np
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
# Perform the square root transformation
data_sqrt = np.sqrt(data[‘charges’])
# Define a grid of plots
fig, axs = plt.subplots(nrows=1, ncols=2)
# Create histograms
axs[0].hist(data[‘charges’], edgecolor=’black’)
axs[1].hist(data_sqrt, edgecolor=’black’)
# Add a title to each histogram
axs[0].set_title(‘Original Data’)
axs[1].set_title(‘Square Root Transformed Data’)
# Display the plots
plt.show()
The preceding code structure is the same as the log transformation code. A
few things like the variable names and the np.sqrt() function name are
different.

Figure 3.18: Squared transform of the data
The original data is right-skewed and the square root transformed data is also
moderately right-skewed but is nearing a normal It is not as efficient as the
log transform version since the original data is right-skewed and not leftskewed. Although, for understanding the concept it is fine to use the .sqrt()
function in this case with the available data.
Normally, if we compare, the log transformation fares better than the square
root transform. The log transformation can compress high values better than
that of the square root transform. However, Square root can be only used for
the values >=0 while logarithmic can’t be used when values =

Data Integration

Data Integration is combining data from various sources to have a
composite view of the dataset. This is often necessary during data analysis
as it helps to work with the complete dataset. Various operations are used
like and concat to perform data integration using pandas.

Concatenation

The concat function in pandas is used to concatenate rows of a data frame to
the end of another data frame thus returning a new object. If there are missing
columns or rows in either data frame, then the cells are replaced by NaN
The following code explains the concept of concatenation of 2 data frames.
Here, there are 3 rows each in every data frame, and the indexes are also
defined.
import pandas as pd
df1 = pd.DataFrame({‘Column1’: [‘A0’, ‘A1’, ‘A2’],
‘Column2’: [‘B0’, ‘B1’, ‘B2’],
‘Column3’: [‘C0’, ‘C1’, ‘C2’],
‘Column4’: [‘D0’, ‘D1’, ‘D2’]},
index=[0, 1, 2])
df2 = pd.DataFrame({‘Column1’: [‘A3’, ‘A4’, ‘A5’],
‘Column2’: [‘B3’, ‘B4’, ‘B5’],
‘Column3’: [‘C3’, ‘C4’, ‘C5’],
‘Column4’: [‘D3’, ‘D4’, ‘D5’]},
index=[3, 4, 5])
result = pd.concat([df1, df2])
result
The resulting data frame shows that the 2nd data frame is kept below the 1st
data frame

Figure 3.19: Concatenated data frame
The second code for concatenation shows missing columns in
df1 = pd.DataFrame({‘Column1’: [‘A0’, ‘A1’, ‘A2’],
‘Column2’: [‘B0’, ‘B1’, ‘B2’],
‘Column3’: [‘D0’, ‘D1’, ‘D2’]},
index=[0, 1, 2])
df2 = pd.DataFrame({‘Column1’: [‘A3’, ‘A4’, ‘A5’],
‘Column2’: [‘B3’, ‘B4’, ‘B5’],
‘Column4’: [‘C3’, ‘C4’, ‘C5’],
‘Column3’: [‘D3’, ‘D4’, ‘D5’]},
index=[3, 4, 5])
result = pd.concat([df1, df2])
result

The resulting data frame has NaN values in the first 3 rows in the 4th

Figure 3.20: Concatenated data frame with NaN values
The concat function can also be used to concatenate data frames along the
column axis =
df3 = pd.DataFrame({‘Column4’: [‘C0’, ‘C1’, ‘C2’],
‘Column3’: [‘D0’, ‘D1’, ‘D2’]},
index=[0, 1, 2])
# Concatenating the data frames along the column axis
result = pd.concat([df1, df3], axis=1)
result

The resulting concatenated data frame is created based on appending the
columns side by The parameter of axis = 1 is used to do the same.

Figure 3.21: Concatenated data frame along the column

Merge

The merge operation in pandas combines data frames into one data frame by
joining rows using one or more keys. It is similar to the JOIN operation in
SQL.
The following code explains the merge function.
# Creating the first DataFrame
df1 = pd.DataFrame({
‘Employee’: [‘Tom’, ‘Ben’, ‘Tom’,’Suzy’],
‘Department’: [‘IT’, ‘Marketing’, ‘IT’, ‘R&D’]
})
# Creating the second DataFrame
df2 = pd.DataFrame({
‘Employee’: [‘Tom’, ‘Suzy’],
‘Salary’: [8000, 10000]
})
merged_df = pd.merge(df1, df2, on=’Employee’)
merged_df
This code has 2 data frames df1 and df2 with the Employee name and
Department in df1 and the Employee name and Salary in The merge
operation is used to combine both the data frames on the Employee column as
we use in JOIN in SQL.

The resulting data frame is as follows:

Figure 3.22: Merged data frames df1 and df2 on the Employee column
The next merge operation is the left join operation of Here, we are merging
df1 and df2 as before but only considering all the rows of df1 and the
common rows between df1 and
merged_df = pd.merge(df1, df2, on=’Employee’, how=’left’)
merged_df
The preceding code is the same as before with an addition of the how=’left’
parameter which considers all the rows of the left data frame If we use then
all the rows of the right data frame will be considered.

Figure 3.23: Left joining of the data frames using the merge function

Join

The .join() function is used to combine data frames based on their indices.
It is very similar to the .merge() function mentioned earlier but it uses the
indices to join the data frames unlike columns in the .merge() function. It
does the left join like above and if there is no match in certain rows, the
result is
left = pd.DataFrame({‘A’: [‘A0’, ‘A1’, ‘A2’]}, index=[‘x’, ‘y’, ‘z’])
right = pd.DataFrame({‘B’: [‘B0’, ‘B1’, ‘B2’]}, index=[‘x’, ‘a’, ‘b’])
joined = left.join(right)
joined
The preceding code uses the .join() function and the data frames df1 and
df2 are joined based on the indices.

Figure 3.24: Resulting data frame after the Join function is used

Bonus Libraries for Data Cleaning

The data cleaning and preparation process is done by traditional Python
libraries like pandas, numpy, and so on, but there are other libraries too,
like and polars which are very good alternatives to the former libraries.
So, let’s discuss some of them briefly.

Pyjanitor

Pyjanitor is an open-source Python library built on top of the Janitor
package in R It does the cleaning process with the help of the chaining
method, where it removes, renames, deletes columns, removes missing
values, and so on. It is very similar to the pipe operator used in R The
following link brilliantly demonstrates the usage of the Pyjanitor package.
https://www.analyticsvidhya.com/blog/2022/04/a-complete-guide-topyjanitor-for-data-cleaning/

Ftfy

The ftfy library is called fixes text for you and it helps to fix issues related
to Unicode encoding and decoding. It is very common in .xlsx or .csv files
where some texts are converted to irrelevant texts. Here, if the ftfy library
is used on those texts, can give us clean text and we can analyze it. The
following link shows the usage of the library.
https://pypi.org/project/ftfy/

Polars

Polars is the pandas alternative library used to process data faster than the
conventional pandas library. Polars does not use an index for the data
frame in comparison to pandas, it supports more parallel operations than
pandas, moreover, Polars supports lazy evaluation which helps efficient
memory usage by examining the queries and optimizing them. In
comparison, pandas use the eager evaluation technique which evaluates a
query without examining or optimizing it thus increasing memory usage.
A more detailed explanation of the comparison of polars and pandas is
explained in the following link:
https://towardsdatascience.com/pandas-vs-polars-a-syntax-and-speedcomparison-5aa54e27497e

Ensuring Data Consistency and Comparability

A uniform and accurate data across several access points or instances can
be considered as consistent data. This can entail dealing with format
changes, duplicate data, and missing Consistent information encourages
accuracy and usability and may be essential for making wise decisions.
The goal of data comparability, on the other hand, is to make sure that data
gathered using various methods or sources may be usefully This
frequently entails standardizing data formats, sizes, and units, as well as
correcting any differences that might develop as a result of various
metadata or data collection

Data Consistency

Data consistency assures that there is no conflicting or contradictory
information and that the data is accurate and reliable. Consistency checks
compare data from different datasets or from the same dataset to find
discrepancies and fix them. This may entail cross-validating data,
confirming the connections between variables, and spotting any
discrepancies in the data.
Data consistency checks can be carried out using methods such as data
profiling, data visualization, and statistical Data profiling offers a deeper
knowledge of the data’s properties by providing summary statistics and
descriptive information about the data. Techniques for data such as scatter
plots and box can be used to locate potential discrepancies or The
correlations and consistency of the data can be further validated using
statistical analysis techniques like correlation analysis or hypothesis

Data Comparability

The ability to compare and analyze data from various sources or eras is
known as data Aligning data formats, addressing discrepancies in data
definitions or units, and harmonizing variables across datasets are all
necessary to achieve data comparability.
Standardization and Normalization are essential for attaining data
comparability. Datasets can be combined and compared with ease if
similar formatting, naming rules, and data types are Additionally,
resolving measurement inconsistencies or accounting for inflation can
assist in ensuring that data is similar across time.

Conclusion

In this chapter, we explored the process of cleaning and preparing data for
analysis. Data cleaning and preparation are crucial steps in the data
analysis workflow, as they ensure that the data is accurate, consistent, and
suitable for analysis. We discussed various techniques and concepts
related to data cleaning and preparation, including identifying and fixing
errors, transforming data, data normalization, data integration, and
ensuring data consistency and
Data cleaning involves identifying and addressing errors, inconsistencies,
and missing values in the dataset. We discussed techniques such as
handling missing data, handling outliers, and dealing with inconsistent By
applying these techniques, we can improve the quality of the data and
reduce the risk of biased or incorrect analysis results.
Data preparation involves transforming the data into a suitable format for
analysis. We discussed techniques such as data formatting and
standardization, data integration and merging, and data transformation and
feature These techniques help in harmonizing the data, resolving
differences between datasets, and creating new variables based on domain
knowledge or insights from the data.
Data normalization is an important step in data preparation, especially
when dealing with variables that have different scales or units of
measurement. We discussed normalization techniques such as min-max

scaling and z-score which bring the variables to a common scale and
facilitate fair comparisons.

Ensuring data consistency and comparability is crucial when working with
multiple datasets or data collected at different time points. We discussed
techniques such as standardization, data profiling, and statistical analysis
to ensure that the data is consistent, comparable, and reliable across
different sources or periods.
Throughout the chapter, we provided code examples and discussed the use
of popular libraries such as NumPy, Pandas, for data cleaning and
preparation tasks, and also explained the libraries of and Ftfy in brief.
These libraries offer powerful functions and methods to handle various
aspects of data cleaning and preparation efficiently.
By investing time and effort in cleaning and preparing the data, we can
ensure that the subsequent analysis is based on accurate, consistent, and
reliable This improves the quality and integrity of the analysis results and
enables informed decision-making based on trustworthy insights.
In the next chapter, we will delve into exploratory data analysis
techniques, which help us gain a deeper understanding of the data, identify
patterns, and uncover meaningful insights.

CHAPTER 4
Exploratory Data Analysis

Introduction

Exploratory Data Analysis (EDA) is the most important step in the data
analysis process. It involves investigating and understanding the patterns,
and relationships within a dataset before conducting further deeper
analysis or building predictive models. EDA aids analysts in gaining
insights, spotting problems with data quality, and selecting the best data
preparation options. This chapter will explain EDA and its the process of
EDA as carried out during the data science various data analysis
exploration methods like descriptive statistics, data distribution analysis,
correlation analysis, dimensionality reduction, some visualization
techniques, time series analysis, some auto EDA tools like pandas
profiling and d-tale, and some real-life use However, the topics of
visualization and time series will also be discussed in detail dedicatedly in
separate chapters.

Structure

In this chapter, we will discuss the following topics:
Introduction to Exploratory Data Analysis (EDA)
Importance of EDA
The whole EDA Process
Data Analysis Methods for Exploration
Descriptive Statistics
Data Distribution Analysis
Correlation Analysis
Dimensionality Reduction
Visualizations for Exploring Data
Univariate Visualizations
Bivariate Visualizations

Multivariate Visualizations
Identifying Patterns and Trends
Cluster Analysis
Auto EDA Tools (pandas profiling and d-tale)
Case Studies

Introduction to Exploratory Data Analysis (EDA)

Exploratory Data Analysis is an approach that summarizes the important
properties of the data, uncovering the underlying patterns, and identifying
the outliers or anomalies. It involves visualizing data using graphs, charts,
and statistical measures to reveal meaningful information.

Importance of EDA

EDA understands the data by identifying the flaws and making informed
and intelligent decisions in the whole data analysis process. It identifies
missing values, outliers, and other anomalies, and does feature selection
and engineering to create a solid foundation for advanced statistical
analysis.

The whole EDA Process

The EDA process typically involves the following steps:
Data collection: Gather the relevant dataset from various sources like web
scraping, databases, accessing APIs, surveys, and so on.
Data cleaning: Preprocess the data by handling missing values, outliers,
anomalies, removing duplicates, and so on.
Data exploration: Uses descriptive statistics, visualizations, correlation
analysis, and other analytical techniques to gain relevant insights from the
data.
Hypothesis generation: Formulate hypotheses based on the initial findings
and patterns observed.
Summary and insights: Summarize the key findings and insights derived
from the EDA process.

Data Analysis Methods for Exploration
The Data Analysis methods for exploration are descriptive statistics, data
distribution analysis, correlation analysis, and dimensionality The
individual topics are explained along with the code.

Descriptive Statistics

Descriptive Statistics is the fundamental block of data analysis and machine
learning modeling. It helps in summarizing the data using the relevant Python
libraries. It can be applied to various datasets and variables using the Pandas
library in The central tendency (mean, median, mode) and the variations in
the data (variance and standard deviation) are being calculated.
To demonstrate the concept of descriptive statistics, we use the QS World
University Rankings 2024 retrieved from
https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/joebeachcapital/qs-world-universityrankings-2024
import pandas as pd
df= pd.read_csv(‘2024 QS World University Rankings 1.1 (For qs.com).csv’)
df.head()

Figure 4.1: The first 5 rows of the data frame

df = df.drop(index=0)
df.info()
The first row is deleted because it is repeated.

Figure 4.2: The datatypes of all the attributes and the total number of rows

The preceding screenshot is the output of df.info() and it shows the details of
all the variables, their datatypes (most of them are object datatypes and we
will change them to float or integer as per the need), the number of entries
that have values (and also gives us an idea about the number of missing
values). It also shows that there are 29 columns in the data

There are several columns with numerical values but all of them are
represented as object so we need to change it to float datatype. The object
datatype means the variable is alphanumeric. For the machine learning model
or for any analysis purpose we need numerical data in integer/float format
and categorial data in categorical format which can be later converted into
numerical form using one hot By converting the variables into their
respective datatype, the data analysis and ML model training become easy.
df[‘Sustainability Score ‘] = df[‘Sustainability Score’].astype(float)
The .describe() method is used to get the descriptive statistics of the column
in the data frame.
df[‘Sustainability Score ‘].describe()
The result of the descriptive statistics is as follows.

Figure 4.3: The Descriptive Statistics of the Sustainability Score variable are
found
The maximum score is 100, but the median lies at 8.4. The mean is 25.42 and
the minimum value is The top 25% (75th percentile) of the data is having a
score of more than 42.6. This denotes that the majority of the scores lie below
42 and only a few universities have good sustainability
Moreover, the descriptive statistics can also be calculated using the following
codes:
df[‘Sustainability Score ‘].mean()
df[‘Sustainability Score ‘].median()
df[‘Sustainability Score ‘].std()
df[‘Sustainability Score ‘].mode()
The .mode() object normally is used to find the frequency of the categories,
that is, they are used for categorical variables instead of numerical variables.

Data Distribution Analysis

Data Distribution analysis in Python is the observing of the distribution
and relationships within the data. Normally, the Pandas, Numpy, and
Seaborn libraries are used to perform the operation. Distributions like
Histogram, KDE plot (Kernel Density Estimation), ECDF (Empirical
Cumulative Distribution Function) plot, Violin plot, QQ Plot (Quantile Quantile Plot), Box plot, and Rug plot are used to study the data in detail.

Histogram

Histogram represents numerical variables by their distribution. The .histplot()
object is used from the Seaborn
import seaborn as sns
sns.histplot(df[‘Sustainability Score ‘])
The histogram of the Sustainability score is as follows:

Figure 4.4: The histogram distribution of the Sustainability Score

KDE Plot

The Kernel Density Estimate (KDE) plot is used to represent the data using a
continuous probability distribution curve. The kdeplot() function is used to
create the plot.
sns.kdeplot(df[‘Sustainability Score ‘])

Figure 4.5: The KDE plot of the Sustainability Score

ECDF plot

The Empirical Cumulative Distribution Function (ECDF) plot represents the
proportion or count of observations falling below each unique value in the
dataset. The ecdfplot() function is used to create the plot. The observations
are visualized directly, that is, there are no binning or smoothing parameters.
sns.ecdfplot(df[‘Sustainability Score ‘])

Figure 4.6: The ECDF plot of the Sustainability Score

QQ plot

A Q-Q (quantile-quantile) plot is a probability plot for comparing two
probability distributions by plotting their quantiles against each other.
import scipy.stats as stats
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
stats.probplot(df[‘Sustainability Score ‘], dist=”norm”, plot=plt)
plt.show()
The code shows the usage of the stats library and the .probplot() function
using the normal distribution The plot is shown as follows.

Figure 4.7: The Q-Q plot of the Sustainability Score

Correlation Analysis

Correlation analysis is an important component of EDA where it is found out
whether any relationship exists between two variables and datasets and, of
course, how strong or weak the relationship is. It is imperative to understand
the correlation between variables to understand the innate patterns and
connections within the dataset. For example, we need to perform the
correlation analysis of student performance on tests versus their studying
hours, or student performance on tests versus active attendance (that is, the
student is asking questions and is involved in curriculum-based
conversations) of the class.
The positive correlation means that both variables increase with respect to
each other, on the contrary, the negative correlation signifies that if one
variable increases, the other decreases.
https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/vikasukani/diabetes-data-set?
select=diabetes-dataset.csv
To proceed forward, let’s take an example of the diabetes dataset which was
used for testing and explanation here. The code is given as follows.
import pandas as pd
# Load the dataset
df = pd.read_csv(‘diabetes-dataset.csv’)
df.head()

Figure 4.8: The first 5 rows of the diabetes dataset and all the variables are
numeric

In the dataset, all the variables are numeric be it integer or float, but the
Outcome variable is 1 or 0 meaning if it is 1 then the person is likely to have
diabetes and 0 means the person is not likely to have The attributes of
Glucose, Blood Pressure, Skin Thickness, Insulin, and so on, affect the
probability of a patient suffering from diabetes. This dataset is ideal for
explaining the concept of correlation analysis since all these attributes and the
correlation numbers later can help us understand whether a patient suffers
from diabetes or not.
The datatypes of the dataset are checked once to identify if there are any
mismatched datatypes, for example, numeric but identified as an object.
print(df.dtypes)

Figure 4.9: The datatypes of the dataset are identified as numeric
There is the corr() method in Pandas to calculate the pairwise correlation of
the excluding the NA/null values. The method returns a correlation matrix
which is a table showing correlation coefficients between the variables. Each
cell in the table shows the correlation between the variables.

# Compute the correlation matrix
corr_matrix = df.corr()
The correlation matrix for all the variables is shown in the figure as follows.

Figure 4.10: The pairwise correlation of the columns
The correlation values are between -1 and and the number which is near 1 is a
positively correlated number meaning that the 2 variables are increasing (or
decreasing) together, and if the number is closer to then the 2 variables are
inversely correlated to each other (if one increases, the other decreases). If the
number is 0, then there isn’t any positive or negative correlation between the
variables or there is no relationship.
If we observe the numbers cell by cell, higher glucose level contributes to a
higher probability of diabetes-affected patients and the correlation number is
0.4584. Higher Insulin level is directly proportional to higher skin thickness
(correlation coefficient is 0.4488). As Age increases, skin thickness decreases
(correlation coefficient -0.111).

Spearman Correlation

Spearman correlation does not assume a linear relationship or normal
distribution, and it’s based on the ranked values for each variable rather than
the raw data. It is mostly used to calculate the correlation coefficients for
ordinal variables.
# Compute the Spearman correlation matrix
spearman_corr_matrix = df.corr(method=’spearman’)
print(“\nSpearman Correlation Matrix: “)
spearman_corr_matrix
The correlation matrix is as follows.

Figure 4.11: The Spearman correlation of the columns
Let’s check out the correlation matrix using Seaborn’s heatmap function.

import seaborn as sns
f, ax = plt.subplots(figsize = (12,10))
sns.heatmap(df.corr(),
annot = True,
linecolor = ‘r’,
linewidths = .5,
fmt = ‘.1f’,
ax = ax);

The correlation matrix is represented in the form of a heatmap as shown in
the following figure. The numbers are the same as the df.corr() function we
used earlier.

Figure 4.12: The Correlation matrix heatmap

The correlation coefficient of 0.5 between glucose and the outcome suggests
that both variables are positively

Dimensionality Reduction

Dimensionality reduction is the process of reducing the number of random
variables by obtaining a set of principal variables. Sometimes the dataset has
a high number of features and we need to reduce the features so that
irrelevant features are removed and most of the information from the features
is retained for the further
It is divided into feature selection and feature extraction.
Principal Component Analysis (PCA) is a common dimensionality reduction
technique. It is a statistical technique of orthogonally transforming the n
dimensions of a dataset into a new set of n It analyzes the data where the
observations are described by a lot of inter-correlated quantitative dependent
variables. It extracts important information from the data and displays the
information as a set of orthogonal variables.
Let’s do some code to understand the workings of the PCA technique.
from sklearn.preprocessing import StandardScaler
from sklearn.decomposition import PCA
The sklearn library is used which has the StandardScaler function for
standardizing the features and the PCA function for performing the PCA
operation.
Since the data frame is already present from the previous correlation analysis,
we next proceed to separate the target variable (Outcome) from the mother

data frame (df).
# Separate the features from the target column (‘Outcome’)
X = df.drop(‘Outcome’, axis=1)
y = df[‘Outcome’]

This way we have a separate variable y which is the output attribute.
Next, we proceed to standardize the features since PCA is influenced by the
scales of the features. We standardize the features to have a mean of 0 and a
standard deviation of
# Standardize the features
scaler = StandardScaler()
X = scaler.fit_transform(X)
Next, the PCA technique is applied to the X variable to reduce the
dimensionality of the data to 2 principal
# Apply PCA
pca = PCA(n_components=2) # we are reducing to 2 principal components
X_pca = pca.fit_transform(X)
# Print the explained variance ratio
print(‘Explained variance ratio: ‘, pca.explained_variance_ratio_)
Explained variance ratio: [0.26153728 0.21691186]
The explained variance ratio tells how much variance can be attributed to
each of the principal components Since the dimensions were reduced from 4
to some of the variance is lost too.

Finally, visualize the data.
# Visualize the results
plt.scatter(X_pca[:, 0], X_pca[:, 1], c=y)
plt.xlabel(‘First Principal Component’)
plt.ylabel(‘Second Principal Component’)
plt.show()
The scatter plot of the 2 components is as follows.

Figure 4.13: Visualizing the PCA with dimension reduced to 2 components

The code uses the scatter plot to represent the 2 dimensions. X_pca is used
along with 2 dimensions and the output variable The data points are
segregated by 2 colors and are mostly congested in the middle of the plot.

Visualizations for Exploring Data

Exploratory Data Analysis (EDA) has a lot of steps involved starting from
data preparation to descriptive statistics to correlation analysis to cluster
analysis to visualizations and so on. Visualizations make up a significant
portion of EDA where graphs, plots, charts, and so on, are used to tell
stories to the They not only look visually pleasing but also explain the
numbers with the help of charts, plots, and They help the analysts, and the
managers make informed decisions based on visual For example, the sales
of any video game can be understood by factors that are represented in a
pie chart. By looking at the pie chart itself, the managers can make
informed decisions on how to improve the sales for the next quarter.

Univariate Analysis

Univariate analysis is the simplest form of data analysis, where the data being
analyzed contains only one variable. Since it’s just one variable, it doesn’t
have to do anything with causes or The main purpose of univariate analysis is
to describe the data and find patterns that exist within it. Let’s create a
histogram for the Glucose variable in the diabetes dataset we have been
using.
# Plot histogram for the ‘Glucose’ column
plt.hist(df[‘Glucose’], bins=10, alpha=0.5)
plt.title(‘Histogram for Glucose’)
plt.xlabel(‘Glucose’)
plt.ylabel(‘Frequency’)
plt.show()
The histogram representation is shown as follows.

Figure 4.14: Univariate analysis using Histogram

The preceding histogram shows that most of the Glucose levels are between
80 and 150 units approximately. The graph is a left-skewed one where most
of the data is concentrated toward the right.

Bivariate Analysis

Bivariate analysis, as the name suggests, involves 2 variables and we find the
relationship between them. Here is a scatter plot (a common bivariate plot)
for the Glucose and Insulin variables from the diabetes dataset.
#Bivariate Analysis
# Scatter plot for ‘Glucose’ and ‘Insulin’
sns.scatterplot(x=’Glucose’, y=’Insulin’, data=df)
plt.title(‘Scatter plot of Glucose and Insulin’)
plt.show()
The scatter plot function we have used here is straightforward and has tested
using the 2 variables of Insulin and Glucose. Now let’s check how the plot
looks like a visualization graph.

Figure 4.15: Bivariate analysis using Scatter Plot

The preceding scatter plot shows a very close linear relationship but not a
straightforward linear Most of the data is concentrated between 80 and 150
glucose units as we observed from the univariate Insulin intake increases with
increasing glucose levels but there are also certain outliers in the beginning
where 0 glucose and 0 insulin levels are there. There are also a couple of
outliers at the top

Multivariate Analysis

In multivariate analysis, we focus on multiple variables and try to understand
the relationship between them. In this case, we will test with 4 variables
namely, Pregnancies, Glucose, Blood Pressure, and Insulin closely related to
the target Outcome variable and understand the relationship between them.
We have used the pairplot() function to perform the operation.
#Multivariate Analysis
# Pair plot for ‘Pregnancies’, ‘Glucose’, ‘BloodPressure’, ‘Insulin’
sns.pairplot(df[[‘Pregnancies’, ‘Glucose’, ‘BloodPressure’, ‘Insulin’]])
plt.show()
The seaborn library has the pairplot() function that can be used to perform
multivariate analysis. The pairplot is shown as follows.

Figure 4.16: Multivariate analysis using Pair Plot

The preceding pairplot shows the relationship between the 4 variables. There
are 16 plots but due to lack of space, all of them could not be shown in the
preceding screenshot. One can easily test it out in their system for a better
understanding.
All the subplots are not relevant, for example, the Glucose versus pregnancies
plot does not give us any information since the scatter subplot does not follow
any specific positive or negative relationship, the same goes for Pregnancies
versus Blood Blood Pressure versus and a few more. Glucose and Insulin
show a positive relationship (a very close to a linear This way, we can study
and observe relations between multiple variables simultaneously.

Identifying Patterns and Trends

For identifying patterns and trends in the dataset, there must be some kind
of technique to go through the process of understanding the patterns. For
example, in the unsupervised machine learning technique, there is no
target specified beforehand, thus the algorithm needs to understand and
segregate similar kinds of data points in groups like clustering.

Cluster Analysis

As previously stated, Cluster Analysis is a technique for categorizing a
dataset into groups or clusters in which comparable data points are placed in
one group and dissimilar data points are placed in other groups. K-means
clustering is one of the most widely used clustering methods. The K-means
technique separates a set of n datasets into k subsets (or with each dataset
assigned to the cluster with the closest mean or
Let’s apply the K-means clustering on the diabetes dataset using the sklearn
library.
from sklearn.cluster import KMeans
# Separate the features from the target column (‘Outcome’)
X = df.drop(‘Outcome’, axis=1)
# Apply K-means clustering
kmeans = KMeans(n_clusters=2, random_state=0) # we are choosing 2
clusters
kmeans.fit(X)
# Print the cluster centers
print(‘Cluster centers: ‘, kmeans.cluster_centers_)
Cluster centers: [[ 0.97680787 0.39379477 0.38518391 -0.21659583
-0.16202733 0.08989272
0.00323192 1.05962701]

[-0.51678214 -0.20833791 -0.20378231 0.11459045 0.08572088
-0.04755792
-0.00170985 -0.56059778]]

Since we are still using the diabetes dataset, we need to focus on importing
the KMeans function from the sklearn We separate the features (X) and the
target column Then we apply K-means clustering to the features. The
n_clusters parameter is the number of clusters to form and the number of
centroids to generate. The random_state parameter is used for the
reproducibility of the results. Next, we print the cluster centers. Next, we
need to visualize the clusters.
# Visualize the clusters
plt.scatter(X[:,1], X[:,4], c=kmeans.labels_, cmap=’viridis’)
# Plot the cluster centers
plt.scatter(kmeans.cluster_centers_[:, 0], kmeans.cluster_centers_[:, 1],
s=300, c=’red’)
plt.title(‘Clusters of Patients’)
plt.xlabel(‘Glucose’)
plt.ylabel(‘Insulin’)
plt.show()
In the first line of code for visualization, we keep all the data points in 2
clusters of different colors (yellow and purple). The data points are not
completely segregated but can be understood overall. The Glucose and
Insulin variables are considered in this case. That’s why its X[:,1] and X[:,4].
There are 2000 kmeans.labels_ for the clustering.

Figure 4.17: K-Means clustering operation shown
In the next part, the clustering operation 2 groups are formed as shown by the
2 big red Most of the yellow points are there with the left red dot and the
other points are with the purple dot (as shown in Figure

Auto EDA tools (pandas profiling and D-tale)

Till now we have been primarily dealing with Exploratory Data Analysis
and their steps like Descriptive Statistics, Correlation Analysis, Cluster
Analysis, Visualizations, Data Distribution Analysis, Feature Engineering
and so on. All these techniques can be implemented altogether using
libraries dtale and pandas-profiling Let’s discuss these libraries in detail.

D-tale

D-tale is the Auto EDA library that was launched in February 2020 and is
used to visualize Pandas data frames conveniently and also supports various
interactive plots, 3D plots, heat maps, the correlation between the features,
building custom and many more. All these operations are normally carried out
by different functions but all D-tale does all this together in The code is
demonstrated as follows.
import dtale
d = dtale.show(df)
d.open_browser()
We just have to install the dtale library and we can do the operation and get
the relevant result as shown in the following screenshot.

Figure 4.18: D-tale web page representation

The preceding figure shows how a data frame looks after the D-tale library is
used. It looks very descriptive and clear. The features can be seen and at the
top the number of rows (2000) and the number of columns (9) can be
observed.

Figure 4.19: The play button on the top left gives a list of functionalities
The functionalities are custom filter, data frame functions, clean column,
merge and stack, Describe, Time Series Analysis, Feature Analysis, Highlight
and so on. If we drag the slider down, we can find more features.
Now let’s explore some features to find how it fares against the conventional
EDA techniques.

Figure 4.20: The details of a column
If we look closely, then we get the datatype of the variable, the number of
outliers, the skew, and There are also various functions like delete,

replacements, rename, hide, duplicates, and description of the variable.
We can also summarize the data based on a particular attribute, for example,
we are trying to find the average BMI for each So, we can use the technique
of Summarizing data here.

Figure 4.21: Summarizing the data from the Actions tab
On this, the following tab will appear and we can then feed the required
variables and do the Groupby operation like we do using the .groupby()
function in Pandas or normally in

Figure 4.22: The Groupby option in the Summarize data option
After this operation is done, we get the result as follows.

Figure 4.23: Average BMI of each Age
We can also do numerous operations using the Visualize tab.

Figure 4.24: Visualize tab operations
We can do the operations of Correlations, Missing Analysis, Predictive Power
Score, and Time Series Analysis which are very handy because all these are
available in one library.

We can test with numerous other functions in the D-tale library, so it is left
for the readers to test more.

Pandas-profiling

It is a Python auto EDA library that generates interactive HTML reports and
includes various aspects of the dataset. They are handling missing values,
descriptive statistics of datasets like mean, mode, median, skewness, standard
deviation, and so on, and charts like histograms and
Let’s demonstrate its use by the following code.
#importing required packages
import pandas_profiling
import numpy as np
#descriptive statistics
pandas_profiling.ProfileReport(df)
The code is straightforward when it comes to explanation. After the last line
of the code is run, we get the following screenshot along with a lot of other
information for each variable.

Figure 4.25: The details of the dataset

In the preceding screenshot, we have the number of rows, columns, missing
values, missing %, duplicate rows, duplicate and so on. It also gives the
number of numeric and categorical If we click on the Alerts option, there are
certain interesting details.

Figure 4.26: Some statistical numbers of the dataset
From the preceding screenshot, there are 36.5% duplicate rows, which is a
lot. There are interesting results on variables that are highly correlated like
Pregnancies are highly correlated with and Skin Thickness is highly
correlated with Insulin level. Some variables have zeros in them like Skin
Thickness has 28.6% zeros and Insulin has 47.8%
In the variables section, we can explore more on each attribute like the
Glucose level.

Figure 4.27: The detail of the Glucose level of the diabetes dataset
Glucose level variable has 136 distinct the mean is the maximum glucose
level is there are 13 zero values in the and no missing
We also have a heatmap generated by the library which is quite handy.

Figure 4.28: The Heatmap of the dataset showing the correlation between the
values
We also have the details on the first and last rows, the duplicate rows, the
count of missing and so on.
Overall, these Auto EDA libraries are a lifesaver when it comes to performing
EDA with many features and saving However, conventional EDA is not going
anywhere since it not only gives a learning curve to the user but also helps us
add more features as we move forward in the data science life cycle.
Conventional EDA is also not so helpful in dealing with larger and more
complex

Case Studies

Exploratory Data Analysis (EDA) can be used to understand the data, and
patterns, identify outliers, and do correlation and cluster Here are a few
examples to explain the real-life use cases that are normally done at the
industry level.

EDA on a Retail Sales Dataset

In the situation of Retail Sales, we have to understand the sales pattern
over the last few years or months, the customer behavior over time, the
marketing strategies used and their impact on the business, products that
are more likely to be bought or that are less likely to be and so on. Of
course, we perform all the EDA techniques we discussed in the chapter,
but most importantly the preceding patterns or trends must come first and
they should be the anchor for identifying the business problem and solving
For example, we see that there are certain clothing that are being bought
during the festival season by the youth mostly (but also by the middleaged and older people), so those specific clothing can be provided with
more discounts and promotions along with certain other accessories like
shoes, wallets, belts, caps, and so on. These can be identified by the sales
value for each of the items and a correlation analysis can be This way the
customer can feel more interested in other items too when needed. Here,
the customer will keep coming back to specific items from the store when
needed.

EDA on a Healthcare Dataset

For healthcare, it is important to gain insights into patients’ health data,
and lifestyle choices like how much exercise he/she does, their level of
smoking, and alcohol consumption, overworked or not, stressed or not,
normally pleasant mood or not, sugar level, Blood pressure level, height,
weight, and so on. These factors, if studied well say a lot about a person’s
physical, mental, and emotional health. The diabetes dataset studied
helped us understand the correlation between the glucose level and the
probability of a person having diabetes or There may be other factors too
that are responsible for diabetes that were not included in the dataset. If
we explore more, for example, there are a lot of experiments conducted on
students who study a lot and don’t involve themselves with outdoor
activities, talking with their friends, or traveling versus students who do
all these along with The second counterpart has a lower stress level than
the former considering the fact that both of them nearly have the same
average These can also be conducted on professionals of various ages,
nationalities, genders, across various kinds of jobs, and so on.

EDA on Finance Dataset

If we explore the financial markets, then we can identify areas of
investment and learn more about money as well as financial These include
analyzing stock price data, identifying the trends, and investments done by
highly experienced to mid-level experienced investors and learning from
them, also understanding how companies perform while the market is
doing well, or there is or exceptional situations like war, pandemic, and so
on.

EDA on Manufacturing Dataset

In the manufacturing domain, it is important to understand the factors of
production time, production volume, resource usage, and the state of the
raw materials. These points can help identify the issues of inefficient
utilization of resources and time and thus improve with time. The
decision-making can be done accordingly. For example, if there is a chip
manufacturing factory that makes 100,000 chips daily, but there are issues
with the machinery that limit it to 100,000 but can be increased to 200,000
then the machinery and the workload can be optimized by the
professionals to make certain efficient changes to increase the capacity.
This way more demand can be met.

Conclusion

The topic of Exploratory Data Analysis (EDA) has been explored quite in
detail and the steps covered mostly resonate with what is being practiced
in the industry.
The chapter has included various topics from descriptive statistics to data
distribution analysis to correlation analysis to dimensionality reduction to
various visualization techniques like univariate, bivariate, and multivariate
analysis to cluster analysis and some auto EDA tools like d-tale and These
concepts are the backbone of the data science lifecycle and take up most
of the time while dealing with datasets and data modeling.
Importance of EDA in the data analysis process
The EDA makes up most of the time and energy in the data science
lifecycle since we have to deep dive and understand the data to extract
insights, identify data quality issues like missing data, mismatched
datatypes, identify outliers in the data columns, missing important
columns in some and so on. All these contribute to the final goal of data
preparation or making intelligent business decisions for the company. All
these factors make the EDA the backbone of the whole data science
lifecycle.

Future directions in exploratory data analysis
This chapter concludes with a discussion of EDA, visualizations,
exploring various statistical techniques, data cleaning, and various auto
EDA and visualization tools that are making a lot of difference in the
market. Recently, there has been a rising trend of various AI Chatbot tools
too like ChatGPT, Bard, Perplexity, Bing AI, Phind, Claude, and so on,
that are doing a fine job of heavy lifting operations like EDA, data
cleaning and preparation, data modeling, machine learning techniques,
machine learning and what not. However, we must never forget it all
depends on the developers on what kind of product they are bringing or
planning to bring into the market so that they can make use of these tools
to create the product. So, they must be well aware of what is happening in
the backend.
In the next chapter, we will explore the concepts of Hypothesis testing,
some predictive modeling, regression analysis, and testing, and
understanding confidence We will build on this chapter and go deeper to
extract more important insights that the EDA cannot give us.

Keywords

Exploratory Data Analysis, Data Visualization, Correlation Analysis,
Histogram, KDE, Violin plot, Heat map, Dimensionality Reduction, PCA,
Cluster Analysis, Auto EDA tools, D-tale, Pandas profiling

CHAPTER 5
Statistical Analysis

Introduction

Statistics is the main foundation of data science, be it data cleaning, data
preparation, or doing exploratory data we cannot just think anything ahead
without all the techniques mentioned here. For any data scientist or data
analyst, it is of utmost importance to apply statistical techniques and have
a deeper understanding of the data. In this chapter, we will proceed from
the portion where we left off in the previous chapter of Exploratory Data
Analysis We will cover the topics of descriptive statistics like mean,
median, mode, variance, and standard deviation in detail over the previous
chapters, and explore distributions like Normal, Poisson, Lambda,
Binomial, Long-tailed, Student t-test, and so on. We will also learn and
experiment with statistical experiences and significance testing like
student t-test, hypothesis testing, A/B testing, regression Degrees of
Freedom, Fischers and Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) to name a few.
There are some libraries like PyMC3 apart from conventional packages of
Pandas and Numpy. As usual from the previous chapters, we will not only
learn the theoretical concepts but also use them to solve problems like the
use cases we did.

Structure

In this chapter, we will discuss the following topics:
Introduction to Statistical Analysis
Importance of Statistical Analysis
Statistical Analysis Workflow
Data Exploration
Variable Selection
Statistical Tests
Interpretation of Results
Reporting and Visualization
Statistical Methods and Techniques
Descriptive Statistics
Probability distributions

Statistical tests
Libraries for Statistical Analysis
Determining Relationships between Variables
Making Predictions about Future Events

Introduction to Statistical Analysis

Statistical analysis is the technique used to extract meaningful hidden
insights from the data that cannot be obtained using It uses techniques like
statistical testing to analyze the data, determine relationships using
variables, and also make In this chapter, we will explore the various
statistical tests, distributions, and descriptive statistics to explain the
concepts of statistical analysis and also demonstrate the use of code
snippets to understand problem-solving in real life.

Importance of Statistical Analysis

Statistical analysis is being used in various domains ranging from
healthcare, transportation, legal, supply chain, finance, social sciences,
defense, technology, manufacturing, insurance, marketing, and so on. It
helps in data-driven decisions by making use of hidden insights, various
statistical testing methods, and predictive modeling. This way, better
decisions can be made along with optimization of the complex workflow.

Statistical Analysis Workflow

It is the systematic process of analyzing data using various statistical
techniques so that the results can be communicated to the stakeholders for
further decision-making. The steps are as follows:

Data Exploration

The data needs exploration for exploring the various data distributions,
identifying outliers, and detecting missing values. Then the results can be
communicated using various charts, plots, and graphs for better
communication. These include box plots, violin plots, histograms, scatter
plots, pie charts, and so on.

Variable Selection

Based on the problem definition at hand, it is imperative to identify the
relevant variables for analysis. This can be identifying the dependent
variable and the independent variables and also eliminating the nonessential variables. This way, one can understand whether the independent
variables are correct enough to influence the dependent variable. This also
helps to understand the complex modeling the variables are involved in,
like the relationship between each other.

Statistical Tests

Statistical tests are imperative to analyzing variable relationships and
drawing insights from them. There are tests like t-tests, chi-square tests,
correlation tests, analysis of variance (ANOVA), regression analysis, AD
Fuller and so on, that are used based on the type of data and the problem
that needs to be solved. These tests help to understand the variable
relationships, assess the statistical significance, and validate hypotheses.

Interpretation of Results

The statistical tests when performed output results like p-values,
confidence intervals, statistical measures, test results, and so on, to help
with insightful decision-making for solving business problems. The tests
performed depend on the kind of problem one is solving.

Reporting and Visualization

The statistical analysis results must be communicated seamlessly with the
help of reports and visualizations. This includes various charts, plots,
tables, and graphs, along with providing clear explanations. There are pie
charts, histograms, heat maps, line charts, bar charts, violin plots, box
plots, and so on to help with a proper understanding of the data and the
insights.

Statistical Methods and Techniques

Statistical analysis is the backbone of data analysis and helps to make
informed decisions to solve business problems. There are descriptive statistics
and inferential statistics. Parametric and non-parametric methods are also
used. To proceed forward, we will be using a dataset of all the countries in the
world in 2023 It contains variables like population unemployment GDP per
forest cover in birth fertility infant mortality and so on.
We will load the data and do basic exploration in terms of missing value
detection, identifying datatypes, and so on. The code is as follows:
import pandas as pd
import numpy as np
df = pd.read_csv(‘world-data-2023.csv’)
df.head()

Figure 5.1: Top 5 rows of the dataset

df.dtypes

Figure 5.2: The datatypes of the dataset

Most of the variables are object datatypes and thus we need to convert them
to float-type variables.

columns = [‘Land Area(Km2)’,’Agricultural Land( %)’,’Armed Forces size’,
‘Population’, ‘Urban_population’, ‘Co2-Emissions’, ‘CPI Change (%)’,
‘Forested Area (%)’, ‘Gasoline Price’,’GDP’, ‘Gross primary education
enrollment (%)’,’Gross tertiary education enrollment (%)’,’Minimum
wage’,’Total tax rate’, ‘Unemployment rate’, ‘Out of pocket health
expenditure’,’Population: Labor force participation (%)’]
for col in columns:
df[col] = df[col].str.replace(‘,’, ‘’)
df[col] = df[col].str.replace(‘$’, ‘’)
df[col] = df[col].str.replace(‘%’, ‘’)
for col in columns:
df[col] = pd.to_numeric(df[col])
The datatypes are converted into float data types. In the original dataset, there
are commas, percent signs, and dollar that need to be removed. Here, after the
operation, the data types are all in float
Then we drop irrelevant columns as follows:
df.drop(columns=[‘Latitude’, ‘Longitude’, ‘Calling Code’], inplace=True)
After this, we create a histogram to represent the data.
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
import seaborn as sns

# Histogram
df.hist(bins=50, figsize=(20,15))
plt.show()

Figure 5.3: The histogram representation of each variable of the dataset

The histogram representation of each attribute of the dataset gives us a basic
idea of each variable and how are they represented for each nation. Next, we
will check the heatmap to understand the correlation between the variables.
f, ax = plt.subplots(figsize = (12,10))
sns.heatmap(df.loc[:, [‘Land Area(Km2)’,’Agricultural Land( %)’,
‘Population’, ‘Urban_population’, ‘Co2-Emissions’, ‘Forested
Area(%)’,’GDP’, ‘Unemployment rate’, ‘Out of pocket health
expenditure’,’Population: Labor force participation (%)’]].corr(),
annot = True,
linecolor = ‘r’,
linewidths = .5,
fmt = ‘.1f’,
ax = ax);
plt.show()

The goal of the correlation matrix or the heatmap is to identify the relation
between the variables.

Figure 5.4: The heat map of the dataset with selected variables

From the preceding heatmap, we can find some highly positive correlations
between Urban population and carbon emissions, Urban population and GDP,
Land Area, and and some negatively correlated variables like the forested
area being negatively proportional to forested the Unemployment rate being
negatively proportional to labor force and so on.

Descriptive Statistics

Descriptive statistics involves summarizing and describing the data using
metrics like and standard These statistics provide insights into the central
tendency, variability, and distribution of the The following code uses the
.describe() method to calculate the above metrics.
df.describe()
There are 23 relevant numeric float variables that have descriptive statistics.

Figure 5.5: The descriptive statistics of the dataset
In the preceding table, we can observe the minimum, maximum, mean,
median (50th percentile), standard deviation, the 25th and 75th percentiles.
These values will make more sense if we correlate one variable with the
other. For example, in the preceding heatmap, we found positively and
negatively correlated variables although some variables did not correlate with
any variable. For example, the maximum fertility rate recorded is 6.91 which

is nearly 7 and the minimum is 1. Another example is the median agricultural
land in percentage is 39.6% and the maximum is 82.6%.
Skewness

The asymmetry of a real-valued random variable’s distribution that is
centered on the mean is measured by its skewness. It measures how far the
data points depart from the normal distribution, to put it simply. If we
measure the skewness of all the float-type variables, we find that there are
positive as well as negative values. If the skewness is less than zero, then the
left tail of the curve is longer than the right tail, and if the skewness is greater
than zero, then the data distribution of the right tail is longer than the left tail.
If the skewness is zero, then the data is perfectly symmetrical and it is quite
improbable to be a real-life data. Then method is used to find the skewness.
df.skew()

Figure 5.6: The skewness index of the float type variables

In positively skewed variables like urban total tax unemployment minimum
and so on, the mean is greater than the median, with a larger number of
smaller values than fewer large values. The histogram plots of each variable
are shown in Figure 5.7 for a better understanding of the skewness.
sns.histplot(df[‘Urban_population’])

plt.show()

Figure 5.7: Histogram plot of Urban Population variable
The preceding plot is right-skewed, meaning most of the data is concentrated
in the lower range.
sns.histplot(df[‘Total tax rate’])
plt.show()

Figure 5.8: Histogram plot of the Total tax rate variable
The Total tax rate variable is also right-skewed as represented in the
preceding plot.
sns.histplot(df[‘Unemployment rate’])
plt.show()

Figure 5.9: Histogram plot of the Unemployment rate variable
The unemployment rate of most nations is between the 2 and 12 percent
range and is right skewed.
sns.histplot(df[‘Minimum wage’])
plt.show()

Figure 5.10: Histogram plot of the Minimum wage variable
The minimum wage of most nations lies between 1$ and 3$ and the data is
right skewed.
sns.histplot(df[‘Population’])
plt.show()

Figure 5.11: Histogram plot of the Population variable
Most nations have a population below 200 million, which is reflected in the
preceding histogram and it is also right skewed.
The negatively skewed variables like life expectancy and gross primary
education enrollment (%) have the data skewed to the left and the median is
greater than the mean with a large number of larger values and fewer small
values.
Some of the left-skewed variables are represented by histogram plots for
better understanding.
sns.histplot(df[‘Life expectancy’])

plt.show()

Figure 5.12: Histogram plot of the Life Expectancy variable
The life expectancy variable is left-skewed and almost most of the nations
live more than 70 years
sns.histplot(df[‘Gross primary education enrollment (%)’])
plt.show()

Figure 5.13: Histogram plot of the Gross primary education enrollment (%)
variable
This Gross primary education enrollment percentage is also left-skewed.
Now there is the variable with symmetric distribution, that is, labor force
participation
sns.histplot(df[‘Population: Labor force participation (%)’])
plt.show()

Figure 5.14: Histogram plot of the Population: Labor Force Participation (%)
variable
The preceding plot shows an almost symmetric distribution, which shows that
most of the nations maintain a mean value of 60 to 65% of Labor force
participation in the market.
Kurtosis
Kurtosis can be defined as how different the tails of a distribution are from
that of a normal distribution.
If the variables have high the distribution has heavier tails and sharper peaks
than the normal distribution. It also means there are more outliers in the This

kind of kurtosis is called
If the variables have low the distribution has lighter tails and flatter peaks
than the normal distribution. There are also fewer outliers in the variable as
compared to the former counterpart. This kind of kurtosis is called

The mesokurtic type variables have a kurtosis value close to zero or the same
kurtosis as the normal distribution.
The following code uses .kurtosis() method to perform the operation.
df.kurtosis()

Figure 5.15: The Kurtosis of the float type variables
We observe that there are a lot of negative values meaning that they are
platykurtic and there are not a lot of outliers in the variables. Some have very
high values (leptokurtic) and have more outliers in

Probability Distributions

Probability distributions are the mathematical functions that describe every
possible value and likelihood that a random variable can take within a range.
They are used to model a phenomenon to understand the probability estimates
of an event being occurred.
There are two types of probability distribution namely discrete and Discrete
probability distributions are also called probability mass while continuous
probability distributions are called probability density
We will discuss some distributions like the Normal distribution, Uniform
distribution, Poisson distribution, Lambda distribution, Binomial and so on.
Normal Distribution
Normal distribution is a symmetric curve and the shape is very similar to that
of a bell, thus, sometimes it is also referred to as the bell
The distribution of the normal distribution is symmetric about the that is, half
of the values fall below the mean, and half of the values are above the mean.
The peak of the curve is centered around the and increasing the mean moves
the curve to the and decreasing it moves the curve to the The standard
deviation is the spread of the data around the mean, that is, if the standard
deviation is small, the curve is and if the standard deviation is large there is a
larger spread and the curve is

Figure 5.16: Graphical representation for various standard deviation values
In the preceding graph, we have various standard deviation values and we can
see that the higher the standard deviation value (represented by sigma), the
wider and flatter the curve in comparison to standard deviations that are
lesser. The less standard deviation values have steeper curves.
The code for the normal distribution is as follows:
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
data = np.random.normal(loc=0.0, scale=1.0, size=10000)
plt.hist(data, bins=30)

plt.show()
The preceding code uses the numpy library along with the normal() function
with the number of data points as the size parameter, there are 30 bins used
and a histogram is created. The matplotlib library is used too.

Figure 5.17: The normal distribution of the data
In the preceding distribution curve, we can see that the mean is at 0 and most
of the data is centered around the mean. The curve is symmetric so there is no
skewness and most values cluster in the center around the

Figure 5.18: The 68-95-99.7 Rule (Empirical Rule)
The minimum and maximum values range from −3.5 (approximately) to 3.3
(approximately).
https://builtin.com/data-science/empirical-rule
Uniform Distribution
The uniform distribution defines an equal probability over a given range of
continuous values. Here, it is mainly dependent on the minimum and
maximum values in the distribution. The mean = where a and b are the
minimum and maximum values respectively, the variance = (b-a)^2/12, the

distribution is symmetric with the majority of the values lying in the middle
of the and tails that decrease to the minimum and the maximum.
The code implementation is as follows:
from scipy.stats import uniform
# Generating random variables from Uniform distribution
data = uniform.rvs(size = 100000, loc = 5, scale=10)
# Plotting the results
sns.set_style(‘whitegrid’)
sns.histplot(data, bins = 30, color = ‘k’)
plt.xlabel(‘interval’)
plt.show()
The scipy library is used to import the uniform function. The seaborn library
is used for visualizing the results using the histogram function.

Figure 5.19: The uniform distribution of the data
The data ranges from 2 to 17 approximately and follows a symmetrical curve.
It looks like a box if we try to close the minimum and maximum
It is used in the modeling of random variables with fixed likelihoods. If a
random event has an equal chance of landing anywhere within a range,
uniform distribution can be used to represent the probabilities of the possible
outcomes.

Poisson Distribution
The Poisson distribution is a probability distribution that describes the
number of times a particular event occurs in a fixed interval of time or space.

The distribution is defined using a parameter called lambda, which is the
expected number of occurrences during the observation.
It is used to model the events that occur independently at a constant rate, it
can also be used to predict the probability of events occurring in a given time.
The code implementation is as follows:
from scipy.stats import poisson
data_poisson = poisson.rvs(mu=3, size=10000)
plt.hist(data_poisson, bins=30)
plt.show()
The scipy and the matplotlib libraries are used. The Poisson function is used
in this case.

Figure 5.20: The Poisson distribution of the data

The preceding Poisson distribution shows the distribution of the data.
Lambda distribution
Lambda distribution is the exponential distribution curve here. The coding
implementation is as follows:
from scipy.stats import expon
data_expon = expon.rvs(scale=1,loc=0,size=1000)
ax = sns.distplot(data_expon, kde=True, bins=100, color=’skyblue’,
hist_kws={“linewidth”: 15,’alpha’:1})
ax.set(xlabel=’Exponential Distribution’, ylabel=’Frequency’)
The scipy and the seaborn libraries are used. The expon function is used.

Figure 5.21: The exponential distribution
The data is generated using the expon.rvs() function with a bin size of
Binomial distribution

A binomial distribution is one in which there are only two possible mutually
exclusive outcomes, such as success or failure, gain or loss, win or and where
the probability of success and failure is the same across all trials.
The coding implementation is as follows:
from scipy.stats import binom

data_binom = binom.rvs(n=10,p=0.8,size=10000)
plt.hist(data_binom, bins=30)
plt.show()
The coding pattern is the same here as the previous distributions and we are
using the scipy and the matplotlib libraries. The binom function is used with a
bin size of

Figure 5.22: The binomial distribution
The binomial distribution in the preceding graph shows the frequency of the
trials from 1 to The maximum frequency is obtained at the 8th trial followed
by the 9th trial and then the 7th

Statistical Tests

Statistical tests in statistical analysis in Python involve a variety of
statistical tests to make informed decisions. Python has some libraries like
scipy.stats and statsmodels that help in statistical testing. In the next submodules of statistical testing, we will work on some of the use cases based
on the countries’ dataset and understand the important features, like
Shapiro Wilk p-value, hypothesis testing, Analysis of Variance (ANOVA),
Chi-square testing, and so on.
Shapiro Wilk Test
We already have the data frame ready from the countries’ dataset and
calculate the correlation between the variables labor force participation
and unemployment The idea here is to understand the usage of the
Shapiro-Wilk test using the use case. The coding implementation is as
follows:
correlation = df[‘Unemployment rate’].corr(df[‘Population: Labor force
participation (%)’])
print(‘Correlation:’, correlation)
Correlation: -0.4341421526724244
The preceding code shows the correlation between the variables and the
correlation coefficient is -0.43.

The next code shows the usage of libraries scipy and statsmodels to
perform the Shapiro-Wilk test.
import scipy.stats as stats
from scipy.stats import shapiro, pearsonr, ttest_ind, mannwhitneyu
from statsmodels.tsa.stattools import adfuller
# Normality Test for ‘Unemployment rate’
stat, p = shapiro(df[‘Unemployment rate’])

print(‘Unemployment rate:’, ‘Statistics=%.2f, p=%.2f’ % (stat, p))
if p > 0.05:
print(‘Sample looks Gaussian’)
else:
print(‘Sample does not look Gaussian’)
Result:
Unemployment rate: Statistics=0.87, p=0.00
Sample does not look Gaussian
The preceding code altogether imports the functions of mannwhiteneyu
from the scipy library. The statsmodels library imports the adfuller
function.

To understand the theory and conditions behind the Shapiro-Wilk test, it is
performed by data scientists and statisticians to check whether the data is
normally The result returns a statistic and a The p-value is used to
understand whether to reject or accept the null If the p-value is low
(typically < then we reject the null hypothesis and can conclude that the
data is not normally otherwise if it is then we accept the null hypothesis
and can say that the data is normally
The result from the preceding code shows that the p-value is 1 and it is a
Gaussian (normally) distributed
However, it is to be noted that the p-value does not support the existence
of an alternative It only infers how likely the observed data has occurred
under the null hypothesis. If we reject the null hypothesis, then we cannot
directly always support the alternate

Hypothesis Testing

Hypothesis Testing is the statistical technique to conclude a population based
on the sample data. It involves comparing the two namely the null hypothesis
(H0) and the alternative hypothesis For the Null Hypothesis (H0), there is no
such significant difference or effect, on the contrary in the Alternative
Hypothesis (H1), there are significant differences or effects.
There are these two errors namely, the Type I and Type II errors that occur in
hypothesis testing.
The Type I error occurs when the null hypothesis is but it is true, meaning it
is a false positive Here, the machine learning model predicts the output to be
positive where it is The probability of making the Type I error is alpha or the
significance It is the maximum acceptable probability of rejecting the null
hypothesis when it is true. The significance level is 0.05 or
When the null hypothesis is not rejected but is true—a false negative situation
—Type II error occurs. In this case, the machine learning model forecasts a
negative output when a positive one Beta represents the likelihood of making
a Type II error. A statistical test’s power, which measures the likelihood of
successfully rejecting the null hypothesis when it is false, is equal to 1 - beta.
Researchers can increase the sample size or the significance level to lower the
possibility of Type II mistakes.
One Sample t-test
The coding implementation for hypothesis testing Sample is as follows:

from scipy import stats

# One-sample t-test
t_statistic, p_value = stats.ttest_1samp(df[‘Unemployment rate’], 0.0)
print(‘t-statistic:’, t_statistic)
print(‘p-value:’, p_value)
Result:
t-statistic: 19.417670076487422
p-value: 2.32361093809253e-47
The t-statistic value in a one-sample t-test is measured by how much the
sample mean differs from the hypothesized population If the t-statistic value
is larger than the critical value or the p-value < then we reject the null On the
contrary, if the t-statistic value is less than the critical value or the p-value >
then we fail to reject the null In this case, the p-value < 0.05, thus we reject
the null hypothesis.
One sample independent t-test
The independent sample t-test is the parametric test that is used to compare
the means of the two independent groups. It’s used to test for a statistically
significant difference in the means between the two groups. In this case, we
create a data frame with two groups and certain scores. Then we categorize
the number in the two groups and then perform the independent
df = pd.DataFrame({
‘group’: [‘A’, ‘A’, ‘A’, ‘A’, ‘A’, ‘B’, ‘B’, ‘B’, ‘B’, ‘B’],

‘score’: [371, 542, 275, 389, 2145, 1459, 153, 874, 321, 525]
})
group_A = df[df[‘group’] == ‘A’][‘score’]
group_B = df[df[‘group’] == ‘B’][‘score’]
t_statistic, p_value = ttest_ind(group_A, group_B)
print(‘t-statistic:’, t_statistic)
print(‘p-value:’, p_value)
Result:
t-statistic: 0.18480230929708708
p-value: 0.8579830736566254
The p-value, in this case, is greater than 0.05, so we fail to reject the null
hypothesis. The condition remains the same as the 1-sample
Chi-Square test
The statistical test used to determine whether there is a significant
relationship between two categorical variables is called the Chi-Square To
compare observed data with expected data in accordance with particular
hypotheses, it is used in hypothesis testing.
By contrasting the observed frequencies in each category of a contingency
table with the frequencies we would anticipate if there were no link between
the categories, the chi-square test statistic is generated.
The coding implementation is as follows:

#Chi-Square test using created dummy data
from scipy.stats import chi2_contingency
# Sample DataFrame
data = {‘Rain’: [‘Yes’, ‘No’, ‘Yes’, ‘No’, ‘Yes’, ‘No’, ‘Yes’], ‘Temperature’:
[‘High’, ‘Low’, ‘High’, ‘High’, ‘Low’, ‘Low’, ‘High’]}
df1 = pd.DataFrame(data)
#print(df1)
contingency_table = pd.crosstab(df1[‘Rain’], df1[‘Temperature’])
chi2, p, dof, expected = chi2_contingency(contingency_table)
print(‘Chi-square statistic:’, chi2)
print(‘p-value:’, p)
Result obtained:
Chi-square statistic: 0.10937499999999994
p-value: 0.7408568142938687
The results have a chi-square statistic and a Here the p-value >= 0.05, thus we
fail to reject the null hypothesis and the variables rain and temperature are
independent of each other by using the chi-square test.
Analysis of Variance (ANOVA)
ANOVA is the statistical method used to test the differences between two or
more means. ANOVA tests the hypothesis that the means of two or more
populations are ANOVAs assess the importance of one or more factors by
comparing the response variable means at the different factor levels. The null

hypothesis states that all the population means are equal while the alternative
hypothesis states that at least one is different.
To perform ANOVA, the scipy library uses the f_oneway function, which
performs a 1-way The data frame with 2 groups of A and B are used.
df = pd.DataFrame({
‘group’: [‘A’, ‘A’, ‘A’, ‘A’, ‘A’, ‘B’, ‘B’, ‘B’, ‘B’, ‘B’],
‘score’: [371, 542, 275, 389, 2145, 1459, 153, 874, 321, 525]
})
group_A = df[df[‘group’] == ‘A’][‘score’]
group_B = df[df[‘group’] == ‘B’][‘score’]
fvalue, pvalue = stats.f_oneway(group_A, group_B)
print(fvalue, pvalue)
Result:
0.03415189352153622 0.8579830736566272

The main output statistic in ANOVA is the f-value. It is the ratio of the
variability between groups to the variability within groups. A larger F-value
indicates a greater difference between groups and suggests that the
independent variable significantly affects the dependent variable. If the pvalue < then it is unlikely that the observed differences among group means
occurred by and the null hypothesis of no difference among group means can
be rejected.
In the preceding code result, the p-value > 0.05, meaning that the null
hypothesis can be accepted.

Regression Analysis
Regression Analysis is the statistical testing technique that helps us
understand the relation between the dependent variable and one or more
independent The fundamental idea is to understand if the independent
variables can predict the dependent variable. Let’s use the code to understand
the relevant output statistics involved.
import statsmodels.api as sm
X = sm.add_constant(df[‘Population: Labor force participation (%)’]) #
adding a constant
model = sm.OLS(df[‘Unemployment rate’], X).fit()
print_model = model.summary()
print(print_model)
In the preceding code, we have tried to understand the relation between labor
force participation and the unemployment The add_constant() function is
used here. The OLS function (Ordinary Least Squares) is used along with the
method to create the model. The model summary is as follows:

Figure 5.23: The Regression model summary
The output statistics are R-squared, f-statistic, log-likelihood, coefficients, pvalue, and adjusted The output statistics are defined as follows:
The Coefficients: The coefficients, in this case, are the constant and the labor
force that represent the change in the dependent variable for a change of one
unit in the independent variable, assuming that all the other variables are
constant. If the coefficient is statistically significant the variable can be called
a good predictor in the
The t-statistic: This value is calculated by the coefficient divided by its
standard A larger value of the t-statistic proves that it is against the null
hypothesis (that is, the coefficient is zero, or the independent variable has
zero to no effect on the dependent variable).

The p-value: A small p-value (typically < 0.05) proves that there is evidence
against the null hypothesis and also suggests that the independent variable

(labor force participation) is a good predictor in the model.
The F-statistic: This number evaluates the regression model’s overall
significance. It contrasts a model with no predictor variables with the actual
The null hypothesis is refuted (that is, the model without predictors fits the
data as well as the full if the p-value for the F-statistic is low indicating that at
least one of the predictors is strongly related to the dependent variable.
The R-squared statistic: The R-squared statistic illustrates the percentage of
the dependent variable’s variance that can be accounted for by the
independent variables. If the R-squared value is close to the model likely
accounts for a sizable proportion of the variance in the dependent
Adfuller test statistic
The Augmented Dickey-Fuller (ADF) test is the statistical test to determine
whether a given time series is stationary, we will explore more on this in
Chapter 6: Time Series The ADF test statistic is a negative number if it is
more on the negative side, then there is a higher probability of null hypothesis
rejection, and there is a higher probability that the time series is stationary.
The coding implementation is as follows:
result = adfuller(df[‘Population: Labor force participation (%)’])
print(‘ADF Statistic: %f’ % result[0])
print(‘p-value: %f’ % result[1])
ADF Statistic: -7.525260
p-value: 0.000000

The adfuller function is derived from the statsmodels library. There are the
ADF statistic and the The p-value meaning the null hypothesis is rejected in
this case.

Libraries for Statistical Analysis

The libraries in statistical analysis are an inbuilt set of functions that the
user can use to do deeper data analysis. There are pre-written codes to
perform tasks. The relevant libraries used for statistical analysis are
Pandas, Numpy, scipy, statsmodel, scikit-learn, PyMC3, Pingouin, and
Since we have used Pandas and Numpy frequently in the previous
chapters and also in this chapter, we will not be discussing this, instead,
we will discuss a little about the other libraries.
Scipy
The Scipy library is built on Numpy by offering more statistical and
scientific features. It is useful for sophisticated statistical analysis since it
has modules for optimization statistical functions signal processing, linear
algebra functions file input/output and some special functions
Statsmodels
Statsmodels is the complete library for statistical modeling and testing. It
provides a wide range of statistical functionalities, such as ordinary least
squares function to fit the model to the data getting the summary of the
results after fitting the model cross-correlation function and so on, to
name a few. Additionally, it offers capabilities for model visualization and
diagnostics.
Scikit-learn

Scikit-learn is a machine-learning library that also has statistical functions
under its belt. These include functions like train_test_split() which is used
to split the datasets between train and test datasets, model.fit() to fit the
model to the data, model.predict() to predict the target for the provided
data, model.score() that calculates the mean accuracy on the given test
data and labels for classification algorithms, GridSearchCV() for hyperparameter tuning to make the model performance better, cross_val_score()
to calculate the cross-validation score by dividing the dataset k times and
then training and testing the model k times, and confusion_matrix() to find
the classification mismatches in the final result, thereby assessing the
model performance.
PyMC3
PyMC3 is a probabilistic programming library that supports Bayesian It
allows for flexible specification of probabilistic models and performs
Bayesian inference using Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) sampling.
PyMC3 enables the estimation of posterior distributions and uncertainty
quantification. Some of the functions used are as follows:
pm.Model() is used to instantiate the model,
pm.Normal() is used to create a normal random variable,
pm.HalfNormal() is used to define Half Normal random
pm.sample() is used to draw samples from the posterior using MCMC,

pm.traceplot() is used to plot the posterior distributions and sample paths
of the model parameters,
pm.summary() is used to create a text-based output of common posterior
statistics.

https://sjster.github.io/introduction_to_computational_statistics/docs/Prod
uction/PyMC3.html
Pingouin
Pingouin is a statistical package written in Python 3 and is based on
Pandas and Numpy. It does simple and complex statistical operations and
is also used mostly for detailed statistical output in comparison to that of
scipy and Some of the statistical functions used in Pingouin are pg.ttest()
that gives the output of T-value, p-value, degrees of freedom, effect size
(Cohen’s d), statistical power, and Bayes Factor (BF10), Analysis of
Variance (ANOVA) where the dframe.anova() function is
dframe.pairwise_corr() for pairwise correlation, partial correlation where
dframe.pcorr() function is used, testing the normality of the data using the
.normality() function.
PyStan
a tool for Bayesian inference, has a Python interface called Stan is a
cutting-edge framework for high-performance statistical computation and
statistical In numerous domains of social, engineering, and business,
PyStan is used for statistical modeling, data analysis, and prediction.

Some of the functions used are StanModel() which is used to compile a
Stan Model, the sampling() function is used to draw samples from the
model, the extract() function is used to extract samples from the fit object,
to_frame() function is used to convert the fit object into a pandas data
frame, and the build() function is used to build a Stan model.

These libraries provide a plethora of tools and functions to support various
aspects of statistical They simplify the implementation of statistical
methods, offer efficient and enhance the exploration and understanding of
By leveraging these libraries, analysts and data scientists can perform
robust statistical analysis and derive meaningful insights from

Determining Relationships between Variables

The statistical analysis helps to determine the relationships between the
variables. There are correlations and dependencies between the variables
to understand how they interact and affect each other. There are
correlation analyses, regression analyses, and various hypothesis testing
techniques to understand the significance of the relationships.
In correlation we understand how directly or indirectly variables are
related to each other along with the strength of the relation. There can be a
high positive correlation between the numeric variables, a high negative
correlation between the variables, or no relation at all between them.
Finding the relationship between a target variable and one or more
independent variables is aided by regression It enables us to comprehend
the effects of altering the independent factors on the dependent Regression
analysis helps predict the dependent variable, identify errors between the
expected and observed values of the target variable, and examine the
direction and strength of
When examining connections between categorical variables and a
continuous dependent variable, ANOVA is used. It aids in determining
whether there are any notable differences in the dependent variable’s
means across several categories of the independent ANOVA helps
determine which groups are statistically different from one another and
sheds light on the influence of categorical

Using one of these tests can also help in determining the relevant and
irrelevant features from the data by comparing the relationship between
the Multicollinear features can be removed.

Making Predictions about Future Events

Statistical analysis helps us to make future predictions based on historical
data and the extracted patterns. These involve using predictive modeling
techniques, and statistical algorithms to predict future events. There are
time series analysis, regression analysis, and machine learning algorithms
to do predictive modeling.
Time series analysis is used to forecast events based on historical temporal
data. It uses trends, seasonalities, and so on to make accurate predictions.
There are algorithms like ARIMA, SARIMA, exponential smoothing, and
so on to do the forecasting. This is very much used in the financial domain
to predict the price of stocks in the future and plan to invest in those
stocks. In the sales domain, the companies try to forecast sales numbers to
plan investments for the future. In this way, they can focus not only on
their products but also on attracting new customers and retaining old ones.
There can be a plethora of applications for time series forecasting that we
can explore more in the next chapter.
Regression analysis as discussed earlier, examines the relation between
independent variables and the target variable. There are parameters of the
regression model that can be tuned to attain the predicted values of the
dependent variable. This way, we can forecast events based on historical
data.

Supervised, unsupervised, semi-supervised, and reinforcement-based
algorithms are the different categories of machine learning algorithms. We
deal with a variety of algorithms used in predictive modeling, including
xgboost, neural networks, decision trees, random forests, and logistic
These algorithms discover patterns and relationships from the training
data to predict or categorize based on the unseen test data.

Conclusion

Statistical data analysis is a vast field, and this chapter covered various
statistical testing techniques and distributions using a use case on a
country It also explained some of the relevant statistics-based libraries and
functions that are used in the industry today. We need to explore, dig
deeper, and play with various kinds of real-world datasets to improve our
statistical testing skills and build a solid Happy Analyzing!
This concludes the chapter on Statistical Data In the next chapter, we will
understand and explore temporal data to predict future events. We will
learn the concepts of trends, seasonality, causality, and practice with
various algorithms, and do comparative analysis between Moreover, there
are also performance metrics that help to examine the performance of the
time series models and which algorithms perform better than the others in
that situation. We will use a real-life use case to do the operations.

References

Normal distribution reference:
https://numpy.org/doc/stable/reference/random/generated/numpy.random.n
ormal.html
Uniform distribution reference: https://sidsharma1990.medium.com/probability-distributions-1-uniformdistribution-f75cd22ebf0a
Poisson distribution reference: https://medium.com/@snehabajaj108/thepoisson-exponential-distribution-using-python-2e9959fdcbc7
Lambda distribution reference:
https://www.datacamp.com/tutorial/probability-distributions-python
https://medium.datadriveninvestor.com/mathematics-for-machinelearning-part-5-8df72392ec10
Binomial distribution:
https://github.com/mandliya/ml/blob/master/maths/Probability/Probability.
ipynb

https://stackoverflow.com/questions/69290701/difference-between-scipystats-binom-and-np-random-binomial

Keywords

Statistical analysis, Variable transformation, variable selection, statistical
tests, data visualizations, skewness, histogram, probability distributions,
normal distribution, Hypothesis testing, ANOVA, t-test, chi-square, one
sample t-test, regression, statsmodels, scipy

CHAPTER 6
Time Series Analysis and Forecasting

Introduction

The field of Time Series Analysis and Forecasting is crucial in
understanding and predicting the patterns in temporal data. In this chapter,
we explore the concepts and techniques, starting from the concepts of
stationarity, autocorrelations, partial autocorrelations, residuals,
seasonality, and other important algorithms. We will look into time series
data and explore the various algorithms of Auto-Regressive (AR),
ARIMA, SARIMA, FBprophet, and LSTM (Long Short Term and
perform comparative analysis on the same. There are also performance
metrics like Mean Squared Error (MSE), Root Mean Squared Error
(RMSE), Mean Absolute Error (MAE) and so on, that we will use to
compare the models. There are some real-life use cases like sales data,
stock data, and weather data to connect how real-life time series
forecasting works.

Structure

In this chapter, we will discuss the following topics:
Understanding Time Series Analysis and Forecasting
Importance of Time Series Analysis and Forecasting
Time Series Analysis
Types of Time Series Data
Stationarity and Non-Stationarity
Trend, Seasonality, and Noise
Autocorrelation and Partial Autocorrelation
White Noise
Visualizing Time Series Data
Time Series Forecasting
Simple moving average

Exponential Smoothing
Autoregressive (AR)
ARIMA
FbProphet
Deep Learning for Time Series Forecasting (CNN and LSTM)
Evaluation of Time Series Forecasting Models
Exploring the parameters in the models
Performance Metrics of the models to Measure their accuracy
Auto Time Series Libraries

Understanding Time Series Analysis and Forecasting

Time series analysis is the statistical technique that deals with temporal or
trend analysis. It provides an extra source of information and
dependencies between the data. It can be applied to stock market analysis,
economic forecasting, sales forecasting analysis, weather forecasting, and
budgetary analysis, to name a few. There are linear regression models and
autoregressive integrated moving average (ARIMA) models that are
mostly used for forecasting the relevant data. The ARIMA models utilize
past data to make future predictions. There are various hidden trends and
patterns such as seasonalities, trends, and lags that help exploit the data so
that more inferences can be drawn, thus making it easier to forecast
results.
Time series analysis helps us to understand the reason behind the specific
behaviors of the on the other hand, forecasting helps to understand what
can happen in the future considering the past data is present with For
example, from the sales data in the time domain, we can infer what
products are bought more, which products are bought in bundles, how the
users buy during the festival seasons such as clothes and accessories or
only clothes and fewer accessories, and so on. This paves the way for time
series forecasting where the data analysts and data scientists predict which
pattern the buyers will follow in the next season in buying the products,
which products will likely be sold more and which of them will be sold
less, and so on.

In this chapter, we will dig deep into various underlying patterns in the
data and explore them with various time series modeling We will also
utilize some auto time series Python libraries to proceed forward with the
use cases.

Importance of Time Series Analysis and Forecasting

Time series analysis and forecasting are important in various fields like
finance, insurance, social sciences, supply climate and so on. Intelligent
decision-making and strategic planning are the causes of perfect analysis
and forecasting. Whether it’s predicting future sales for a particular store
or stock market forecasting, or forecasting weather-related activities,
forecasting, and time series analysis are extremely essential.
Time series analysis and forecasting also help understand and model
dynamic systems. Time series models capture the temporal dependencies
in the data, thus describing, explaining, and predicting the dynamics of the
system. These models help us understand the system’s behavior and its
response to various factors.
In conclusion, time series analysis and forecasting are powerful tools for
understanding and predicting temporal data. They provide valuable
insights into the patterns, trends, and dynamics in the which are crucial for
intelligent decision-making and strategic planning. As the volume and
complexity of time series data continue to grow, the importance of time
series analysis and forecasting will only increase.

Time Series Analysis

There are various features based on which we can do time series analysis
such as whether the data is stationary, understanding the trend, seasonality,
and noise in the data, autocorrelation, white and also visualizing the time
series These attributes are essential while we are trying to explore time
series data and give us hidden patterns and insights that are impossible to
search by usual methods.

Types of Time Series Data

Time series data can be classified based on the type of observations and
the regularity of time intervals. The different types of time series data are
as follows:
Univariate Time Series Data: This type of data has single (variable)
observations that are recorded temporally. A perfect example of this can be
the daily sales data recordings of a particular product in a store.
Multivariate Time Series Data: In this kind of data as the name suggests,
multiple attributes are at play. The present data is dependent on the past
data as well as on other variables. For example, the sales data of the
particular product, sales data of some correlated product, like if a person
buys a cricket bat, then he/she is also likely to buy cricket balls, wickets,
the guards worn by batsmen, and so on. This can also be exemplified
considering seasonal data, where customers buy certain products
depending on some festival at a particular time of the year. The customer
buys multiple products on a certain occasion.
Continuous Time Series Data: This type of data has continuous recordings
with the time variable at continuous intervals. For example, tracking the
stock market data of a particular company.
Discrete-Time Series Data: There are data points at distinct points of time.
For instance, the daily temperature data at specific hours of the day.

Regular and Irregular Time Series Data: For regular time series data, the
observation points are recorded at regular intervals like every 30 minutes,
every hour, or daily or weekly. For irregular time series data, the
observation data points are recorded at random or irregular time intervals.
For instance, if earthquakes are happening, then the data points are
recorded at random time intervals.
Event time series data: The event time series data is based on specific
events where the data points are recorded at time stamps where an event
occurs. For example, earthquake data or data from the buying of products
at a particular festival.
Metric Time Series: The data points are collected based on metrics at
regular time intervals. For example, the CPU utilization of a system
measured every second forms a metric time series.
Panel data: In panel data, which can also refer to longitudinal or crosssectional time series data, several entities are observed across time. For
instance, panel data is created using the daily closing prices of all S&P
500 businesses throughout the year.
Wide format: In this data format, each variable has a separate column, and
each row relates to a time stamp. In this case, the number of variables is
smaller in number.
Long format: In this data format, there are a lot of rows with many
variables. Each observation is represented by a single unique row and

there are separate columns for timestamp, entity, and other variable
values.

In the next subsections, we will explore the concepts of stationarity,
autocorrelation, partial autocorrelation, seasonality, trend, white noise, and
tests like the Augmented Dickey-Fuller (ADF) test to test the stationarity
in a time series data.

Stationarity and Non-Stationarity

A stationary time series is one whose statistical properties such as mean,
variance, and so on, stay constant over time.
Strong stationarity: This stochastic process’ unconditional joint probability
distribution does not alter as time goes on in the process. As a result, variables
like mean and variance also remain constant over time. For instance, if we
take any two parts from the time series, they should have the same
distribution.
Weak stationarity: When a process exhibits weak the mean, variance, and
autocorrelation remain consistent throughout For weakly stationary time
series, the daily changes in stock price data can be considered. The actual
prices may fluctuate, but the changes or returns from one day to the next may
have a constant mean and variance.
Non-stationary series that rely on time have too many parameters to take into
consideration while modeling the time series, hence stationarity is crucial. A
non-stationary series can be readily transformed into a stationary series using
the function.
On the contrary, non-stationarity refers to a time series where these statistical
properties vary with time.
To check whether a given time series is stationary or not, there are several
methods, including:

Visual inspection: Plotting the time series data and visually examining it for
trends, seasonality, or changes in statistical properties over This can involve
plotting the series itself, the rolling mean, or the autocorrelation function
Augmented Dickey-Fuller (ADF) test: The ADF test is a statistical analysis
that determines whether a time series contains a unit which denotes nonstationarity. It contrasts the alternative hypothesis of stationarity with the null
hypothesis that the time series has a unit root and is therefore The null
hypothesis is rejected and stationarity is indicated if the test statistic is smaller
than the crucial This test was already shown in Chapter 5: Statistical
Before we deep dive into the ADF test and analysis of the individual
parameters and output values, let’s understand a bit about the dataset. The
dataset was used from the UC Irvine data repository It has hourly responses
that are recorded using a multisensor device for an Italian The data is present
in an Excel format. We convert it into a data frame. The top of the data looks
somewhat as shown in Figure The data were recorded from March 2004 to
February 2005 to measure the air quality using chemical sensor devices. The
average concentrations of CO, Non-Metanic Hydrocarbons, Benzene, Total
Nitrogen Oxides and Nitrogen Dioxide were recorded.

Figure 6.1: Top five rows of the data frame
The date and time stamp variables are merged and then converted to datetime
datatype.
df[‘DateTime’] = df[‘Date’].astype(str) + ‘ ‘ + df[‘Time’].astype(str)
df[‘DateTime’] = pd.to_datetime(df[‘DateTime’])
#transforming DateTime column into index
df = df.set_index(‘DateTime’)

Figure 6.2: The transformed data with the date time column as the index
The preceding screenshot shows the transformed data into the datetime data
type and also as the index for better data analysis, and forecasting later.
Now we will explore the code snippet of the ADF test using The statsmodels
package is used to import the adfuller function.
from statsmodels.tsa.stattools import adfuller

# Perform Augmented Dickey-Fuller test
result = adfuller(df[“NO2(GT)”])
# Extract the p-value from the test result
p_value = result[1]
# Check if the series is stationary based on the p-value
if p_value < 0.05:
print(“The time series is stationary.”)
else:
print(“The time series is non-stationary.”)
The data frame is df and the NO2(GT) is the variable of recordings of the
Nitrogen Dioxide gas. We will be using the p-value testing technique to infer
whether the data is stationary or not. In this case, the p-value < which states
that the null hypothesis can be inferring that the NO2(GT) data is

Trend, Seasonality, and Noise

Seasonality in time series refers to the changes in a year that happen during
certain regular intervals. Any predictable pattern that happens over 1 year can
be called Seasonality happens in different types of datasets in the e-commerce
domain, sales domain, finance stock prices domain, transportation domain,
climate change and so on. Seasonality can be additive and In additive the
changes over time are of the same magnitude, in absolute terms. In
multiplicative the changes increase or decrease over time.
machinelearningmastery.com
There are three components of a time series that are seasonality, trend, and
These can be found using the seasonal_decompose() function from the
statsmodels library. The code snippet for the seasonality, trend, and residual is
as follows:
from statsmodels.tsa.seasonal import seasonal_decompose
# assuming ‘df’ is your DataFrame and ‘time_series_column’ is the column
with the time series data
decomposed = seasonal_decompose(df[‘NO2(GT)’],model=’additive’,
extrapolate_trend=’freq’, period=1)
decomposed.plot()
plt.show()
#https://analyticsindiamag.com/why-decompose-a-time-series-and-how/

trend = decomposed.trend
seasonal = decomposed.seasonal
residual = decomposed.resid
The seasonal_decompose() function is used and the additive seasonality is
used meaning the changes over time are of the same magnitude, in absolute
terms. In multiplicative the changes increase or decrease over time. All the
plots are shown as follows:

Figure 6.3: The seasonality, trend, and residual plots of the data

All the plots of observed values, seasonality, trend, and residuals are shown in
Figure We can also observe individual plots with the code snippet as follows:
level = decomposed.observed
level.plot();
The observed values of the NO2(GT) variable are visualized as follows.

Figure 6.4: The observed value plot
The trend in a time series data is the increasing or decreasing patterns. It may
be understood by the increasing buying patterns trend during festival seasons
and decreasing patterns trend during normal Also, if we try to correlate with
the example of air quality levels for the Italian city, we can see that the NO2

levels are at an increasing trend from November 2004 to March The code
snippet is as follows:
trend=decomposed.trend
trend.plot();
The trend object is used to find the trend of the time series

Figure 6.5: The trend plot
The trend plot shows a consistent plot between April 2004 and September
2005 and shows an increasing trend from October 2004 to March The
seasonality of the data can be explained as follows:

seasonality = decomposed.seasonal
seasonality.plot();
The seasonal object is used to find the seasonality of the time series

Figure 6.6: The seasonality plot
There is no seasonality in the time series data. The residual of the time series
data can be found using the code snippet:
residual = decomposed.resid
residual.plot();
The resid object is used to find the residual of the time series

Figure 6.7: The residual plot
For the residuals, there are random changes in the time series data, and there
are no changes in the time series data as can be seen. We can concatenate all
of the above four components of observed values, trend, seasonality, and
residuals into a data frame.
component = pd.concat([level, trend, seasonality, residual],axis=1)
component.head(10)
The concat function is used to combine all four components and the top 10
entries of the data frame are shown in Figure

Figure 6.8: The combined data frame with the components of observed
values, seasonality, trend, and residual

The observations are the three components of trend, seasonality, and There
are top 10 rows in the concatenated data and there is no seasonality at the
beginning of the data but if we explore more, there may be seasonality in the
data.
All the four components were shown graphically. The seasonality of the time
series data can help improve the accuracy of the forecast models and make

more accurate

Autocorrelation and Partial Autocorrelation

Autocorrelation and partial autocorrelation are the two tools by which we
can identify patterns in the time series data. It helps identify the patterns
and dependencies in the data.

Autocorrelation

Autocorrelation is the statistical relationship that gives the correlation of the
time series data with its own lagged values. It measures how much the current
value is deviated from the previous value.
For instance, there are time series of daily rainfall measurements (in
centimeters let’s say), and the autocorrelation of today’s level is related to
yesterday’s level, the day before yesterday’s level, and so on. If the
autocorrelation is then the consecutive days must have had similar levels of
rainfall.
The code snippet is given as follows:
# Autocorrelation of NO2 level
plot_acf(df[“NO2(GT)”],lags=20,title=”NO2”)
plt.show()
The plot_acf() function is used and 20 lags are used.

Figure 6.9: The autocorrelation function
The correlation results show that the first few lags have high and positive
correlation values and are statistically significant since it cross the shaded line
meaning the NO2 level remains the same over a few The correlation values
keep decreasing from the zeroth lag to the 5th lag and stay

Partial Autocorrelation

Partial Autocorrelation is the measure of the correlation between the
observations of a time series that are separated by k time units after adjusting
for the presence of other short terms of shorter
In partial autocorrelation, the direct relation is calculated between the lag and
the observation value. The code snippet is as follows:
# Partial Autocorrelation of NO2 level
plot_pacf(df[“NO2(GT)”],lags=20)
plt.show()
The plot_pacf() function is used with a lag of

Figure 6.10: The partial autocorrelation function

The first few lags and values have higher correlation values and decrease as
the number of lags

White Noise

White noise is a type of random signal that has equal amplitude at all It is
often used in signal processing and time series analysis as a reference or
baseline In Python, you can generate and visualize white noise using various
libraries, such as NumPy and The code snippet is as follows:
import numpy as np
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
# Define the sample rate and the duration
sample_rate = 1000
duration = 1.0
# Generate a time array
t = np.arange(int(sample_rate * duration)) / sample_rate
# Generate white noise
noise = np.random.normal(0, 1, len(t))
# Plot the white noise
plt.plot(t, noise)
plt.xlabel(‘Time’)
plt.ylabel(‘Amplitude’)
plt.title(‘White Noise’)
plt.show()

This code generates a time array t using the arange function to represent the
time Then, it generates white noise using the random.normal function from
NumPy, which generates random numbers following a Gaussian distribution
with mean 0 and standard deviation Finally, it plots the white noise using
Matplotlib’s plot function.

Figure 6.11: The White Noise function
The resulting plot shows a random signal with equal amplitude at all
representing white noise. Since the amplitude is generated from the random
normal a different pattern is always generated.
The white noise is naturally random in nature and doesn’t have any specific
patterns or trends. It is commonly used as a reference signal for comparison
or as a source of randomness in simulations and

Visualizing Time Series Data

The data frame can be represented using the heatmap as shown here.
However, we also showed in the previous sections visually representing
seasonality, trend, and residuals for the NO2 From the heatmap, we can
extract the correlation between other entities for Air Quality measurements.
The code snippet is as follows:
f, ax = plt.subplots(figsize = (12,10))
sns.heatmap(df.corr(),
annot = True,
linecolor = ‘r’,
linewidths = .5,
fmt = ‘.1f’,
ax = ax);
The preceding code uses the Seaborn library and the heatmap() function to
represent the data frame. The line color is red, the annotations parameter is set
to True.

Figure 6.12: The heatmap of the data frame
There are high correlation values of 0.9 and 0.8 in some cases. For example,
PT08.S2 (NMHC) is highly positively correlated to PT08.S1 (CO) with a
correlation coefficient of The variable of C6H6(GT) is highly positively
correlated to PT08.S1 (CO) with a correlation coefficient of 0.9. The variable
of NOx(GT) is highly positively correlated to NO2(GT) with a correlation
coefficient of 0.8.

Time Series Forecasting

Time Series Forecasting is the prediction of results about various kinds of
datasets, for example, sales forecasting for a particular company, and
stock price prediction. This will help the investors understand how the
company is performing in the stock market and then make intelligent
decisions, weather prediction to forecast any natural calamity in the near
future and so on. We will look into various forecasting models and apply
them to understand how they perform on the example dataset. Some of the
time series forecasting models are Simple Moving Average (SMA),
Exponential Smoothing, Auto Regressive, Moving Average, ARMA,
ARIMA, and some deep learning models too.

Simple moving average

Simple Moving Average (SMA) is the time series forecasting model that uses
the average over a set of data points from a time series over a set of time
Here, a window of points is taken that are shifted from the original set of data
points. It is called the moving average because new data points come up
making the older points disappear and not being used for the calculation. It is
the most fundamental of forecasting algorithms available and does help in
revealing underlying trends in the data.
In the following code snippet, we will explore the SMA model and also
visualize the forecasted value.
train_size = int(len(df) * 0.7)
train_set, test_set = df[:train_size], df[train_size:]
#Simple Moving Average
#https://www.kaggle.com/code/gauravduttakiit/timeseries-forecasting-withsimple-moving-average
y_observed_sma = df[“NO2(GT)”].copy()
ma_window = 3
y_observed_sma[‘sma_forecast’] =
df[“NO2(GT)”].rolling(ma_window).mean()
y_observed_sma[‘sma_forecast’][train_size:] =
y_observed_sma[‘sma_forecast’][train_size-1]
plt.figure(figsize=(20,5))
plt.grid()
plt.plot(train_set[‘NO2(GT)’], label=’Train’)
plt.plot(test_set[‘NO2(GT)’], label=’Test’)

plt.plot(y_observed_sma[‘sma_forecast’], label=’Simple moving average
forecast’)
plt.legend(loc=’best’)
plt.title(‘Simple Moving Average Method’)
plt.show()
The preceding code uses the train and test datasets that are divided based on
the 70:30 The train data is 70% of the data and the test data is 30% of the The
rolling() function is used and a window size of 3 days is used meaning the
last 3 days’ observation for each point in the time series. The window size
parameter can be changed accordingly and we can observe the changes
depending on our requirement. A smaller window size will keep up with the
data very closely and can also pick up on the contrary, a larger window size
will not follow the data closely, and have a more generic smooth
The and forecasted data are visualized using the matplotlib function.

Figure 6.13: Visualization of the SMA model
The blue line is the train the orange line is the test data and the yellow line is
the Simple moving average forecasted

Exponential Smoothing

Exponential Smoothing is the time series forecasting model that calculates the
weighted average of the past data points, and the weights decrease
exponentially with the older data points. The latest observations are given
more importance than the older ones.
There are different types of exponential smoothing methods, such as Simple
Exponential Smoothing, Double Exponential Smoothing (also known as
Holt’s method), and Triple Exponential Smoothing (also known as HoltWinters’
We will look into the following code to understand the implementation of the
Exponential Smoothing time series model.
from statsmodels.tsa.api import SimpleExpSmoothing
#https://analyticsindiamag.com/hands-on-guide-to-time-series-analysis-usingsimple-exponential-smoothing-in-python/
#First Model
model1 =
SimpleExpSmoothing(df[‘NO2(GT)’]).fit(smoothing_level=0.2,optimized=F
alse)
model_fit1 = model1.forecast(3).rename(‘alpha=0.2’)
#Second Model
model2 =
SimpleExpSmoothing(df[‘NO2(GT)’]).fit(smoothing_level=0.8,optimized=F

alse)
model_fit2 = model2.forecast(3).rename(‘alpha=0.8’)
#Third Model
model3 = SimpleExpSmoothing(df[‘NO2(GT)’]).fit()
model_fit3 =
model3.forecast(3).rename(‘alpha=%s’%model3.model.params[‘smoothing_l
evel’])
#After creating the models we visualize the plots
ax = df[‘NO2(GT)’].plot(marker=’o’, color=’black’, figsize=(12,8),
legend=True)
#Plot for alpha =0.2
model_fit1.plot(marker=’+’, ax=ax, color=’red’, legend=True)
model1.fittedvalues.plot(marker=’+’, ax=ax, color=’blue’)
#Plot for alpha = 0.8
model_fit2.plot(marker=’o’, ax=ax, color=’blue’, legend=True)
model2.fittedvalues.plot(marker=’o’, ax=ax, color=’red’)
#Plot for alpha=Optimized by the statsmodel
model_fit3.plot(marker=’*’, ax=ax, color=’green’, legend=True)
model3.fittedvalues.plot(marker=’*’, ax=ax, color=’green’)
plt.show()

Figure 6.14: Visualization of the Exponential Smoothing model along with
forecasts with alpha values

We are using the Exponential Smoothing model by changing the alpha
parameter (0.2, 0.8, and the optimized model). A value close to 0 means past
observations have higher weights and a value close to 1 means current
observations have higher that is, current observations influence the There are
three models and visualizations. We are using the SimpleExpSmoothing
function, the smoothing_level is and the steps are The Smoothing level is
changed to 0.8 and the optimized value of 0.50.

Autoregressive (AR)

Autoregressive (AR) models are used for modeling and forecasting time
series data. An AR model of order n, is a time series model that uses the
previous time stamp data points as input to a regression equation to predict
the next step.
In an AR(n) the forecasted variable is a linear function of the previous n data
For example, an AR(1) model would be:
Yt = α + β*Y(t-1) + εt
Here, Yt is the output at the time stamp α is the constant, β is the coefficient
of the previous value and is the error.
The following code snippet demonstrates the AR (1) model with order =
(1,0,0).
from statsmodels.tsa.arima.model import ARIMA
# Fit the AR model (let›s assume we›re fitting an AR(1) model)
model = ARIMA(df[‹NO2(GT)›], order=(1, 0, 0))
model_fit = model.fit()
# Make a forecast
forecast = model_fit.forecast(steps=5)
print(‹Forecast: ‹, forecast)
Output:

Forecast: 2005-04-04 15:00:00

147.587421

2005-04-04 16:00:00 131.166890
2005-04-04 17:00:00 117.760660
2005-04-04 18:00:00 106.815399
2005-04-04 19:00:00 97.879349
Freq: H, Name: predicted_mean, dtype: float64

The ARIMA model is imported from the statsmodels library. ARIMA
(Autoregressive Integrated Moving Average) model and the forecast() method
is used here. The forecasting is done for the next 5 time
If we observe the model using the model_fit.summary() method, we get the
results as follows:

Figure 6.15: The summary of the Autoregressive Model
The model summary has a P-value of 0 which is < 0.05 signifying that the
NO2 level variable is stationary.

ARIMA
ARIMA (Autoregressive Integrated Moving Average) is a time series
forecasting model that has three components, namely, Autoregressive (AR)
refers to the current observation which is calculated based on the previous
data points, Integrated (I) is the number of nonseasonal differences needed to
make the time series stationary, and Moving Average (MA) gives the linear
combination of the errors of the previous lags.
The ARIMA models are used as ARIMA(p,d,q) where is the order of the AR
term, is the number of differencing to make the time series stationary, and is
the order of the MA term.
We will understand how to select the values of and q and make an ARIMA
model by using the parameters. Since the data is already stationary, we will
not be doing the ADF test again. We will do the Autocorrelation and Partial
Autocorrelation of the data to find the value of q and p respectively. To find
the value of d, we use the differencing technique. The code for this is as
follows:
plt.rcParams.update({‹figure.figsize›:(9,7), ‹figure.dpi›:120})
# Original Series
#https://analyticsindiamag.com/quick-way-to-find-p-d-and-q-values-forarima/
fig, (ax1, ax2, ax3) = plt.subplots(3)
ax1.plot(df[‹NO2(GT)›]); ax1.set_title(‹Original Series›);
ax1.axes.xaxis.set_visible(False)
# 1st Differencing

ax2.plot(df[‹NO2(GT)›].diff()); ax2.set_title(‹1st Order Differencing›);
ax2.axes.xaxis.set_visible(False)
# 2nd Differencing
ax3.plot(df[‹NO2(GT)›].diff().diff()); ax3.set_title(‹2nd Order Differencing›)
plt.show()
The original NO2 level variable is plotted along with the first-order
differencing and the second-order differencing. The main objective is to
identify the optimal value of d for which the differencing level has less noise.
The plots for the preceding code are as follows.

Figure 6.16: The differencing plots for the NO2 level variable to find d

From the preceding plots, we can observe that both the first and second-order
difference plots look very similar, thus we cannot be completely sure,
whether to take 1 or 2, but let’s fix d as 1st order differencing and then we can
iterate with 2 also later.
The autocorrelation plot is also used to check the differencing value on the
original plot.

from statsmodels.graphics.tsaplots import plot_acf
fig, (ax1, ax2, ax3) = plt.subplots(3)
plot_acf(df[‹NO2(GT)›], ax=ax1)
plot_acf(df[‹NO2(GT)›].diff().dropna(), ax=ax2)
plot_acf(df[‹NO2(GT)›].diff().diff().dropna(), ax=ax3)
The plot_acf() function is used to do the first order differencing and the
second order

Figure 6.17: The ACF plots for first-order differencing and second-order
differencing
To find the value of we need to use the partial autocorrelation (PACF) The
partial autocorrelation function plot can be used to draw a correlation
between the time series and its lag while the other intermediate lags can be
ignored. This plotting will let us know about the lags that are not necessary in
the autoregression part. The code snippet is as follows:
https://analyticsindiamag.com/quick-way-to-find-p-d-and-q-values-for-arima/

from statsmodels.graphics.tsaplots import plot_pacf
plot_pacf(df[‹NO2(GT)›].diff().dropna())

The plot_pacf() function is used to perform the partial autocorrelation
function.

Figure 6.18: The Partial Autocorrelation Plot
We can take the value of p as 1 since the second lag performs better than the
first lag and is within the limit too. Although, if we look closely the fifth lag
performs better than all the first four lags, so we can also consider p as
To find the value of q, we need to use the Autocorrelation (ACF) It helps us
to understand the amount of moving average needed to remove the
autocorrelation from the stationary series. The code is as follows:
plot_acf(df[‹NO2(GT)›].diff().dropna())

The plot_acf() function is used to perform the ACF plot operation on the NO2
level variable. The ACF plot is as follows:

Figure 6.19: The Autocorrelation Plot
Here we can observe that two lags are out of the significance limit, so the
optimal value of q can be taken as
Next, we build the ARIMA model using the p = 1, d = 1, and q = 2 values.
# Fit the AR model (let›s assume we›re fitting an AR(1) model)
model = ARIMA(df[‹NO2(GT)›], order=(1, 1, 2))

model_fit = model.fit()
# Make a forecast
forecast = model_fit.forecast(steps=5)
print(‹Forecast: ‹, forecast)
Output:
Forecast: 2005-04-04 15:00:00 156.726490
2005-04-04 16:00:00 152.392795
2005-04-04 17:00:00 148.767562
2005-04-04 18:00:00 145.734973
2005-04-04 19:00:00 143.198144
Freq: H, Name: predicted_mean, dtype: float64
The model is created for the next five steps. Next, we observe the summary of
the model using the .smodel_fitummary() function.
model_fit.summary()

Figure 6.20: The model summary
The p-value is still 0 and the AIC value is reduced from the previous model
(106925) to 105521.
We can also test with p = 1, d = 2, and q = 2 values.

# Fit the AR model (let›s assume we›re fitting an AR(1) model)
model = ARIMA(df[‹NO2(GT)›], order=(1, 2, 2))
model_fit = model.fit()
# Make a forecast
forecast = model_fit.forecast(steps=5)
print(‹Forecast: ‹, forecast)
Output:
Forecast: 2005-04-04 15:00:00 167.111512
2005-04-04 16:00:00 167.054147
2005-04-04 17:00:00 167.054739
2005-04-04 18:00:00 167.061655
2005-04-04 19:00:00 167.069261
Freq: H, Name: predicted_mean, dtype: float64
The predicted values remain the same more or less the same at 167 The
model summary is as follows:
model_fit.summary()
The model_fit.summary() function is used to find the summary of the model
and the screenshot of the model is represented as follows:

Figure 6.21: The model summary with changed p,d, and q values
The P-value in this model is < 0.05 which makes it statistically significant,
and the AIC value has increased to 105842 from the previous model. AIC is
the Akaike Information Criterion that helps explain the strength of the linear
regression It explains the goodness of the Lower AIC means the model is
better than the higher AIC model.

Here is a very good article to interpret the ARIMA model parameters.
https://analyzingalpha.com/interpret-arima-results

https://www.machinelearningplus.com/time-series/arima-model-time-seriesforecasting-python/
The predicted plot can be represented by the code as follows:
# Actual vs Fitted
from statsmodels.graphics.tsaplots import plot_predict
plot_predict(model_fit, dynamic = False)
plt.show()
The plot_predict() function is used to plot the predicted values.

Figure 6.22: The predicted plot using the ARIMA model

FbProphet

FbProphet is a flexible and efficient time series forecasting algorithm
based on additive models where non-linear trends are fit with yearly,
weekly, and daily It also considers holidays into consideration to perform
the forecasting operation. It is based on the Bayesian approach which also
provides room for uncertainty estimation in the predictions.
https://pypi.org/project/fbprophet/

Deep Learning for Time Series Forecasting (CNN and LSTM)

Deep Learning for time series forecasting using Convolutional Neural
Networks (CNN) and Long Short Term Memory (LSTM) is very useful
considering the kind of data and time series forecasting problems we are
solving. Here are definitions and applications of CNN and LSTM
algorithms in time series forecasting.
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) are the class of deep learning
models that are primarily used for analyzing visual data, however, they
can also be used for forecasting time series data. CNNs are designed to
automatically and adaptively learn spatial hierarchies of features from the
input data.
Recurrent neural network (RNN) architecture known as Long Short-Term
Memory (LSTM) was developed to better precisely simulate temporal
sequences and their long-range dependencies. Because LSTM has
feedback connections, it is a “general purpose computer” (it can perform
any computation a Turing machine can) in contrast to standard
feedforward neural networks. It can handle whole data sequences, such as
audio or video, in addition to single data points (like pictures). It is perfect
for time series forecasting since it can keep data in “memory” for a long
time.

The CNN-LSTM model is a type of deep learning model that has the best
of CNNs and CNNs are excellent at learning spatial hierarchies or spatial

relationships in the data, making them well-suited for time series data
where temporal patterns can be considered as “spatial”. LSTMs, on the
other hand, are designed to learn from sequences of data by storing
information from past data points, making them ideal for time series
forecasting.

Evaluation of Time Series Forecasting Models

Evaluating time series forecasting models is an important step in the
model-building process. It helps understand the model’s performance and
accuracy in making future predictions. The evaluation process typically
involves training a set of models on a training set and assessing its
accuracy on the unseen test set. There are several metrics, including Mean
Absolute Percentage Error (MAPE), Mean Error (ME), Mean Absolute
Error (MAE), Mean Percentage Error (MPE), Root MEAN Squared Error
(RMSE), Lag 1 Autocorrelation of Error (ACF1), Correlation between the
Actual and the Forecast (corr), Min-Max Error (minmax) that are used to
evaluate the performance of time series forecasting models.

Exploring the Parameters in the Time Series Models

The time series models are statistical tools for temporal data analysis and
forecasting. These models are based on the idea that the data points
represent the realization of a series of random variables, indicating the
existence of an underlying stochastic process.
When there are various parameters involved in the time series models, we
need to explore the relevant points with respect to the models and the data.
Among them, some of them are as follows:
Trend: A Trend is defined as a consistent upward or downward movement
in a time series. Trends can be probabilistic or deterministic and
identifying trends in the data helps to uncover hidden patterns in the data
for long-term analysis and forecasting.
Seasonality: Seasonality primarily points to seasonal changes in the data
temporally. In this case, we can identify the buying patterns of customers,
or rising and falling of stock prices during certain situations of the year, or
climatic changes that affect various places in the world.
Correlation between attributes: There are situations when the time series
variables are correlated.
The ARIMA (Autoregressive Integrated Moving Average) model has the
parameters of p (order of autoregression), d (degree of differencing), and q

(order of moving average) that are changed iteratively and we can make
better models.

In the case of deep learning models like CNN (Convolutional Neural
Networks) and LSTM (Long Short-Term parameters such as the number
of layers, the number of neurons in each layer, the type of activation
function, and the learning rate are among the important factors to consider.
The process of parameter selection is fundamentally iterative. There may
be some initial value of parameters that we start with and then iteratively
change to improve the model performance with time.

Performance Metrics of the Models to Measure their Accuracy

In the context of time series forecasting, many performance metrics are
used to evaluate the accuracy of the These metrics compare the forecasted
values with the observed values and give a quantitative measure of the
quality of the forecasts. We will discuss MAPE, MAE, MSE, and RMSE
as follows:
Mean Absolute Percentage Error MAPE is the measure of the prediction
accuracy of a forecasting model. It expresses accuracy as a percentage and
is defined by the formula MAPE = mean(abs((observed value- forecast
value) /observed value)) * The lower the MAPE, the better the model’s
performance.
Mean Error is the average of the forecast errors, where the forecast error is
the difference between the observed value and the forecasted value
divided by the total number of samples. A positive ME indicates that the
forecasted values are lower than the actual while a negative ME indicates
that the forecasted values are higher than the actual A ME close to zero
suggests that the forecasts are unbiased.
Mean Absolute Error Without taking into account their direction, MAE
calculates the average magnitude of the differences in a group of
projections. All individual variances are given equal weight in the test
sample’s average of the absolute difference between the forecasted value
and the observed

Mean Squared Error (MSE): MSE is the square of the difference between
the forecasted value and the observed value. It is used frequently along
with MAE and It depends on the forecast model and the problem at hand
on which performance metrics we will be using.
Root Mean Squared Error (RMSE): RMSE is a frequently used measure
of the differences between values predicted by a model and the values
observed. It is the square root of the average of squared differences
between forecasted and actual observations over a defined time period.
RMSE = sqrt(mean((actual-forecasted)^2))
Lag 1 Autocorrelation of Error ACF1 measures the correlation between a
value and the preceding (lagged by 1-time unit) value. In this context, it
measures the correlation between an error and the error at the next time
point.
These metrics have different requirements as far as the accuracy and the
performance of the forecasting are concerned. We mostly use MAE, MSE,
RMSE, ACF1, and so but we also use other performance metrics as per
the need of the problem and the forecasting

Auto Time Series Libraries

The Auto time series libraries are the tools that help automate the process of
time series forecasting. They perform operations like data preparation, feature
engineering, model selection, and Since these tools already cover all the
mentioned operations in quick and organized succession with minimum
human intervention, they help save a lot of time and also develop accurate
time series models. This way there are avenues for better prediction over the
traditional time series forecasting
One of the libraries that was already discussed is the fbprophet in which the
algorithm is based on additive models where non-linear trends are fit with
yearly, weekly, and daily It also considers holidays into consideration to
perform the forecasting operation. There are also a few other libraries, we
will look into atspy, auto-ts, statsforecast, pmdarima, ts-automl, tsfresh,
sktime, Arch time series financial library, and pyflux.
Atsypy is an automated time series model using Python. It has various
automated time series models as in the following screenshot:

Figure 6.23: The automated models provided by Atspy
https://github.com/firmai/atspy
Auto_TS is a library that automates the process of building multiple time
series models using a single line of It supports models like ARIMA, Seasonal
ARIMA, Prophet, and scikit-learn machine learning It also has Dask to
handle millions of rows.
https://github.com/AutoViML/Auto_TS
Statsforecast library provides fast and accurate implementations of
AutoARIMA, AutoETS, AutoCES, MSTL, and Theta models in These
models exploit autocorrelations in the time series data. Here is a very good
blog on the usage of Statsforecast
https://github.com/Nixtla/statsforecast

Pmdarima library is a Python wrapper for the R package “forecast” and
provides auto ARIMA It automatically selects the best ARIMA model for a
given time Here is also a very good article to explain of the usage of
pmdarima.
https://github.com/alkaline-ml/pmdarima
https://towardsdatascience.com/efficient-time-series-using-pythonspmdarima-library-f6825407b7f0
Ts-automl is a library that provides automated time series forecasting using
machine learning It offers different pipeline classes for different types of
models, such as slow, fast, and balanced.

https://github.com/MMurilloGlez/ts-automl
Tsfresh is a library for automated feature extraction and selection for time
series It automatically extracts a large number of features from time series
and selects the most relevant ones for modeling.
https://github.com/blue-yonder/tsfresh
Sktime provides a unified interface for multiple time series learning
Currently, this includes time series classification, regression, clustering,
annotation, and It comes with time series algorithms and scikit-learn
compatible tools to build, tune, and validate time series
https://github.com/sktime/sktime

Arch is a time series financial library that helps in financial stock price
forecasting, and financial econometrics. It is abbreviated as Autoregressive
Conditional Heteroskedasticity (ARCH) and is written in Python (with
Cython and/or Numba used to improve performance).
https://github.com/bashtage/arch
PyFlux is an open-source time series Python library that has a good array of
modern time series as well as a flexible array of inference options (frequentist
and Bayesian) that can be applied to these models.
https://github.com/RJT1990/pyflux

These are the few automated time series forecasting models that help save
time and resources and improve the workflow of time series forecasting It
also helps in augmenting the accuracy of the prediction

Conclusion

This chapter covered the necessities of time series analysis and
forecasting, the properties of time series data, including seasonality,
trends, stationarity, white noise, the different types of time series data, and
the visualization of the time series These properties of the data when
explored give us deeper insights on the data that cannot be done by
straightforward data analysis. We have taken a real-life dataset from the
UC Irvine data repository to analyze the time series data of the air quality
of an Italian city. On that, we have tested algorithms, such as AR, MA,
ARMA, ARIMA, Exponential Smoothing, Fbprophet, and All the codes
are in Python and we have also discussed the tuning of the relevant such
as trend, seasonality, and so We also learned about some important
performance metrics of time series forecasting models, including MAE,
MSE, RMSE, and so on. Additionally, we have also learned about some
very interesting and efficient automated time series libraries that not only
save us a lot of time and resources but also make the models In the next
chapter, we will do data analysis of voice and audio data using Python
libraries.

References
White Noise
https://medium.com/@ms_somanna/guide-to-adding-noise-to-your-datausing-python-and-numpy-c8be815df524

Keywords

Time Series Forecasting, Seasonality, Trend, Visualization, AR, ARMA,
ARIMA, Exponential Smoothing, Autocorrelation, Partial
Autocorrelation, Stationarity, Auto time series libraries

CHAPTER 7
Signal Processing

Introduction

Python is widely used in data analysis and can also be used for audio
signal analysis. We take a closer look at signal processing with Python in
this chapter.
This thorough book will provide you with an in-depth understanding of
audio signals, their various representations, and the methods used to
manipulate them. It will also cover transformers for audio data,
transcription, voice recognition, and text-to-speech analysis using the
HuggingFace package and Python.
The essential ideas of time and frequency domain representations—which
serve as the fundamentals of audio signal analysis—will be our main
emphasis. Additionally, we will understand how to see these signals in
both domains. The Fourier Transform, a crucial mathematical tool for
navigating between the various domains of time and frequency, will also
be covered in this chapter.
Upon completion of this chapter, the readers will be able to deal with
audio signals and create their application be it text-to-speech or automatic
speech recognition or transcription.

Structure

In this chapter, we will discuss the following topics:
Introduction to Signal Processing
Brief Overview of Signal Processing and its Importance in Data Analysis
Introduction to Audio Signal Processing and its Applications
Understanding Audio Data
Basics of Audio Data: sampling rate, amplitude, bit depth, waveform, and
spectrograms
Introduction to Python Libraries for Audio Data Processing
Audio Signal Processing Techniques
Introduction to Various Audio Signal Processing Techniques
Use of Python for Implementing these Techniques
Speech Recognition and Transcription

Techniques used in Speech Recognition and Transcription
Walkthrough of a Python Code Example for Speech Recognition and
Transcription

Introduction to Signal Processing

Signal Processing is an important branch of engineering that deals with
the analysis, interpretation, and manipulation of Signals, in this context,
can be anything that carries information, such as audio, voice, images, or
even financial stock market The field is divided into analog signal
processing and digital signal with the latter being heavily in use due to the
rise of cheap hardware and digital technologies. The primary goal of
signal processing is to extract useful information from this kind of data
and convert it into a format that is easier to interpret. This discipline finds
extensive applications in various fields, including telecommunications,
image processing, seismology, and even in the medical field for
processing ECG, EEG, and MRI

Brief Overview of Signal Processing and its Importance in Data Analysis

Signal Processing is a fundamental discipline in the fields of data science,
engineering, and various other fields that deal with the extraction,
analysis, and manipulation of signals. A signal is any information be it
audio, video, temperature data, stock market data, and so on, that changes
over time or space.
Signal processing is crucial to data analysis because it allows us to derive
actionable insights from unstructured data and apply those insights to It
serves as the foundation for a wide range of technologies that we use
daily, including computers, radios, cell phones, and smart
In the context of time-series data, signal processing is used to analyze
patterns and trends to predict future values based on historical data points.
This is particularly important in various industries, such as finance and
weather where accurate predictions can lead to significant cost savings
and efficiency
Signal processing also involves various preprocessing and filtering
techniques to improve the quality of the data for Techniques such as
moving averages, rolling windows, and different types of filters high-pass,
and are used to smooth time-series data and reduce the impact of

Moreover, studying signals in the frequency and time domains depends on
auditory signal Analyzing signals and data points about time is known as

time-domain On the other hand, frequency domain analysis looks at how
signals behave about frequency. Significant patterns and features in the
data that are not immediately visible in the raw data can be found through
these studies.
The applications of signal processing are diverse and span several For
instance, in the Internet of Things (IoT), signal processing is used to
extract valuable information from sensor data, leading to actionable In
healthcare and biomedical applications, various signal processing
techniques help detect different abnormalities in the patient’s body, assess
and diagnose the patient’s health conditions, and plan the treatment
accordingly. There are also fields like environmental monitoring, weather
forecasting, and industrial automation, where the data is captured by
sensors and then analysis is carried out.
As the digital world continues to expand, signal processing faces new
challenges and opportunities. The ever-growing data source from various
devices and platforms can lead signal processing to reinvent itself, in
connection with techniques from distributed computing, optimization, or
machine learning.
In conclusion, signal processing is a crucial discipline that plays a pivotal
role in data analysis. Providing the tools and techniques to extract
meaningful information from raw data, enables us to make sense of the
world around us and make informed decisions.
https://www.datacamp.com/tutorial/a-data-scientists-guide-to-signalprocessing
https://theconversation.com/signal-processing-a-field-at-the-heart-ofscience-and-everyday-life-89267

https://signalprocessingsociety.org/our-story/signal-processing-101

Introduction to Audio Signal processing and its Applications

Audio signal processing, also known as audio processing, is the method of
interpreting and manipulating auditory signals to alter the way they sound
or to extract information from them. It can be performed in either the time
or frequency domain and can be applied to both analog and digital
With the introduction of the telephone, phonograph, and radio in the early
20th century, audio signals could now be sent and stored. This marked the
beginning of the history of audio signal processing. The mid-1900s saw
Bell Laboratories play a major role in the development of signal
processing theory and its audio application. The field’s early contributions
to communication theory, sampling theory, and pulse-code modulation
(PCM) by pioneers like Claude Shannon and Harry Nyquist served as its
cornerstones.
An analog audio signal is a continuous signal that is equivalent to airborne
sound waves in terms of electrical voltage or The next step in analog
signal processing is to physically modify the continuous signal using
electrical circuits to adjust its voltage, current, or charge. Historically, the
only way to modify a signal was through analog before the widespread
use of digital technology.
Since the development of digital technology, many applications now
prefer to use digital signal However, because analog technology
frequently yields nonlinear answers that are challenging to duplicate with
digital it is frequently still preferred in music applications.

Audio signal processing has a wide range of applications. These can be
put as audio data storage, audio data processing, data compression, music
information retrieval, automatic speech recognition, text-to-speech
processing, acoustic detection, and noise cancellation, to name a few.
Automatic Speech recognition (ASR) is another vital application of audio
signal processing. It helps extract information from the speech signals and
then translates it into recognizable Speech recognition technology is found
in many applications, from “talk to text” applications on smartphones to
recognition programs for people with disabilities.
To conclude, audio signal processing is a comprehensive field with
diverse applications ranging from music and entertainment to
telecommunications and health care. As technology continues to evolve,
the importance and influence of audio signal processing are likely to
increase further.
https://signalprocessingsociety.org/our-story/signal-processing-101
https://www.coursera.org/lecture/audio-signal-processing/introduction-toaudio-signal-processing-fHha1
https://www.ee.iitb.ac.in/student/~daplab/publications/chapter9-prao.pdf

Understanding Audio Data

Sound signals are studied and manipulated in the intriguing and intricate
field of audio data. It is essential to many applications, including voice
recognition, audio streaming, and even medical Let’s examine the
fundamentals of audio data and how it is represented digitally so that you
can completely understand the idea.
Since audio transmissions are analog, they are continuous in both
amplitude and Real-world sounds are created by waves traveling across a
medium, such as the air. Microphones pick up these waves and translate
them into an electrical signal. The frequency and amplitude of the original
sound wave are precisely reflected in this signal.
To convert this analog signal into a digital format, sampling is Sampling
involves measuring the amplitude of the signal at regular intervals, known
as the sampling A common sampling rate for audio is 44.1 which means
the signal is measured 44,100 times per Each of these measurements is
known as a sample.
After sampling, the digital audio data is usually stored in a file format like
WAV or These formats include not only the actual audio data, but also
metadata such as the number of channels (mono or stereo), the sample
rate, and the bit The bit depth refers to the number of bits that are used to
represent each A higher bit depth allows for a more precise representation
of the audio signal but also results in larger file sizes.

Understanding audio data also involves understanding how to manipulate
and process For example, audio data can be filtered to remove certain
frequencies, or it can be amplified to increase the volume. These
operations are typically performed using digital signal processing (DSP)
techniques.
Finally, it’s important to note that audio data can be analyzed and
interpreted in various ways. For instance, a spectrogram can be used to
visualize the frequency content of an audio signal over Machine learning
algorithms can also be applied to audio data for tasks such as speech
recognition or music genre
To sum up, deciphering audio data comprises of variety of steps, including
recording sound waves, transforming them into a digital format,
processing and modifying them, and interpreting the It’s an intriguing area
with many uses, ranging from entertainment to medical.
https://towardsdatascience.com/understanding-audio-data-fouriertransform-fft-spectrogram-and-speech-recognition-a4072d228520

Audio Data

Several concepts of audio data help us understand the data and derive
decisions from them: sampling rate, amplitude, bit depth, waveform, and
spectrograms. Let’s explore each of these to understand the basics of
audio data.
Sampling Rate
The sampling often measured in kilohertz is the number of audio samples
recorded per second. Each sample represents the amplitude of the audio at
a particular moment in time. The higher the sample rate, the more
accurately the audio can be represented, resulting in a higher resolution.
The Nyquist-Shannon sampling theorem states that to accurately
reconstruct any signal of a required bandwidth, the sampling frequency
must be greater than twice the highest frequency of the signal being If
lower sampling rates are used, the original signal’s information may not
be completely recoverable from the sampled signal.
Amplitude and Bit Depth
Amplitude in digital audio is often expressed in decibels It defines the
magnitude of the sound wave, which we understand as volume normally.
The higher the amplitude, the louder the sound.

Bit depth refers to the number of bits used to represent each sample of In
digital audio, a bit is a binary unit of information that can have a value of
either 0 or The bit depth determines the number of possible amplitude
values that can be assigned to each The higher the bit depth, the greater
the resolution and dynamic range of the audio.
Waveform
Waveforms are graphical representations of audio signals. In the context
of audio, they represent how the amplitude of a sound signal changes over
They can be used to identify loud sections, quiet sections, and silence in
an audio clip.
Spectrograms
A spectrogram is a visual representation of the spectrum of frequencies in
a sound or other signal as they vary with This map of frequencies helps to
identify the areas that can be manipulated and played with to understand
the audio and recreate new audio. Spectrograms are used extensively in
the field of signal processing and are a useful tool for as they can identify
different sounds, and their changes and interactions, visually over
In conclusion, understanding these basic components of audio data is
crucial for anyone involved in digital audio production, whether it’s music
creation, podcasting, or audio for video It allows you to make informed
decisions about the audio quality, file size, and processing power needed
for your specific project.
https://www.lalal.ai/blog/sample-rate-bit-depth-explained/

https://legacy.presonus.com/learn/technical-articles/Sample-Rate-and-BitDepth
https://huggingface.co/learn/audio-course/chapter1/audio_data

Introduction to Python Libraries for Audio Data Processing

Audio processing in Python involves manipulating, analyzing, and
understanding audio signals. Several libraries are available in Python to
conduct audio data processing, each with its strengths and use cases. We will
be mainly using the Librosa library to load the data and explain the concepts
of amplitude, frequency, time domains, spectrograms, waveforms, and
sampling rates.
Librosa is the Python package for music and audio
https://librosa.org/
We will be referring to the HuggingFace Audio Course to create the codes, do
the visualizations, and explain the concepts. There are also some other
packages like PyAudio, pydub, pyAudioAnalysis, pyAudioProcessing,
TorchAudio, Essentia, and SoundFile to name a few.
https://huggingface.co/learn/audio-course/chapter1/audio_data
https://pypi.org/project/PyAudio/
https://github.com/jiaaro/pydub
https://github.com/tyiannak/pyAudioAnalysis
https://github.com/jsingh811/pyAudioProcessing

https://github.com/pytorch/audio
https://github.com/MTG/essentia
https://github.com/bastibe/python-soundfile
The introductory codes are as follows. We import the librosa library and then
load the trumpet sound from the dataset and visualize it. The matplotlib
library is used to visualize the data.
import librosa
array, sampling_rate = librosa.load(librosa.ex(“trumpet”))
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
import librosa.display
plt.figure().set_figwidth(12)
librosa.display.waveshow(array, sr=sampling_rate)
The data is visualized in the time domain. The waveshow function from
librosa is used to represent the waveform.

Figure 7.1: The time domain data representation of the trumpet audio
The preceding graph has the amplitude on the y-axis and time on the The
sampling rate is 22050 Hz or 22.5 KHz and each point in time is the single
sample value that was obtained when the signal was sampled.
We can also look into the array variable that is a numpy array.
array[:5]
array([-1.4068246e-03, -4.4607770e-04, -4.1098156e-04, 9.9922603e-05,
4.3147978e-05], dtype=float32)

For the frequency domain representation, we will be using the Discrete
Fourier Transform (DFT) to convert the time domain signal to the frequency
domain signal. Here, we will be using the function from numpy library. We
will look into 8192 samples from the sound data and then use the window
function to identify the frequency components present in the signal.
import numpy as np
dft_input = array[:8192]

# calculate the DFT
window = np.hanning(len(dft_input))
windowed_input = dft_input * window
dft = np.fft.rfft(windowed_input)
The dft variable is an array of complex numbers consisting of real and
imaginary components.
print(dft)
[-2.18180002e-04+0.00000000e+00j -2.04155426e-05-1.08952556e-03j
9.24083484e-04+1.93526629e-04j ... -8.31871101e-08+3.38487353e-06j
-3.02099704e-06-3.69307347e-06j 3.64474469e-06+0.00000000e+00j]
We will look into the individual real and imaginary components of the dft
variable.
# get the amplitude spectrum in decibels
amplitude = np.abs(dft)
amplitude_db = librosa.amplitude_to_db(amplitude, ref=np.max)
amplitude_db
array([-80., -80., -80., ..., -80., -80., -80.])
The abs() function from numpy is used to find each component’s absolute
values (amplitude) in the dft variable. The librosa.amplitude_to_db() is used
to convert the amplitude values to the decibel

# get the frequency bins
frequency = librosa.fft_frequencies(sr=sampling_rate, n_fft=len(dft_input))
#Visualizing the frequency domain
plt.figure().set_figwidth(12)

plt.plot(frequency, amplitude_db)
plt.xlabel(“Frequency (Hz)”)
plt.ylabel(“Amplitude (dB)”)
plt.xscale(“log”)
The is used to get the frequency bins meaning the sampling rate and the
length of the sound signal are used to have each component that will be used
to represent the frequencies. The plot of the frequency domain representation
is shown as follows:

Figure 7.2: The frequency domain data representation of the trumpet audio
data
The preceding plot represents the strength of the various frequency
components that are present in the audio file of length 8192 The frequency
values are on the and their amplitudes are on the
The frequency values are represented by the frequency variable.

frequency

array([0.00000000e+00, 2.69165039e+00, 5.38330078e+00, ...,
1.10196167e+04, 1.10223083e+04, 1.10250000e+04])
We will be observing Spectrogram using the librosa library. It plots the
frequency, amplitude, and time representation of the audio signal. Short-Time
Fourier Transform (STFT) is used to take multiple DFTs where only a small
section of time is used, and then the resulting spectra are stacked together into
a spectrogram.
#Spectrogram
D = librosa.stft(array)
S_db = librosa.amplitude_to_db(np.abs(D), ref=np.max)
plt.figure().set_figwidth(12)
librosa.display.specshow(S_db, x_axis=”time”, y_axis=”hz”)
plt.colorbar()
The specshow() function is used to represent the spectrogram. The decibel
scale is created using the amplitude_to_db() function. The Spectrogram is
represented as follows:

Figure 7.3: The Spectrogram representation of the trumpet audio data

In the preceding plot, the x-axis represents time, and the y-axis represents
frequency in The intensity of the color gives the amplitude or power of the
frequency component at each point in time, measured in decibels (dB).
The spectrogram is created by taking short segments of the audio typically
lasting a few milliseconds, and calculating the discrete Fourier transform of
each segment to obtain its frequency spectrum. The resulting spectra are then
stacked together on the time axis to create the Each vertical slice in this image
corresponds to a single frequency seen from the top. By default, librosa.stft()
splits the audio signal into segments of 2048 which gives a good trade-off
between frequency resolution and time resolution.
Next, we will be looking into Mel It is similar to Spectrogram but has the
frequency represented in a non-linear scale. This way the visualization will be
easier to understand concerning the hearing as perceived by a human. The
human auditory system is more sensitive to changes in lower frequencies than
higher and this sensitivity decreases logarithmically as frequency
To create the mel the STFT is used just like creating the Spectrogram, that is
splitting the audio into short sections to obtain a sequence of frequency
spectra. Then, each spectrum is sent through a set of filters called the mel to
transform the frequencies to the mel
#Mel Spectrogram
S = librosa.feature.melspectrogram(y=array, sr=sampling_rate, n_mels=128,
fmax=8000)
S_dB = librosa.power_to_db(S, ref=np.max)
plt.figure().set_figwidth(12)

librosa.display.specshow(S_dB, x_axis=”time”, y_axis=”mel”,
sr=sampling_rate, fmax=8000)
plt.colorbar()
In the preceding code the parameter n_mels is the number of mel bands to
The mel bands are a set of frequency ranges that divide the spectrum into
perceptually meaningful using a set of filters whose shape and spacing are
chosen to mimic the way the human ear responds to different frequencies.
Common values for n_mels are 40 or fmax indicates the highest frequency (in
Hz) we care
Just as the regular spectrogram, the mel spectrogram has the amplitude, time,
and frequency represented. The amplitude is commonly referred to as a logmel because the conversion to decibels involves a logarithmic The preceding
example used librosa.power_to_db() as librosa.feature.melspectrogram()
creates a power spectrogram.

Figure 7.4: The Mel spectrogram representation of the trumpet audio data

Compared to the normal spectrogram, the Mel spectrogram can capture more
meaningful features of the audio signal for human making it a popular choice
in tasks such as speech recognition, speaker identification, and music genre

Audio Signal Processing Techniques

The electronic manipulation of audio signals is the primary importance of
audio signal processing, also sometimes referred to as audio These signals
are longitudinal waves made up of compressions and rarefactions that
propagate through the atmosphere as electronic representations of sound
waves. Analog or digital formats can be used to describe audio signals,
and either domain can be used for processing. Digital processors use
mathematics to process the digital representation of an electrical signal,
whereas analog processors deal directly with the signal.

Introduction to Various Audio Signal Processing Techniques

Techniques for processing audio signals have a long history; they were
essential to the invention of the telephone and phonograph as well as early
radio Significant advancements in digital audio coding and audio data
compression have been accomplished over time. These advancements
include modified discrete cosine transform coding, adaptive DPCM,
differential pulse-code modulation, and linear predictive coding.
Applications of audio signal processing include the following areas:
Data compression and storage: Since audio signals can be big, it’s
important to store them effectively. By using methods, such as audio data
compression, the size of the audio files can be decreased without
noticeably lowering their quality,
Music information retrieval: This is the process of obtaining relevant data
from music files, such as the genre, tempo, mood, or
Speech processing: This is the process of interpreting and analyzing
spoken language. Applications such as voice recognition, speech
synthesis, and speech-to-text conversion use techniques in this field,
Noise Cancellation: To reduce unwanted noise and enhance the quality of
the audio signal, this technique creates an “anti-noise” signal,

Audio synthesis: Audio synthesis is the process of creating audio signals
through electronics. A synthesizer is a type of musical instrument that
carries out this Synthesizers can produce original sounds or mimic
existing
Audio Effects: These modify the sound of an audio source, such as a
musical instrument. Distortion, filters, modulation, pitch, time, and
dynamic effects like volume pedals and compressors are examples of
common effects.
The discipline of audio signal processing has also made use of deep
learning techniques. These methods have been applied to tracking,
localization, ambient sound detection, music information retrieval, and
speech Additionally, they have been applied to the synthesis and
manipulation of audio, including source separation and audio
enhancement.
The processing of audio signals is a vital part of our everyday existence.
Audio signal processing methods enable and improve the efficiency of our
interactions with our smart gadgets, including the music we listen to,
phone calls we make, and voice instructions we give them.
https://www.ee.iitb.ac.in/student/~daplab/publications/chapter9-prao.pdf
https://arxiv.org/abs/1905.00078
https://towardsdatascience.com/audio-deep-learning-made-simple-part-1state-of-the-art-techniques-da1d3dff2504

https://www.wiley.com/enus/Digital+Audio+Signal+Processing%2C+3rd+Edition-p9781119832676

Use of Python for Implementing these Techniques

We have used the technique of fast Fourier transform (FFT) previously to
represent the signal in the frequency domain. We can also use MFCC to
represent the signal. Mel Frequency Cepstral Coefficients (MFCC) are a few
characteristics, typically between 10 and 20, that characterize a spectral
envelope’s general form. MFCCs are an effective feature for automatic
speech recognition because they may be utilized to represent the “speech
envelope.”
Here’s a detailed explanation of how MFCCs are computed:
Framing of the signal: The first step in computing MFCCs is to divide the
continuous audio signal into short frames (typically 20-40ms This assumes
that the frequencies in a signal are stationary, that is, they don’t change over
time.
Applying the Fourier Transform: For each frame, the Fourier Transform is
applied to convert the signal from the time domain to the frequency This
results in a spectrum that shows the intensity of each frequency in the

Applying the Mel filterbank: The spectrum is then passed through a set of
filters called the Mel The Mel scale is a perceptual scale of pitches that
approximates the human ear’s response to different frequencies. Each filter in
the filter bank is a triangular bandpass filter* that passes frequencies within a
certain range and attenuates frequencies outside this The result is a set of
spectral coefficients that represent the power in each Mel frequency band.

Taking the logarithm: The logarithm of each spectral coefficient is then This
step is based on the observation that human perception of sound intensity is
Apply the Discrete Cosine Transform (DCT): Finally, the DCT is applied to
the log spectral coefficients to yield the The DCT is a linear transformation
that is used to de-correlate the log spectral coefficients and reduce their The
result is a set of MFCCs that represent the shape of the power spectrum in a
compact form.
A band-pass filter is a device or process that allows signals within a specific
frequency range to pass through while attenuating (not permitting) signals at
frequencies outside this In the context of audio signal processing, a band-pass
filter is used to isolate a particular range of frequencies from an audio
The Mel filter bank is a series of band-pass filters used in the estimation of
Mel Frequency Cepstral Coefficients (MFCC). Every filter in the Mel
filterbank is a triangle band-pass which attenuates frequencies outside of its
passband while passing frequencies within it. The filters are uniformly spaced
along the Mel a pitch perception scale that simulates how the human ear
reacts to various frequencies. A collection of spectral coefficients that express
the power in every Mel frequency band is the result.
We will observe the coding implementation of MFCC using the Librosa
library.
#Mel Frequency Cepstral Coefficients (MFCC)

import librosa

y, sr = librosa.load(librosa.ex(“trumpet”))
# Compute MFCC
mfcc = librosa.feature.mfcc(y=y, sr=sr, n_mfcc=13)
# Print shape of MFCC matrix
print(mfcc.shape)
Output:
(13,230)
We first load the “trumpet” sound from the previous code using This gives the
variables y (audio time series) and sr (sampling rate). We then compute mfcc
using the librosa.feature.mfcc() function. This takes audio time series (y),
sampling rate (sr), and number of mfcc (n_mfcc) as the input parameters. The
mfcc.shape gives the shape of the MFCC matrix that is, 13 rows and 230
columns.
Next, we visualize it in the form of a spectrogram.
import librosa.display
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
plt.figure(figsize=(10, 4))
librosa.display.specshow(mfcc, x_axis=’time’)
plt.colorbar()
plt.title(‘MFCC’)
plt.tight_layout()
plt.show()

The MFCC is displayed using the librosa.display.specshow() function. This
function creates a spectrogram where the x-axis represents time and the yaxis represents the different The color at each point represents the amplitude
of a particular MFCC at a particular time.

Figure 7.5: The MFCC spectrogram representation of the trumpet audio data
The x-axis is the time variable where each column in the image represents a
different time frame in the audio signal. The audio signal is divided into short
frames (typically 20-40ms and the MFCCs are computed for each
The y-axis is the different Each row of the image is an individual MFCC.
There are a total of 13 MFCCs that we have calculated in the preceding code.
For the colors, each color at each point in the image represents a specific
amplitude at a particular time. The color scale is a legend at the side of the
spectrogram. Darker colors represent lower and brighter colors represent
higher

https://wiki.aalto.fi/display/ITSP/Cepstrum+and+MFCC
https://www.analyticsvidhya.com/blog/2021/06/mfcc-technique-for-speechrecognition/

Speech Recognition and Transcription

Speech also known as automatic speech recognition is a technology that
converts speech into written text. It’s an interdisciplinary field that
includes electrical engineering, computer science, and languages.
Numerous industries can benefit from this technology, including
healthcare, automated customer service, voice assistants like Siri and and
transcribing services.
When it comes to speech recognition, transcription is the act of turning the
audible speech into written or printed There are two types of transcription:
automated, where a machine recognizes and transcribes the and manual,
where a person listens to the speech and types out the text. These days
various AI tools also transcribe speech to text.

Techniques used in Speech Recognition and Transcription

Speech recognition and transcription technologies have evolved. Early
systems were based on simple pattern-matching techniques, but modern
systems use more sophisticated machine-learning Here are some key
techniques used in speech recognition and transcription:
Acoustic Modeling
Acoustic modeling is the task of creating statistical representations for
each distinct sound in a language. The most common approach to acoustic
modeling involves Hidden Markov Models which use statistical methods
to represent different states of speech and the transitions between
Language Modeling
Forecasting the likelihood of a word sequence is known as language
modeling. This is crucial for speech recognition since it helps the system
in distinguishing between word sequences that share similar sounds. For
language modeling, n-gram models and, more recently, neural networkbased models are frequently utilized.
Feature Extraction

The process of converting the unprocessed audio signal into a collection
of features that capture the essence of the speech is known as feature In
speech recognition, Mel Frequency Cepstral Coefficients (MFCC) is a
frequently utilized characteristic. It offers a condensed depiction of the
sound’s spectral envelope, which helps differentiate between phonemes or
discrete units of sound.
Deep Learning
Speech recognition algorithms now work better than before due to the
usage of deep learning. Because they can handle sequential recurrent
neural networks (RNNs), particularly Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM)
are commonly used. The most recent transformer which take advantage of
self-attention have demonstrated encouraging outcomes more
End-to-End Models
End-to-end models, such as the Attend and Spell (LAS) help simplify the
speech recognition pipeline by directly transcribing the audio data into
These models eliminate the need for separate acoustic and language
making the system simpler and potentially more accurate.
In conclusion, with developments in deep learning and machine learning,
the field of speech recognition and transcription is developing faster than
ever. These innovations could completely change the way we
communicate with machines and handle a lot of spoken data.

Walkthrough of a Python Code Example for Speech Recognition and
Transcription
The coding implementation for speech recognition and transcription is as
follows. We will create the speech recognition and transcription models using
the Huggingface Transformers library.
We’ll use the automatic-speech-recognition to transcribe an audio recording
of a person asking a question about paying a bill using the same that is used
from the datasets
https://huggingface.co/learn/audio-course/chapter2/asr_pipeline
The dataset looks like this in the datasets section of the Huggingface website.

Figure 7.6: The MINDS-14 dataset section as shown on the Huggingface
website

Let’s start with the following code, but before that please make sure to install
the transformers library. It is better to create a separate environment using
conda or pip to avoid any dependency issues later with the system python

https://it.engineering.oregonstate.edu/sites/it.engineering.oregonstate.edu/files
/pages/virtualenv/files/python-guide.pdf
https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/python-virtual-environment/
!pip install –upgrade transformers
from datasets import load_dataset
from transformers import pipeline
cls = pipeline(“automatic-speech-recognition”)
minds = load_dataset(“PolyAI/minds14”, name=”en-AU”, split=”train”)
minds
Output:
Dataset({
features: [‘path’, ‘audio’, ‘transcription’, ‘english_transcription’,
‘intent_class’, ‘lang_id’],
num_rows: 654
})
The minds variable is a dictionary datasets file with 654 We can then use any
of the entries and explore them. The variable cls is the automatic speech
recognition model that is created using the pipeline object imported from the
transformers library.

example = minds[500]
cls(example[“audio”][“array”])
Output:
{‘text’: ‘WHAT ONOTHEN I VILENT’}
The variable example is the 501st entry in the minds variable we defined
earlier.
If we do the transcription of the example we get this.
example[“english_transcription”]
Output:

‘yes I recognize the payment’
The transcription result is very different from the one we got earlier and is not
very clear from what we got after cls() was passed to the
We can try this for the German split of the We will load the “de-DE” subset.
from datasets import load_dataset
from datasets import Audio
minds = load_dataset(“PolyAI/minds14”, name=”de-DE”, split=”train”)
minds = minds.cast_column(“audio”, Audio(sampling_rate=16_000))
example = minds[500]
example[“transcription”]

Output:
ich habe bitte eine Frage ich würde gerne eine Rechnung bezahlen wie kann
ich das bitte machen
Let’s create the automatic speech recognition pipeline like before.
from transformers import pipeline
cls = pipeline(“automatic-speech-recognition”, model=”maxidl/wav2vec2large-xlsr-german”)
cls(example[“audio”][“array”])
Output:
{‘text’: ‘ruscott ich habe bitte eine frage ich würde gern eine rechnung
bezahlen wie kann nich das bitte machen’}
The data is already present with us from the MINDS dataset and we can
create the ASR model using the pipeline() The readymade model
maxidl/wav2vec2-large-xlsr-german is used.

Conclusion

In this chapter, we embarked on an exploration of audio signal delving
into the intricacies of understanding audio data, the parameters that define
it, and the techniques used to process We also ventured into the realm of
automatic speech recognition and discussing their underlying principles
and their practical implementation in Python.
We began by demystifying audio data, discussing its digital representation
and the various parameters that characterize it, such as sample rate, bit
depth, amplitude, spectrogram, mel spectrogram, and Understanding these
parameters is crucial, as they directly impact the quality and the type of
information, we can extract from the audio
Next, we delved into the core techniques used in audio signal processing.
We explored the Fourier Transform, a mathematical tool that allows us to
examine the frequency components of a and the Mel Frequency Cepstral
Coefficients (MFCC), a feature that provides a compact representation of
the spectral envelope of a We have utilized Python code examples for each
technique, demonstrating how libraries, including and can be leveraged to
implement these techniques and visualize their results.

The last section of the chapter was attributed to building automatic speech
recognition and transcription pipeline using the transformers library and
also leveraged the MINDS-14 We discussed the fundamental techniques
used in these fields, including acoustic modeling, language modeling,

feature extraction, and the use of deep learning We also provided Python
code to build an end-to-end automatic speech recognition showcasing the
practical application of these techniques.
In the next chapter, we will solve real-life problems by using real data. We
will perform data analysis, statistical data analysis, data preparation, and
data cleaning techniques to prepare the data for further modeling. We will
also use some AI tools to perform data analysis to keep updated with the
recent tools, trends and of course improve efficiency and performance.

CHAPTER 8
Analyzing Real-World Data Sets using Python

Introduction

Python has become the industry leader in data analysis because of its
readability, adaptability, and large library of available modules for data
manipulation and analysis. The goal of this chapter, Projects Using is to
walk you through the useful uses of Python in the analysis of real-world
data emphasizing how Python can be used to glean insightful information
from complex data.
Python’s data analysis capabilities are extensive and varied, ranging from
healthcare records and environmental data to social media analytics and ecommerce We’ll go into real-world examples that show how Python may
be used to analyze massive volumes of data, spot trends, and make
predictions.
We will explore the application of Python libraries such as Pandas,
NumPy, Matplotlib, Seaborn, scikit-learn, and SciPy in real-world data
analysis projects. These libraries provide data manipulation, analysis, and
visualization functionalities, making Python a powerful tool for data
science.
In this chapter, we will also introduce an AI tool named which can be used
alongside Python for data analysis. Julius provides advanced analytical
capabilities to enhance data analysis tasks. Combining Python’s robust
libraries and Julius’s AI-driven insights will be a powerful tool for any
data analyst. Moreover, we will also look into no-code and low-code tools,

including Mito, Draw Data, PyGWalker, and so on, to work with data
analysis projects.

Structure

In this chapter, we will discuss the following topics:
An Overview: Using Python to Analyze Real World Projects
Understanding Real-World Data Sets
Characteristics of Real-World Data Sets
Handling Complexities in Real-world Data Sets
Exploratory Data Analysis and Visualization using Python
Introduction to Julius
Overview of Julius as an AI Tool
Exploratory Data Analysis and Visualization using Julius
Data Analysis Using No-code or Low-code Tools

An Overview: Using Python to Analyze Real World Projects

To close the gap between theoretical knowledge and real-world data
analysis scenarios, this chapter, Projects Using aims to provide practical
Python The goal is to give readers a thorough understanding of how
Python and Julius, an AI may work to make the job of data analysts
smoother and more efficient.
Python, which is well-known for being straightforward and effective, is
extensively used in many different fields, including scientific computing,
web development, and data analytics in Python’s adaptability has made it
possible for businesses in a variety of sectors, including finance,
healthcare, and digital behemoths like Google and to evaluate enormous
datasets and derive valuable
The chapter will demonstrate how to approach real-world datasets, which
are often messy, incomplete, and large in It will guide readers through the
end-to-end process of data analysis, from data acquisition and cleaning to
exploratory analysis, statistical inference, and the creation of predictive
The focus will be on applying these methods to datasets that readers are
likely to encounter in their professional lives.
Beyond Python, the chapter introduces Julius, an AI tool that enhances
data analysis and visualization The purpose here is to show how Julius can
integrate with Python to offer a more streamlined and powerful data
analysis Readers will learn how Julius can assist in automating tasks,
providing AI-driven insights, and creating advanced visualizations.

The end goal of this chapter is not only to provide knowledge but also to
inspire confidence in the reader’s ability to handle real-life Through
practical examples and hands-on projects, readers will learn to apply
Python and Julius to make data-driven This chapter serves as the
culmination of the concepts discussed in previous chapters, focusing on
application rather than theory.
By the end of the chapter, readers should be able to undertake their own
data analysis projects with competence. They will have a clear
understanding of how to apply Python in real-world situations and how to
leverage the capabilities of Julius to enhance their data analysis and
visualization This chapter is essential for anyone looking to apply their
Python skills to real-world data and make an impact in their field.

Understanding Real-World Data Sets

Real-world datasets, often known as “raw” data, are sets of unprocessed
data points that are directly gathered from a variety of When correctly
handled and inspected, these unmodified and unanalyzed datasets can
yield a wealth of information. Effective data analysis begins with an
understanding of real-world datasets, particularly in which is well-known
for its capacity to handle and analyze such data.
Unlike neatly packaged sample datasets used for educational purposes,
real-world datasets often come with complexities and challenges that
reflect the realities of data collection and handling in the actual world.
They can be large, containing millions or even billions of data points, and
are often messy and They can contain missing, inconsistent, or incorrect
making them difficult to understand and analyze without thorough
cleaning and preprocessing.
Real-world datasets can be derived from various sources such as social
media feeds, machine logs, business transaction records, healthcare
records, database websites like the World Bank, and the United Nations,
government portals, and sensor data in IoT They can also come in various
formats including text, images, audio, video, and The type of data and its
format largely depend on the data source and the specific application for
which the data is being collected.

Real-world datasets are valuable because they can yield insights that can
be applied to real-world situations. We may find patterns, trends,
correlations, and anomalies by examining these databases, and these
findings can help decision-makers in a variety of disciplines, including
environmental science, business, and
In conclusion, knowledge of real-world datasets is an essential
competency for data scientists and analysts. These datasets, despite their
difficulties and complexities, include a multitude of data that, when
properly utilized, can yield insightful information and support wellinformed decision-making in a range of real-world scenarios.

Characteristics of Real-World Data Sets

Real-world datasets are a rich source of information, providing a snapshot
of situations, behaviors, events, and interactions as they occur naturally.
They are characterized by several key features, including:
Real-world datasets often contain data of various types and formats,
including numerical, categorical, text, image, audio, and This diversity
can provide a more comprehensive view of the phenomenon under study
but also poses challenges in data handling and analysis.
These datasets are often large, sometimes containing millions or even
billions of data The sheer volume of data can provide more statistical
power for analysis but also requires more computational resources and
efficient data processing techniques.
Messy and Unlike clean and structured datasets used in academic settings,
real-world datasets are often messy and They can contain missing values,
outliers, inconsistencies, and errors that need to be addressed during data
preprocessing.
Temporal and Spatial Real-world datasets often have temporal and spatial
aspects, capturing data across time and space. This can provide valuable
context for analysis but also introduces additional such as temporal
autocorrelation and spatial

Subject to Bias: These datasets can be subject to various forms of bias,
including selection bias, measurement bias, and confounding. These
biases need to be carefully considered and addressed in the data analysis
to ensure valid and reliable
These characteristics present both opportunities and challenges for data
analysis. Understanding these features is crucial for effectively working
with real-world datasets and extracting meaningful and actionable insights
from them.
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC9636688/

Handling Complexities in Real-world Data Sets

When we perform Exploratory Data analysis (EDA) on real-world data
sets, we need to navigate through various complexities and intricacies in
the datasets. We need to do Data Analysis and visualization but before that
data transformation, cleaning and preparation also need to be done to get
rid of the anomalies and dirty portions of the data.
One of the first steps in managing the complications of real-world data is
dealing with missing values. Missing values occur due to data entry errors,
missed information while surveying, or maybe the data was not entered by
and so on. Handling of the missing values depends on the problem we are
trying to solve, for example, if the percentage of missing values is very
low (<5%), we can remove them, although again we need to reverify with
the clients about the kind of analysis they want, in some cases we can
replace missing values with the mean or median (for numeric values) and
replace with mode (for categorical values). There can be cases where data
imputation can be done to fill up the cells with missing values. The
.isnull() function is used to check for missing values.
There can be instances where we need to explore the datatypes of each
variable in the dataset. We can easily find that numerical values are tagged
as string datatypes. We can use the dtypes() function in the pandas library
to find the datatypes of each variable and convert them to the right data
type. We can use functions such as .to_numeric() to convert into numeric
variable and .to_string() into string variable for datatype conversion.

Analyzing distinctive values in your data might help in your
comprehension of the variability within it. For instance, you may
determine how many categories are there in a column that shows
categories of a particular feature by looking up the unique values in that
The nunique() function from the Pandas package can be used in Python to
determine how many unique values are present in each
Lastly, data visualization is an effective method for understanding the
complexity of datasets from the actual world. Finding patterns, trends, and
outliers in your data that might not be immediately obvious in raw,
numerical data might be aided by visualizing Many tools for Python, such
as Matplotlib, and plotly can be used to create a wide range of visually
appealing and educational data visualizations.
In summary, handling the complexities in real-world datasets involves a
combination of data cleaning, understanding data types, exploring unique
values, and visualizing the Python, with its powerful libraries and
functions, provides a comprehensive toolkit for performing these tasks
effectively and efficiently.
https://ecoagi.ai/articles/exploratory-data-analysis-python-pandas

Exploratory Data Analysis and Visualization using Python

In this section, we will look into the EDA and visualization of a World Bank
The data has nominal GDP, GDP per capita, Population, % GDP growth for
the year 2022, and %share of GDP of that country in the world economy. We
will go through the steps of Data Analysis and Visualization. The dataset was
chosen from the World Bank to analyze data that is very fresh and connected
to the
So, we start with the Python codes and proceed step-by-step, accordingly.
import pandas as pd
import numpy as np
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
import seaborn as sns
We install the relevant libraries, and next, we load the Excel file and display
the first five rows of the
# Create a DataFrame
df = pd.read_excel(‘GDP data.xlsx’)
df.head(5)
The first five rows of the data frame are as follows. We can start exploring the
data now.

Figure 8.1: The first five rows of the dataset

The preceding data is not in any order as per the nominal GDP, GDP per
capita, or Population. We will look into further analysis as we dive deeper.
print(df.info())
The main information of the data frame df is as follows:

Figure 8.2: The information of the data frame

The dataset has 177 nations and thankfully, there are no missing values. The
variable GDP and GDP (nominal, 2022) are the same, so we can remove the
GDP variable from the data frame. The datatypes of each variable are also
fine and need not be changed.
df = df.drop([‘GDP’], axis=1)
After deleting the GDP variable, we can check the descriptive statistics of
each of the numeric variables.
print(df.describe())
The .describe() function gives the descriptive statistics of the data frame.

Figure 8.3: The descriptive statistics of the numerical values of the data frame

We can extract some information from Figure for example, in the nominal
GDP column, 75% of the countries have less than 3 trillion US dollars of
nominal GDP and the bottom 25% has less than 135 billion US dollars of
nominal We can also see that 75% of nations contribute to 0.03% share to the
nominal The maximum contribution is made by the US with a staggering This
shows that the majority of the world’s wealth is controlled by a few countries,
and most of the nations are poor. Although, we can completely conclude by
analyzing the GDP per capita of each nation. The GDP per capita is a direct
indicator of a country’s development, which is obvious if there are nations
with very high populations and low GDP per For that, we can look into
bivariate analysis graphs for certain variables like GDP per capita and
population.
sns.pairplot(df)
plt.show()

The preceding code helps create scatter plots between the numeric variables.
We will look into some graphs that we find have a relation between variables,
be it a positive or negative relation.

Figure 8.4: Bivariate analysis between the variables
The 4th graph on the first row in Figure 8.4 is the GDP per capita and
Population If we look closely, then we can see that less populated nations
have very high GDP per capita. GDP per capita is defined as the nominal
GDP divided by the country’s population. So, in this case, each individual has
a lot of money on him/her which is a very good thing as far as the
development of the country is concerned. If we also see there are two outliers
in the plot, that have very low GDP per capita.
If we also see the plot of Share of World GDP and Population (4th plot in the
2nd we can see that the two nations are that is, they have high populations as
well as more than 15% contribution to the World GDP, they are the US and
India is there as an outlier population, but its share of the World GDP cannot
be considered an Probably, in a few years, we can see India as a significant
contributor to the World’s nominal
You, the readers, can do more analysis using various other variables too.

Let’s do the correlation matrix heat map on the variables to get a numeric
value of correlation.
columns_of_interest = [‘GDP (nominal, 2022)’, ‘GDP (growth)’, ‘Population
(2022)’, ‘GDP per capita’, ‘Share of World GDP’]
corr_matrix = df[columns_of_interest].corr()
sns.heatmap(corr_matrix, annot=True)
plt.show()
The df.corr() function is used to create the correlation matrix.

Figure 8.5: Correlation Matrix heat map

From the preceding heat map, there is a maximum correlation coefficient of
0.58 between the share of world GDP and Population and GDP nominal and
The GDP per capita and the Share of World GDP have a coefficient value of
If we observe the negative correlation coefficients, countries with more GDP
growth have less nominal GDP for obvious reasons since larger economic
nations can’t grow as fast as smaller nations There is always a saturation or
plateau point where the larger economic powerhouses reach and slow down
their growth, or even the economies contract, like it’s happening for Japan as
an example.
We can look at the top 10 countries with the highest nominal GDP.

# Top 10 countries by GDP
top_gdp_countries = df.sort_values(by=’GDP (nominal, 2022)’,
ascending=False).head(10)
plt.figure(figsize=(12, 6))
sns.barplot(x=’Country’, y=’GDP (nominal, 2022)’, data=top_gdp_countries,
palette=’viridis’)
plt.title(‘Top 10 Countries by GDP (Nominal) in 2022’)
plt.ylabel(‘GDP (Nominal) in Billion USD’)
plt.xticks(rotation=45, ha=’right’)
plt.show()
The .sort_values() function is used to have the countries in descending order
in terms of nominal GDP. The bar graph is as follows.

Figure 8.6: 10 Nations with the maximum nominal GDP

The preceding bar graph has 10 countries with maximum nominal We can
easily say from this graph that these 10 countries hold the majority of the
world’s This can be proved using a pie chart to show the %share of World
GDP.
Let’s check the 10 countries with the lowest nominal GDP.
# Bottom 10 countries by GDP
top_gdp_countries = df.sort_values(by=’GDP (nominal, 2022)’,
ascending=True).head(10)
plt.figure(figsize=(12, 6))
sns.barplot(x=’Country’, y=’GDP (nominal, 2022)’, data=top_gdp_countries,
palette=’viridis’)
plt.title(‘Top 10 Countries by GDP (Nominal) in 2022’)
plt.ylabel(‘GDP (Nominal) in Billion USD’)
plt.xticks(rotation=45, ha=’right’)
plt.show()
It is the same code, except in the ascending is made to The bar graph is as
follows:

Figure 8.7: 10 Nations with the Minimum Nominal GDP

It’s an interesting concept which we can find here. The nations are all Pacific
island nations and the population is very low this does not mean that all of
them are poor or politically or socially disturbed nations. Since the population
is low, their production is also minimal and they do not trade a lot with larger
Thus, they have the least nominal GDP.
We can perform some statistical data analysis on the dataset. For that, we are
installing statsmodels and the scipy package.
from scipy import stats
from sklearn.linear_model import LinearRegression
from statsmodels.stats.outliers_influence import variance_inflation_factor
# Variable importance
model = LinearRegression()

model.fit(df[[‘Population (2022)’]], df[‘GDP per capita’])
print(‘R-squared:’, model.score(df[[‘Population (2022)’]], df[‘GDP per
capita’]))
Output:
R-squared: 0.0024223163260445046
Here, a linear regression model is being created using the LinearRegression
class from a machine learning library scikit-learn. The model will be used to
predict the dependent variable (‘GDP per capita’) based on the independent
variable (‘Population

The fit() method is called on the model, which takes the independent variable
(‘Population (2022)’) and the dependent variable (‘GDP per capita’) as This
step trains the linear regression model on the provided attempting to find the
best-fit line that minimizes the difference between the predicted and actual
values of GDP per capita based on
The score method is used to calculate the R-squared (coefficient of
determination) of the model. R-squared is a statistical measure that represents
the proportion of variance in the dependent variable (‘GDP per capita’) that is
predictable from the independent variable (‘Population It is between 0 and 1,
where 1 is the perfect fit.
The R-squared value is 0.0024 in this case. A higher R-squared value
generally indicates a better fit of the model to the In the context of linear
regression, it represents the proportion of the variance in the GDP per capita
that is explained by the
We can look into Hypothesis testing with the following demo code.

# Hypothesis testing
alpha = 0.05
# Shapiro-Wilk normality test
shapiro_test = stats.shapiro(df[‘GDP per capita’])
print(‘Shapiro-Wilk normality test:’, shapiro_test)
if shapiro_test[1] > alpha:
print(‘GDP per capita follows normal distribution’)
else:
print(‘GDP per capita does not follow normal distribution’)
Output:
Shapiro-Wilk normality test: ShapiroResult(statistic=0.704981803894043,
pvalue=2.031437959347131e-17)
GDP per capita does not follow normal distribution

The variable alpha is set to This is the significance level for the hypothesis In
hypothesis testing, the significance level (often denoted by alpha) is the
probability of rejecting the null hypothesis, when it is A common choice is
0.05, which means there is a 5% chance of rejecting the null hypothesis when
it is true.
The Shapiro-Wilk test for normality is being performed on the ‘GDP per
capita’ column of the DataFrame This test checks whether a given sample
follows a normal The result of the test is stored in the variable
The result of the Shapiro-Wilk test is printed to the console. It typically
consists of a test statistic and a In this case, the output is just the tuple which
includes these values.
The code then checks if the p-value obtained from the Shapiro-Wilk test is
greater than the significance level If the p-value is greater than the code prints
‘GDP per capita follows the normal distribution,’ indicating that there is not

enough evidence to reject the null hypothesis that the data follows a normal If
the p-value is less than or equal to the code prints ‘GDP per capita does not
follow the normal distribution,’ suggesting that there is evidence to reject the
null
The p-value < alpha which signifies that GDP per capita does not follow the
normal distribution.
We can check the t-test too using the following code.
# t-test for the difference in means
t_test = stats.ttest_ind(df[‘GDP per capita’][df[‘Country’] == ‘USA’],
df[‘GDP per capita’][df[‘Country’] == ‘India’])
print(‘t-test:’, t_test)
if t_test[1] > alpha:
print(‘No significant difference in means’)
else:
print(‘Significant difference in means’)
Output:
t-test: TtestResult(statistic=nan, pvalue=nan, df=nan)
Significant difference in means
The code is performing a t-test for the difference in means between the ‘GDP
per capita’ values for the countries ‘USA’ and ‘India’. The ttest_ind function
from the scipy.stats module is used for an independent two-sample t-test.
The result of the t-test is stored in the variable which is a tuple containing the
test statistic and the

The code then checks if the p-value obtained from the t-test is greater than the
significance level If the p-value is greater than alpha, the code prints ‘No
significant difference in means,’ suggesting that there is not enough evidence
to reject the null hypothesis, indicating no difference in means between the
two If the p-value is less than or equal to the code prints ‘Significant
difference in means,’ suggesting that there is evidence to reject the null
indicating a significant difference in means between the two groups.
In this case, there is a significant difference in means.
Then we look into the Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) code here.
# ANOVA test for checking if country affects GDP per capita
anova_test = stats.f_oneway(df[‘GDP per capita’][df[‘Country’] == ‘USA’],
df[‘GDP per capita’][df[‘Country’] == ‘China’], df[‘GDP per capita’]
[df[‘Country’] == ‘India’])
print(‘ANOVA test:’, anova_test)
if anova_test[1] > alpha:
print(‘Country does not affect GDP per capita’)
else:
print(‘Country affects GDP per capita’)
Output:
ANOVA test: F_onewayResult(statistic=nan, pvalue=nan)
Country affects GDP per capita
The code is performing an Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) test to assess if the
country has a significant effect on the ‘GDP per capita’ The f_oneway
function from the scipy.stats module is used for this In this case, the ‘GDP per

capita’ values for three countries (‘USA’, ‘China’, and ‘India’) are passed as
separate groups to the
The result of the ANOVA test is stored in the variable which is a tuple
containing the test statistic and the
The code then checks if the p-value obtained from the ANOVA test is greater
than the significance level If the p-value is greater than alpha, the code prints
‘Country does not affect GDP per capita,’ suggesting that there is not enough
evidence to reject the null hypothesis, indicating no significant difference in
means between the If the p-value is less than or equal to the code prints
‘Country affects GDP per capita,’ suggesting that there is evidence to reject
the null indicating a significant difference in means between at least two of
the
In summary, this code snippet is performing an ANOVA test to assess whether
the country has a significant effect on the ‘GDP per capita values for the
countries ‘USA’, ‘China’, and ‘India’ and prints the result based on a
significance level of 0.05.

Introduction to Julius

is an AI tool dedicated to data analysis. It can help us generate plots,
graphs, charts, pivot tables, and so It can also clean and prepare the data
for usage. To summarize, it helps with data cleaning, data preprocessing,
data visualization, and many more without the need to write any We can
just upload the Excel or CSV or any data file and ask questions on the file,
and voila we get the results.

Overview of Julius as an AI Tool

Julius turns hours of Excel work into minutes. The features of Julius are data
visualizations, data cleaning and preprocessing, creating animations, complex
statistical and of course asking questions like we use prompts in ChatGPT,
Bard, or
A demo of the website is presented in Figure

Figure 8.8: A demo of Julius on how a user gives a prompt and gets a result

We can see from the preceding screenshot that the user asks to create a
logistic regression model and then create a classification Of course, as
always, the more detailed and specific the prompt, the better the result we So,
the user instructs Julius to split the data into training and test data and get the
report. We see that the classification report is generated accurately as
instructed. And, we do not need to code at all, but we need to know how
things work in the background so that we can give better-quality prompts for
accurate
There are these use cases for Energy data analysis over time and for
generating patient insights. These are very good use cases if one chooses to
use the tool and focus on analyzing the data for a particular domain like
healthcare, energy, finance, retail, marketing, HR, and so on.
https://julius.ai/use_cases/energy
https://julius.ai/use_cases#/patients

Exploratory Data Analysis and Visualization using Julius

So, we have an idea of what Julius is and what it does. It’s time to get our
hands dirty and work on the same data, and spit out some results. Let’s start
by asking Julius some basic facts about the GDP data and let’s see what it
gives
Julius was asked about the descriptive statistics of the data, and this is what
we get.

Figure 8.9: Descriptive Statistics of the data by Julius

The code was written by Julius, and it is the same what we wrote earlier. It
saves us a lot of man-hours. Let’s see what the summarization Julius wrote
for us.
The descriptive statistics for the dataset have been calculated. Here’s a
summary of the findings:
The ‘#’ column has values ranging from 1 to with a mean of indicating it’s
likely an index or ranking.

There are 177 unique countries
The ‘GDP (nominal, 2022) column shows a wide range in GDP values, with a
mean of approximately 558.9 billion and a maximum of 25.46 suggesting
significant variation in country economies.
The ‘GDP (growth)’ column has values between −29.1% and 57.8%, with a
mean growth of
Population figures also vary widely, with a mean of approximately 43.7
million and a significant standard deviation, indicating a diverse set of
countries in terms of population size.
The distributions of GDP (nominal, 2022), Population (2022), and GDP per
capita have been visualized:

Figure 8.10: Distributions of GDP (nominal, 2022), Population (2022), and
GDP per capita
The GDP (nominal, 2022) distribution shows a right-skewed indicating that a
few countries have a very high GDP while the majority have a lower

The Population (2022) distribution is also suggesting that most countries have
a smaller population, with a few countries having a very large
The GDP per capita distribution appears to be right-skewed as with most
countries having a lower GDP per capita and fewer countries with a high
GDP per capita.
The results we got can’t be any better. The tool has explained everything in
detail, and we need not ask anything. It is indeed a gem when it comes to data
analysis and visualization.

We will see the code and pie chart created by Julius to show the %share of
GDP by the top 10 nations with the maximum nominal
# Sorting the dataframe by GDP (nominal, 2022) to get the top 10 countries
top_countries = df.sort_values(by=’GDP (nominal, 2022)’,
ascending=False).head(10)
# Plotting the pie chart for the % share of World GDP of the top 10 countries
plt.figure(figsize=(10, 10))
plt.pie(top_countries[‘Share of World GDP’],
labels=top_countries[‘Country’], autopct=’%1.1f%%’, startangle=140)
plt.title(‘Top 10 Countries by % Share of World GDP’)
plt.axis(‘equal’) # Equal aspect ratio ensures that pie is drawn as a circle.
plt.show()
The .sort_values() method is used from pandas to have the countries’ nominal
GDP in descending Then the plotting is straightforward to create the pie
chart.

Figure 8.11: Distribution by %share of world GDP
Approximately 99% of the world’s GDP is acquired by these 10 There is a
stark imbalance in wealth distribution and the poorer countries are still
Next, we see the GDP per capita of the top 10 countries.

Figure 8.12: Distribution by GDP per capita
From the preceding pie chart, we can see that most of the countries are
European and they have a very high standard of living which is reflected by
the amount of money each citizen possesses (GDP per Qatar is an oil-rich
nation, and Singapore and the US are developed

Figure 8.13: Distribution of countries by maximum GDP growth
From the preceding pie chart, we can see that all the nations are smaller in
that is, less population that’s why we can see high GDP This visualization
helps to quickly identify which countries are experiencing the most rapid
economic expansion relative to their peers.

Figure 8.14: Distribution of countries by least GDP growth
We can see some countries from Africa like Morocco, Sudan, and the Central
African Republic that have the minimum GDP But it is surprising to see
Japan on the list and its economy is contracting every year or getting

Data Analysis Using No-code or Low-code Tools

In the realm of data analysis, the emergence of no-code and low-code
tools has revolutionized the way businesses operate and make decisions.
These tools have democratized data analysis, making it accessible not only
to data scientists and IT professionals but also to individuals across
various departments.
No-code tools are platforms that allow users to develop applications or
perform complex tasks without writing a single line of They typically use
a graphical user interface, such as drag-and-drop builders, to enable nontechnical users to create applications or analyze data.
Low-code tools, on the other hand, require some coding but significantly
less than traditional development They provide pre-built components and
a visual interface for application development, reducing the amount of
hand-coding required and accelerating the development process.
There are tools such as Gigasheet, Mito, PivotTableJS, Drawdata,
PyGWalker, Visual Python, TF Playground, and ydata-Profiling that are
no-code tools. These tools are very useful for data science-based projects
and improve efficiency and productivity. We will look into these tools
with some characteristics of each tool and some demos.

Gigasheet

Gigasheet is a browser-based no-code tool used to analyze data. It can
take up to 1 billion+ rows and uses AI to do data It is a combination of
Excel and Pandas with a lot of room for data consumption. It can also be
used to do group, plot, merge, sort, and descriptive
It also imports data from AWS S3, Drive, databases, and more.
Gigasheet also provides an API that helps in automating repetitive tasks
and scheduling imports and

Mito

Mito is an open-source tool that analyzes the data within a spreadsheet
interface in Jupyter Notebook without writing any code. It helps in code
generation.
The installation process is as follows:
!python -m pip install mitosheet
The activation process is as follows; we write these two commands in
Jupyter.
!python -m jupyter nbextension install --py --user mitosheet
!python -m jupyter nbextension enable --py --user mitosheet
The format of the data looks like this. We have to install mitosheet and

Figure 8.15: Mitosheet data representation
We can also give prompts by clicking the AI option to obtain The screenshot
of the representation is as follows.

Figure 8.16: Mitosheet data representation with AI support option
This is the automatic code generated by Mito.

from mitosheet.public.v3 import *; # Analysis Name:id-xrfnfteibq;
import pandas as pd
# Imported Sheet2 from GDP data.xlsx
sheet_df_dictonary = pd.read_excel(r’GDP data.xlsx’, engine=’openpyxl’,
sheet_name=[‘Sheet2’], skiprows=0)
Sheet2 = sheet_df_dictonary[‘Sheet2’]

PivotTableJS

PivotTableJS creates Pivot Tables, aggregations, and charts for Jupyter
Notebooks. The representation is as follows.

Figure 8.17: PivotTable JS representation of the data
In the preceding screenshot, we have created a Pivot Table using the
PivotTable JS tool. It is a very handy tool when it comes to generating pivots
and aggregations.

Drawdata

Drawdata is a tool that draws datasets in Jupyter. We need to install the
drawdata package.
!python -m pip install drawdata
The code for drawing the data is as follows.
from drawdata import draw_scatter
draw_scatter()
The draw_scatter() function is used to create the data and then we can
download it from Jupyter.

Figure 8.18: Data generation using Draw Data
The pen was randomly used to draw lines and then download the .json It is in
the dictionary (key, value pair) format. It looks nice to see and is a good tool
to generate data.

PyGWalker

PyGWalker is an open-source tool that can transform pandas data frame into a
tableau-style interface for data exploration. The code we use is as follows.
!pip install pygwalker
import pygwalker as pyg
walker = pyg.walk(df)
We need to install the pygwalker library and then import the pygwalker The
.walk() method is used to create the Tableau interface.

Figure 8.19: The Tableau interface created by PyGWalker
The preceding screenshot shows that the created interface looks exactly like
Tableau. The nominal GDP for each nation is shown in descending

It is an excellent tool when we want to experiment with various kinds of
visualization on Jupyter, and it just uses a few lines of code to create the
interface.

Visual Python

Visual Python is a GUI-based Python code generator for data science, an
extension to Jupyter Lab, Jupyter Notebook, and Google Colab.
https://visualpython.ai/visualpython-desktop
There are also a few more tools, such as pandas-profiling, d-tale, sweetviz,
and autoviz, that were explained and demonstrated in detail, in the first
few chapters. We can also try those tools.
https://opendatascience.com/top-low-code-and-no-code-platforms-fordata-science-in-2023/
https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/rise-no-codelow-code-data-analysis-toolsinsights-every-shivam-bansal/
https://www.blog.dailydoseofds.com/p/8-immensely-powerful-no-codetools
https://www.blog.dailydoseofds.com/p/gigasheet-effortlessly-analyse-upto
https://www.blog.dailydoseofds.com/p/mito-just-got-supercharged-with-ai
https://www.blog.dailydoseofds.com/p/a-no-code-tool-to-create-chartsand

https://www.blog.dailydoseofds.com/p/drawdata-the-coolest-tool-to-create
https://www.blog.dailydoseofds.com/p/the-pandas-dataframe-extensionevery
https://www.blog.dailydoseofds.com/p/this-gui-tool-can-possibly-saveyou

Conclusion

Utilizing Python to analyze real-world data sets allows us to gain valuable
insights and make data-driven Python, being a versatile and widely-used
language, offers various libraries and tools that can streamline and
simplify the process of data
Throughout the chapter, we learned how to use libraries like pandas for
data manipulation and seaborn for data We saw how these tools can be
used in conjunction with Python to load, clean, preprocess, and visualize
data, making it easier to understand and interpret.
We have worked on a real-world dataset on the GDP of nations and came
up with a lot of data-driven We also performed statistical data analysis
along with Exploratory Data
Moreover, we also tried our hands on AI, no-code, and low-code tools,
such as Julius, PyGWalker, Visual Python, PivotTable JS, Draw Data,
Mito, and so on. These are very efficient and productive to work with and
save a lot of human hours per In the next and final chapter, we will look
into the appendix which will contain various Python functions and
packages that are essential for Python programming and data

APPENDIX
A Python Cheat Sheet

Introduction

This is the last chapter of this book, and here, we will see the functions
that are used in Python, be it from a data analytics perspective or a simple
programming perspective. It will be a comprehensive cheat sheet that will
have a condensed overview of Python’s syntax, keywords, data types,
built-in functions, and other relevant things.
Python is a very flexible programming language, has a large community
of contributors, its simplicity and readability, and its applications from
web development to artificial intelligence. The cheat sheet in this chapter
will be very handy for your Python usage, whether you are a fresher or a
professional in the industry who needs a brush up on the concepts.
The cheat sheet will have the functions on Python programming basics,
the various data types, the control structures, functions, classes, and more
concepts. There are also techniques like Python file handling and
exceptions, and deep dive into the libraries and tools needed to build Data
Science products and Artificial Intelligence applications.
Remember, while this cheat sheet provides a solid foundation, the best
way to learn Python is by building projects, practicing interview
questions, and open-source contributions. Use this guide as a starting
point; don’t be afraid to experiment, make mistakes, and learn from them.
Happy coding!

Structure

In this chapter, we will discuss the following topics:
Python Basics
Python syntax and keywords
Python data types
Creating, naming, and using variables
Arithmetic, comparison, logical, and assignment operators
Creating single and multi-line comments
Control Structures
Conditional statements
Loops and control statements like break, continue, and pass
Data Structures
Lists

Tuples
Dictionaries
Sets
Functions
Defining functions
The anonymous lambda function
Built-in functions
Object Oriented Programming System (OOPS)
Defining classes, creating objects, instance variables, and methods
Exceptions

Defining exceptions, handling exceptions using try, except, finally

Python Basics

Python basics include the basic Python syntax and keywords, the
datatypes present like Boolean, numeric, and string, creating naming, and
using the variables, the operators of arithmetic, logical, comparison, and
assignment, and creating single and multi-line comments. These concepts
are used daily by any Python programmer. These form the foundations of
Python programming.
The Python built-in keywords are as follows:
False, Class, finally, is, return, None, continue, for, lambda, try, True, def,
from, nonlocal, while, and, del, global, not, with, as, elif, if, or, yield,
assert, else, import, pass, break, except, in, raise
For the various Python data types, there are numeric, complex, boolean,
and object
x = 10 # int
y = 20.5 # float
z = 1j # complex
s = “hello” # str
b = True # bool
Python variables are created when a value is assigned to them. It is
straightforward, but some rules need to be followed while creating a
variable. Variable names in Python can be any length and can consist of

uppercase and lowercase letters (A-Z, a-z), digits (0-9), and the
underscore character However, they cannot start with a digit.
x=5
y = “John”
print(x)
print(y)
For Arithmetic there are +,-,*,/,%,**, and //.
For Logical Operators, there are and not
For Comparison there are ==, !=, >, <, >=, and <= symbols.
For Assignment Operators, there are =,+=, -=, *=,/=,%=,//=, **=,&=, |=,
^=, >>=, and <<=
x = 5 (Assignment Operator)
x+=5 (Addition Assignment) #Equivalent to x =x+5
x-=5 (Subtraction Assignment) #Equivalent to x =x-5
x*=5 (Multiplication Assignment) #Equivalent to x =x*5
x/=5 (Division Assignment) #Equivalent to x =x/5
x//=5 (Floor Division assignment) # Equivalent to x =x //5
x%=5 (Modulus Assignment) #Equivalent to x =x%5 (Gives the
remainder of the division)
x**=5 (Exponentiation Assignment) #Equivalent to x = x**5
#(Raises the variable to the power of the value on the right)

We can use the # symbol for single-line comments, and ‘’ or “” for multiline comments.
# This is a single-line comment
‘’’
This is a
multi-line comment
‘’’
“””
This is also a
multi-line comment
“””

Control Structures

Python control structures have conditional statements like and else
statements to satisfy certain conditions. The Flow structure is as follows:
x = 10
if x > 5:
print(“x is greater than 5”)
If we check the elif statement, then:
x = 10
if x > 10:
print(“x is greater than 10”)
elif x == 10:
print(“x is equal to 10”)
‘’’
Either the 1st condition is fulfilled using the if statement or the next
condition is fulfilled using the elif statement. If none of the conditions are
met, nothing will be printed. If we want to print in case none of the
conditions are met then we can also add an else statement as follows:
x = 10
if x > 10:
print(“x is greater than 10”)
elif x == 10:

print(“x is equal to 10”)
else:
print(“X is less than 10”)
There are only the if condition and the else either one will be fulfilled and
there is no need for the elif statement in this case.

Two loops are used in Python: while and for loops.

While loop

i=1
while i <= 10:
print(i)
i += 1
The while loop iterates over a block and adds till the number reaches If
i+=1 is not used, then the loop goes into an infinite loop and the loop will
keep going.

For loop

for i in range(1, 11):
print(i)
The for loop in Python iterates over a sequence (be it a list, tuple, or
string). The range function in this case gives 1 to 10 as the output,
excluding 11.

Control Statements

There are statements like and pass statements that are used to leave the
loop or continue with the next iteration.
# Using break in a while loop
counter = 0
while True:
print(f”Current counter value: {counter}”)
# Break the loop when counter reaches 3
if counter == 3:
print(“Breaking out of the loop.”)
break
# Increment the counter
counter += 1
# Output:
# Current counter value: 0
# Current counter value: 1
# Current counter value: 2
# Current counter value: 3
# Breaking out of the loop.
In the code, the while True creates an infinite loop. The break statement
exits the loop when the counter variable reaches 3.

The continue keyword in Python is used in for and while loops to skip the
rest of the code inside the loop for the current iteration and move to the
next iteration.
# Example: Skip odd numbers in a loop
for i in range(1, 11):
# Skip even numbers
if i % 2 != 0:
continue
# This part of the code will be skipped for odd numbers
print(f”Even number: {i}”)
print(“Loop finished”)
The for loop iterates from 1 to 10. Then an if statement is used to check
for odd numbers, and the continue keyword is found. The code inside the
loop for the current iteration is skipped and moved to the next iteration.
Then only even numbers are printed, and the Loop finished statement is
The continue statement helps control the flow of the loop by skipping
specific iterations based on a condition.
The pass keyword is placed as a block of code when we are not executing
any operation.
def process_data(data):

# Check if the data is valid
if data is None:
# If data is None, do nothing for now
pass
else:
# Process the data
print(f”Processing data: {data}”)
# Example usage
process_data(None)
process_data(“Hello, World!”)
In the example, the process_data() function checks if the provided data is
The pass statement is used to show that no action needs to be taken.

Data Structures

Data Structures in Python are primarily lists, dictionaries, sets, tuples, and
There are methods for each data structure which we will list down. They
are all built-in and offer various functionalities while applying.

List

Lists are a collection of heterogeneous elements (like integer, float,
boolean, string data type) inside square brackets separated by commas.
numbers = [1, 2, 3, 4, 10]
names = [‘Jenny’, ‘Sam’, ‘Alexis’]
mixed = [‘Jenny’, 1, 2]
list_of_lists = [[‘a’, 1], [‘b’, 2]]
The list_of_lists variable is also called a nested list (a list within a list).
There are several methods for lists mentioned as follows with examples
and explanations.
Adds an element x to the end of the list
my_list = [1, 2, 3]
my_list.append(4)
print(my_list)
# Output: [1, 2, 3, 4]
Extends the list by appending elements from the iterable.
my_list = [1, 2, 3]
my_list.extend([4, 5, 6])

print(my_list)
# Output: [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6]
insert(i, Inserts element x at the specified index i in the list
my_list = [1, 2, 3]
my_list.insert(1, 4)
print(my_list)
# Output: [1, 4, 2, 3]
Removes the first occurrence of element x from the list
my_list = [1, 2, 3, 2]
my_list.remove(2)
print(my_list)
# Output: [1, 3, 2]
Removes and returns the element at index If i is not provided, it removes
the last element and returns.
my_list = [1, 2, 3]
popped_element = my_list.pop(1)
print(popped_element)
# Output: 2
Returns the index of the first occurrence of element
my_list = [1, 2, 3, 2]

index_of_2 = my_list.index(2)
print(index_of_2)
# Output: 1
Returns the number of occurrences of element x in the list.
my_list = [1, 2, 3, 2]
count_of_2 = my_list.count(2)
print(count_of_2)
# Output: 2
Sorts the list elements in the ascending order.
my_list = [3, 1, 4, 1, 5, 9, 2]
my_list.sort()
print(my_list)
# Output: [1, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 9]
Reverses the elements of the list.
my_list = [1, 2, 3]
my_list.reverse()
print(my_list)
# Output: [3, 2, 1]

Tuple

Tuples are immutable data meaning we can’t modify a tuple’s elements
after it is created.
Returns the number of occurrences of an element x present in the tuple.
my_tuple = (1, 2, 3, 2, 4, 2, 5)
count_of_2 = my_tuple.count(2)
print(count_of_2)
# Output: 3
Returns the index of the first occurrence of the specified valued x in the
tuple. One can also provide the start and end parameters to specify the
search range.
my_tuple = (10, 20, 30, 20, 40, 20, 50)
index_of_20 = my_tuple.index(20)
print(index_of_20)
# Output: 1
# Specifying start and end parameters
my_tuple = (10, 20, 30, 20, 40, 20, 50)
index_of_20_after_index_2 = my_tuple.index(20, 2)
print(index_of_20_after_index_2)

# Output: 3

Dictionaries

Dictionaries are data structures that are in the form of key-value pairs. The
keys are indexed normally and are unique. Dictionaries are represented by
“{}” and consist of key-value pairs separated by colons.
Here are some of the methods that dictionaries can use.
It removes all items from a dictionary.
my_dict = {‘a’: 1, ‘b’: 2, ‘c’: 3}
my_dict.clear()
print(my_dict)
# Output: {}
Returns a shallow copy of the dictionary.
original_dict = {‘a’: 1, ‘b’: 2, ‘c’: 3}
copied_dict = original_dict.copy()
print(copied_dict)
# Output: {‘a’: 1, ‘b’: 2, ‘c’: 3}
Returns the value for the specified key. If the key is not found, it returns
the default value or None if not provided.

my_dict = {‘a’: 1, ‘b’: 2, ‘c’: 3}
value_of_b = my_dict.get(‘b’)
print(value_of_b)
# Output: 2
value_of_d = my_dict.get(‘d’, ‘Key not found’)
print(value_of_d)
# Output: ‘Key not found’
Returns the contents of the dictionary in the form of tuples.
my_dict = {‘a’: 1, ‘b’: 2, ‘c’: 3}
dict_items = my_dict.items()
print(dict_items)
# Output: dict_items([(‘a’, 1), (‘b’, 2), (‘c’, 3)])
Gives the dictionary’s keys.
my_dict = {‘a’: 1, ‘b’: 2, ‘c’: 3}
dict_keys = my_dict.keys()
print(dict_keys)
# Output: dict_keys([‘a’, ‘b’, ‘c’])
Gives the dictionary’s values

my_dict = {‘a’: 1, ‘b’: 2, ‘c’: 3}
dict_values = my_dict.values()
print(dict_values)
# Output: dict_values([1, 2, 3])
Removes the elements with the specific key and returns the value of it. If
the key is not found, it raises a KeyError or returns the default value if
provided.
my_dict = {‘a’: 1, ‘b’: 2, ‘c’: 3}
popped_value = my_dict.pop(‘b’)
print(popped_value)
# Output: 2
# Using default value
my_dict = {‘a’: 1, ‘b’: 2, ‘c’: 3}
popped_value = my_dict.pop(‘d’, ‘Key not found’)
print(popped_value)
# Output: ‘Key not found’
Removes and returns the last inserted key-value pair as a tuple.
my_dict = {‘a’: 1, ‘b’: 2, ‘c’: 3}
popped_item = my_dict.popitem()
print(popped_item)

# Output: (‘c’, 3)
Updates the dictionary with key-value pairs from another dictionary or an
iterable of key-value pairs.
my_dict = {‘a’: 1, ‘b’: 2, ‘c’: 3}
new_dict = {‘b’: 4, ‘d’: 5}
my_dict.update(new_dict)
print(my_dict)
# Output: {‘a’: 1, ‘b’: 4, ‘c’: 3, ‘d’: 5}
Returns the value for the specific key. If the key is not found, it inserts the
key with the default value or None if not provided.
my_dict = {‘a’: 1, ‘b’: 2, ‘c’: 3}
value_of_d = my_dict.setdefault(‘d’, 0)
print(value_of_d)
# Output: 0

Sets

Sets are an unordered collection of data types that can be iterated and
mutated and contain no duplicate elements.
S = {1,2,3} #this is a set
Some methods used in sets are as follows.
Adds the specified element to the set.
my_set = {1, 2, 3}
my_set.add(4)
print(my_set)
# Output: {1, 2, 3, 4}
Adds elements from an iterable (for example, list, set) to the set.
my_set = {1, 2, 3}
my_set.update([3, 4, 5])
print(my_set)
# Output: {1, 2, 3, 4, 5}

Removes the specified element from the set. Raises a KeyError if the
element is not present.
my_set = {1, 2, 3, 4, 5}
my_set.remove(3)
print(my_set)
# Output: {1, 2, 4, 5}
Removes the specified element from the set if it is present. Does not raise
an error if the element is not found.
my_set = {1, 2, 3, 4, 5}
my_set.discard(3)
print(my_set)

# Output: {1, 2, 4, 5}
Removes and returns an arbitrary element from the set. Raises a KeyError
if the set is empty.
my_set = {1, 2, 3, 4, 5}
popped_element = my_set.pop()
print(popped_element)
print(my_set)
# Output: (an arbitrary element)
# Output: the set without the popped element

Removes all the elements from the set.
my_set = {1, 2, 3, 4, 5}
my_set.clear()
print(my_set)
# Output: set()
set) Returns a new set containing all the (unique) elements from both sets.
set1 = {1, 2, 3}
set2 = {3, 4, 5}
union_set = set1.union(set2)
# Alternatively: union_set = set1 | set2
print(union_set)
# Output: {1, 2, 3, 4, 5}
set) Returns a new set containing common elements of both sets.
set1 = {1, 2, 3, 4}
set2 = {3, 4, 5, 6}
intersection_set = set1.intersection(set2)
# Alternatively: intersection_set = set1 & set2

print(intersection_set)
# Output: {3, 4}

Functions

A function in Python is created using the def keyword, followed by the
function and then having a set of parentheses containing the Its main
purpose is to break a problem into smaller pieces and reuse the code later.

Defining functions

Here is a basic example to understand how functions in Python work.
def add_numbers(num1, num2):
sum = num1 + num2
return sum
The function name is add_numbers and has the parameters num1 and
num2 to add them. The purpose is to add both numbers. The sum variable
is returned at the end.
We can call the function by:
print(add_numbers(3, 5))
# Output: 8
We need to use the function add_numbers and pass to numbers like 3 and
5 in this case. The result is the addition of both numbers.

Lambda Anonymous Function

The lambda function is used to create an anonymous short-lived function.
It is created using the lambda keyword, followed by parameters and It is
used in situations when creating a function using the def keyword will be
redundant.
# Regular function definition
def add(x, y):
return x + y
# Equivalent lambda function
lambda_add = lambda x, y: x + y
# Using both functions
result1 = add(3, 5)
result2 = lambda_add(3, 5)
print(“Result from regular function:”, result1)
print(“Result from lambda function:”, result2)
In the preceding code snippet, add is a normal function and lambda_add is
the equivalent lambda function.
Lambda functions are also used with functions like or

# List of tuples representing names and ages
people = [(“Akshay”, 25), (“Ravi”, 15), (“Rahul”, 35)]
# Sort the list of tuples based on the second element (age)
sorted_people = sorted(people, key=lambda person: person[1])
print(“Sorted People:”, sorted_people)
In the preceding code, the lambda function is used as a key argument for
the sorted() function.
The lambda function extracts the second element (index 1) of each tuple,
that is, the age.
The result of the code is as follows.

Sorted People: [(‘Ravi’, 15), (‘Akshay’, 25), (‘Rahul’, 35)]
The sorted list of tuples has the elements in the ascending order of their
ages.

Built-in functions

Built-in functions are the ones that are already provided in the Python
compiler when we install it. Python has a lot of built-in functions as
follows:
Prints the specified message to the screen.
Returns the length of an object.
Returns the type of an object.
Convert object types.
Generates a sequence of numbers.
Convert to list, tuple, dictionary, set.
Allows user input.
There are also a lot of other built-in functions that help perform operations
to solve problems.

Object Oriented Programming System

Object Oriented Programming System (OOPS) is a programming system
that uses objects, classes, and methods to create and organize In Python,
everything is an object.

Defining classes, creating objects, instance variables, and methods

Classes in Python are the main tree for creating objects. An object is an
instance of a class. A class defines attributes and behaviors common to all
objects of that type.
We will see a reference code to understand the concepts one by one.
# Defining a class in Python
class Vehicle:
# This is the constructor
def __init__(self, name, color):
self.name = name # Instance variable
self.color = color # Instance variable
# This is an instance method
def get_info(self):
return f”Vehicle [Name: {self.name}, Color: {self.color}]”
# Inheritance in Python
class Car(Vehicle):
def __init__(self, name, color, company):
# Calling the constructor of the parent class
super().__init__(name, color)
self.company = company # Additional instance variable
# Overriding the get_info method

def get_info(self):
return f”Car [Name: {self.name}, Color: {self.color}, Company:
{self.company}]”
# Creating an object (instance of a class)
vehicle = Vehicle(“Vehicle1”, “Red”)
print(vehicle.get_info()) # Output: Vehicle [Name: Vehicle1, Color: Red]
# Creating an object of the derived class
car = Car(“Car1”, “Blue”, “Company1”)
print(car.get_info()) # Output: Car [Name: Car1, Color: Blue, Company:
Company1]
In the preceding Python program:
Vehicle is a class that has two instance variables: name and color and one
instance method:
Car is a class that inherits from the Vehicle class. It adds an instance
variable: company and overrides the get_info method.
An instance (or object) of a class is created by calling the class (like a
function call) and passing any required arguments to the method.
Instance methods are functions that are part of the and they can access the
instance variables of the
Inheritance is a mechanism where a new class is derived from an existing
The derived class (child class) inherits the properties and methods of the
base class (parent class).

Polymorphism in Python is demonstrated by overriding methods in the
derived The derived class can provide its implementation of methods that
are already provided by the base

Exceptions

Exceptions in Python are the situations that can modify the control flow
through the program. They get initiated on errors and they show up in the
code. They are handled by the four keywords and the assert statement, and
the Python interpreter.

Defining exceptions, handling exceptions using try, except, and finally

The try block lets test the block of code for errors, the except block
handles the error, and the finally block executes the code, regardless of the
result of the try and except blocks.
Here is an example code.
try:
print(1 / 0)
except ZeroDivisionError:
print(‘You cannot divide by zero!’)
finally:
print(‘This line of code will always be executed.’)
We are operating division by and we give the ZeroDivisionError under the
except block.
We can raise exceptions using the raise keyword. It’s often used with an
exception type or exception instance as an argument.
raise ValueError(‘A value error happened.’)
We can catch multiple exceptions by providing a tuple of exception types
in the except clause.
try:

# code that may raise an exception
except (TypeError, ValueError) as e:
print(f’Caught an exception: {e}’)
Python has several built-in exceptions, such as and so on. Every error has
its scenario of occurrence.

Conclusion

This marks the end of the cheat sheet on Python, where we have covered
the Python basics to various operators to control structures to loops to data
types to data structures and their functions to how to define functions, the
lambda function, the OOPS (Object Oriented Programming Systems) and
Exceptions. We had already covered a lot of functions on pandas, numpy,
matplotlib, seaborn, and so on, to show data analysis, data cleaning, data
visualization, and statistical analysis in the previous chapters.
In the previous chapters, we also covered Web scraping using and Pandas
to scrap data from various websites. We also included Time Series
Analysis and the relevant packages involved, along with some automated
tools. We also covered some no-code and low-code tools like Julius, dtale, pandas-profiling, sweetviz, and so on.
I hope I have done a fine job in writing the book, and even more, I hope
my readers will be very satisfied and grow in their careers after reading
this book. I am always open to suggestions and positive criticism so that I
can learn and contribute more.

References

https://static.realpython.com/python-cheat-sheet.pdf
https://ehmatthes.github.io/pcc_3e/cheat_sheets/
https://www.codewithharry.com/notes/
https://www.datacamp.com/cheat-sheet/getting-started-with-python-cheatsheet
https://ehmatthes.github.io/pcc_3e/
https://hackr.io/blog/python-cheat-sheet
https://www.pythoncheatsheet.org/cheatsheet/exception-handling
https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/python-exception-handling/
https://realpython.com/python-exceptions/
https://www.coursera.org/tutorials/python-exception-cheat-sheet
https://realpython.com/python3-object-oriented-programming/

https://www.learnbyexample.org/python-classes-and-objects/

Index

Symbols
.groupby() method 18
.isnull() 197
.isnull() function 48
.pie() method 19
.sort_values() method 18
A
Anaconda
about 8
environment, using 8
installing steps 8
ARIMA (Autoregressive Integrated Moving Average)
ASR (Automatic Speech Recognition)
about 188
Python code, implementing
ASR, techniques
Acoustic, modeling 188
deep, learning 189
End-to-End models 189
feature, extraction 188
language, modeling 188
audio data
about 176
Python Libraries, manipulating

audio data, concepts
Amplitude, Bit depth 176
rate, sampling 176
spectrogram 177
Waveform 177
audio signal
about 183
processing techniques 184
Python, implementing
audio signal, areas
audio effects 184
audio synthesis 184
data storage, compressing 184
music information retrieval 184
noise cancellation 184
speech, processing 184
audio signal, MFCCs method
Discrete Cosine Transfrom, applying 185
Fourier Transform, applying 185
logarithm, taking 185
Mel filterbank, applying 185
signal, framing 185
Augmented Dickey-Fuller (ADF) 129
auto time series libraries
B
band-pass filter 185
beautiful soup 21
Beautiful Soup 29

BeautifulSoup
C
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) 164
correlation matrix 83
D
data acquire, ways
APIs, using 23
data surveys, collecting 22
websites, scraping 23
Data Analysis
about 2
decision-making applications 4
decision-making, role 3
functions, libraries exploring 9
importance 3
strategies, challenges 3
tools, techniques 5
Data Analysis, exploration methods
Correlation analysis
Data Distribution Analysis 77
Descriptive Statistic
Dimensionality reduction
Spearman Correlation 83
Data Analysis, key steps
data collection 4
data, exploring 4

data, modeling 4
data preparation, cleaning 4
data, visualizing 5
Data Distribution Analysis
about 77
ECDF (Empirical Cumulative Distribution Function) 78
Histogram 77
KDE (Kernel Density Estimate) 77
quantile quatile plot 79
data errors, fixing 47
data errors, techniques
Data Validation 47
inconsistencies, outliers handling 52
missing values, handling
Data Integration
about 64
concat function, using
join() function, using 68
merge operation, using 67
Data preparation
about 46
data, ensuring 69
importance 46
Data preparation, libraries
ftfy 69
Polars 69
Pyjanitor 68
Data preparation, techniques
data comparability 70
data consistency 70
data quality

about 22
dedicate libraries, accessing
Data Transformation
about 56
Normalization 60
Standardization 59
variables, creating
Data Transformation, features
Log transform
square root transform 63
Data Visualization 5
Data Visualization, principles
accuracy 6
clarity 6
consistency 6
contextualization 7
interactivity 6
relevance 6
simplicity 6
Data Visualization, reasons
complexity simplifies 6
data communication, improving 6
decision-making, enhancing 6
facilitates data, exploring 6
insights, patterns revealing 6
supports, storytelling 6
Data Visualization, types
Bar charts 7
Heatmaps 7
Histograms 7
Line charts 7

Pie charts 7
Scatter plots 7
df.columns 13
df.describe() 15
df.head() 12
E
EDA, case studies
dataset, manufacturing 100
finance dataset 99
healthcare dataset 99
Retail Sales 99
EDA data exploring, types
Bivariate analysis 87
Cluster Analysis 90
multivariate analysis 88
trends, patterns identifying 89
Univariate analysis 86
EDA (Exploratory Data Analysis)
about 73
data, exploring 85
importance 73
EDA, process steps
data, cleaning 73
data, collecting 73
data, exploring 73
hypothesis generation 74
insight, summary 74
EDA, tools

D-tale
Pandas, profiling
EDA with Python, visualizing
Ensuring data quality 43
Ensuring data quality, steps
Data Integration 44
Data Validation 43
Exponential Smoothing 154
extract_table_data() 26
extra_type object 14
F
Ftfy 45
H
Huggingface 189
HuggingFace 171
Hypothesis Testing
about 125
Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) 127
Chi-Square test 126
independent t-test 126
Regression Analysis 128
Hypothesis Testing, statistics
coefficients 128
F-statistic 129
p-value 129
R-squared statistic 129

t-statistic 129
I
Inter-Quartile Range (IQR) Technique 53
J

Julius
about 208
AI tool, using 209
data analysis, visualizing
no-code, low-code tools 215
statistics 211
Julius, characteristics
Drawdata 218
Gigasheet 215
Mito 216
PivotTableJS 217
PyGWalker 219
Visual Python 219
Jupyter Notebook, functionalities
Edit option 11
File option 10
Insert option 11
View option 11
K

Kurtosis 115
L
librosa 178
Librosa 186
librosa.fft_frequencies() 180
LinearRegression 205
M
Margin
minds variable 191

N
np.log() function 61
Numpy 45
P
pairplot() function 88
Pandas 45
pandas.read_html() 38
pd.read_csv() function 12
pipeline() function 192
Polars 45
Principal Component Analysis (PCA) 83

Probability distributions 116
Probability distributions, types
binomial distribution 122
Lambda distribution 121
Normal Distribution
Poisson distribution 120
uniform distribution 120
Pyjanitor 45
PyMC3 102
pynytimes library 40
Python
about 7
Anaconda 8
Matplotlib library 17
R
Real-World Datasets
about 196
complexities, handling 198
Python, analyzing 195
Real-World Datasets, characteristics
bias subject, including 197
Haterogeneous 196
Large-scale 196
messy, unstructured 196
temporal, spatial aspects 196
Recurrent neural network (RNN) 164
requests 38
Requests 24

requests.get() 30
S
scipy 121
Scipy 45
Scrapy 23
seasonal_decompose() function 142
selenium 33
Selenium 23
Signal Processing
about 172
Audio signal, processing 175
Automatic Speech Recognition (ASR) 174
Data Analysis, importance 173
Simple Moving Average (SMA) 152
skewness 50
specshow() 181
Statistical analysis
about 103
events predictions, making 133
importance 103
techniques
variables, determining 132
workflow 103
Statistical analysis, libraries
Pingouin 131
PyMC3 131
PyStan 131
Scikit-learn 130

Scipy 130
Statsmodels 130
Statistical analysis, methods
Descriptive statistics
Hypothesis Testing 125
Probability distributions 116
Statistical tests
Statistical analysis workflow, steps
data, exploring 104
Statistical tests 104
variable, selecting 104
Statistical tests
about 104
results, interpretating 104
visualization, reporting 104
statsmodels 102
T
Time series analysis
about 137
Autocorrelation 147
data, visualizing
features 137
importance 137
Partial Autocorrelation 148
Seasonality 141
stationarity, non-stationarity
trend, using
White noise 149

Time series analysis, types
continuous Time series 138
Discrete Time series 138
Event Time series 138
Irregular, Regular Time series 138
Long format 138
Metric Time series 138
Multivariate Time series 138
Panel data 138
Univariate Time series 138
Wide format 138
Time Series Forecasting
about 151
ARIMA (Autoregressive Integrated Moving Average)
Autoregressive (AR)
CNN and LSTM, learning 164
Exponential Smoothing
FbProphet 164
models, evaluating 165
parameters, exploring 166
Simple Moving Average (SMA) 152
Time Series Forecasting, models
ACF1 167
MAPE (Mean Absolute Percentage Error) 166
Mean Absolute Error (MAE) 166
Mean Error (ME) 166
Mean Squared Error (MSE) 166
RMSE (Root Mean Squared Error) 166
Time Series Forecasting, parameters
attributes, correlation 165
seasonality 165

Trend 165
Time series non-stationary, properties
Augmented Dickey-Fuller (ADF) 139
visual inspection 139
Time series stationary, properties
strong stationarity 139
weak stationarity 139
transcription 188
W
wait variable 34
web scraping
libraries, using 24
tools, using
Z
Z-Score Technique

