Table of Contents
Preface
A Primer to the Third Dimension
Design and Prototype
Programming
Characters
Environment
Interactions and Mechanics
Rigid Bodies and Physics Interaction
User Interface and Menus
Visual Effects
Sound Effects
Build and Test
Finishing Touches
Bonus: Other Unity Tools!
Other Books You May Enjoy
Index

Preface
This book is a thorough run through the design and development of a 3D
environment puzzle game made in Unity. We go through the design,
creation, and implementation of characters, environment, UI, sound, and
game mechanics.

Who is this book for?
This book is especially good for anyone who has an interest in making 3D
games but hasn’t started their journey yet. We cover the fundamentals all
the way up to some advanced topics.
Secondarily, this book would help anyone who has already started their
journey and wants to learn other parts of game development as we cover a
broad range of skills and knowledge throughout the book.

What this book covers

Part 1 – Plan and Design
Chapter 1, A Primer to the Third Dimension, takes a ride through 3D
terminology and the initial jargon of what the book will go through.
Chapter 2, Design and Prototype, starts the user down the design rabbit
hole and ends with installing Unity to create your first project.
Chapter 3, Programming, lays down the foundation of programming. This
chapter leans in on the power of C# (C Sharp) by explaining the basics of
logic and the initial use of Visual Studio.

Part 2 – Build
Chapter 4, Characters, goes over designing 3D characters while thinking
about how they will be used for rigging and animations.
Chapter 5, Environment, walks you through thinking about the environment
for your game as well as what we did to design and build our environment.
Chapter 6, Interactions and Mechanics, takes the time to break down how
mechanics need to be thought about and what interaction is for the user,
while also covering the programming needed for the interactions in our
project.
Chapter 7, Rigid Bodies and Physics Interactions, adds complexity to the
interaction with physics and more advanced programming concepts.
Chapter 8, User Interface and Menus, goes over Unity’s canvas component
and how the overall game interface is developed on any project.

Part 3 – Polish and Refine
Chapter 9, Visual Effects, dives into how the visual effects systems can be
worked with to add a further emotional connection to your world. This is
done by explaining the foundation of rendering and the systems
surrounding it.
Chapter 10, Sound Effects, blasts in with explaining the sound systems
within Unity as well as setting a solid foundation of sound design.
Chapter 11, Build and Test, teaches you how Unity builds a final executable
game and explains testing methods to root out bugs that you can squash to
make a better product.
Chapter 12, Finishing Touches, looks to be a toolbox of utility for making
your game as polished as it can be. We go over what we used to polish our
project. This is including specific particle systems, lighting, art defining,
and advanced sound polish.
Bonus Chapter, Other Unity Tools!, is a chapter going over some of the
services Unity has to offer just in case this book inspires you to work on a
project that we haven’t been able to cover, such as multiplayer or mixedreality requirements.

To get the most out of this book
Pay attention to this book not as a tutorial but as many tools being used
to develop a 3D game. We’re only going over a few simple examples.
Take the logic out as something to apply to your projects as much as
possible.
Be prepared to take your own notes on the topics that are being
covered. We ramp up the difficulty in programming quite a bit during
the physics portion.

Ask questions in the Discord, which is attached to the book through a
QR code.

Download the example code files
The code bundle for the book is hosted on GitHub at
https://github.com/PacktPublishing/Unity-3D-Game-Development. We also
have other code bundles from our rich catalog of books and videos
available at https://github.com/PacktPublishing/. Check them out!

Download the color images
We also provide a PDF file that has color images of the
screenshots/diagrams used in this book. You can download it here:
https://static.packt-cdn.com/downloads/9781801076142_ColorImages.pdf.

Conventions used
There are a number of text conventions used throughout this book.
CodeInText: Indicates code words in text, database table names, folder

names, filenames, file extensions, pathnames, dummy URLs, user input,
and Twitter handles. For example: “Mount the downloaded WebStorm10*.dmg disk image file as another disk in your system.”
A block of code is set as follows:
void OnStartGameButtonPressed()
{
SetPlayerEnabled(true);
Cursor.lockState = CursorLockMode.Locked;
Cursor.visible = false;
this.gameObject.SetActive(false);
}

Bold: Indicates a new term, an important word, or words that you see on the
screen. For instance, words in menus or dialog boxes, also appear in the text
like this. For example: “Select System info from the Administration
panel.”
Note
Warnings or important notes appear like this.
Pro Tip
Tips and tricks appear like this.

Get in touch
Feedback from our readers is always welcome.
General feedback: Email feedback@packtpub.com and mention the book’s
title in the subject of your message. If you have questions about any aspect
of this book, please email us at questions@packtpub.com.
Errata: Although we have taken every care to ensure the accuracy of our
content, mistakes do happen. If you have found a mistake in this book, we
would be grateful if you reported this to us. Please visit
http://www.packtpub.com/submit-errata, click Submit Errata, and fill in
the form.
Piracy: If you come across any illegal copies of our works in any form on
the internet, we would be grateful if you would provide us with the location
address or website name. Please contact us at copyright@packtpub.com
with a link to the material.
If you are interested in becoming an author: If there is a topic that you
have expertise in and you are interested in either writing or contributing to a
book, please visit http://authors.packtpub.com.

Share your thoughts
Once you’ve read Unity 3D Game Development, we’d love to hear your
thoughts! Scan the QR code below to go straight to the Amazon review
page for this book and share your feedback.

https://packt.link/r/1801076146
Your review is important to us and the tech community and will help us
make sure we’re delivering excellent quality content.

A Primer to the Third Dimension
Welcome!
It’s a pleasure to have you join us on this journey to learn the fundamentals
of 3D game development. Firstly, we will introduce you to the team who
wrote this book.
Travis Bapiste (3D Artist) directed the art, modeled every model in
the game, rigged the character, and helped define the design of the story.
Russell Craig (Sr. Software Engineer) created the scripts for the
mechanics.
Ryan Stunkel (Sound designer) created and implemented all the
sounds throughout the project.
Anthony Davis (Sr. Technical Artist) wrote the book, managed the
project, built effects and shaders, and polished the project.
Ensuring we brought out the best of our collective experience of over 50
years (with 4 brains behind every page in this book) was a roller-coaster
(and too much fun!) each day. We’ve spent over six months and two
revisions to the entire book (as well as hundreds of GIFs that we have
exchanged during the process) to include the most suitable use-cases that
explain new concepts and, most importantly, offer a teaching approach that
works. In the end, we believe we’ve successfully created a book that would
have shaped the trajectory of our careers in game development and pushed
us ahead by at least 3-5 years.
This book will equip you with all the tools you’ll need to start building;
however, you might need more support and advice en-route to turn your
ideas into creations.

That’s where our Discord server comes into play. It introduces the element
of interactivity for us to connect, read the book together and have a
conversation about your 3D game projects. I am available on Discord more
than ever to ensure you get through with the book with ease, so please feel
free to come say hi and ask any questions!
Don’t forget to drop in your quick intro in the channel #introduce-yourself
when you join in: https://packt.link/unity3dgamedev

Well, let’s get started!

Goal of this book
Our goal with this book is to enable every reader to build the right mindset
to think about 3D games, and then show them all the steps we took to create
ours. An absolute beginner is welcome to work through this book, however
the topics may ramp up in difficulty quite quickly. Though difficult, if you
stick with it, you will have taken multiple steps towards mastery in game
development. The main target audience for this book is those with some
prior knowledge in game development, though regardless of your
experience, we hope to create an enjoyable learning journey for you. The
concepts we will cover soon become complex with characters,
programming, design patterns, and more that we’ll learn.
To make the best use of the book, I’d recommend you follow the approach
below:

Read through the chapters, deliberately taking breaks to think about
the concepts.
When something is brand new, check our project in GitHub to see if
viewing it in action can help explain it further. If it doesn’t, take to
Google to do your own research on it.
If something isn’t available in the project, send me a message over
Discord or seek help from peers in the community server—the link is
shared above.
Move on to the next section and repeat!
This approach will allow you to take ownership over the areas you struggle
with; once you have gone through the process, you can seek help from
peers. The problems that you encounter may also be encountered by others.
Solving them and bringing them to the Discord or having your peers help
with the solution emboldens the overall knowledge of the community.
This book is designed for you to read through our approach and then look
into the project to understand all the underpinnings. It’s more important to
understand the design of why we did what we did first. We take time to go
over fundamentals of the Unity interface as well, but tech can be learned
over time with plenty of resources online.
Some things you will not find in here are how to model characters, rig, or
animate them. We speak very little about this process as that is its own
training. We do go over why we designed our character the way we did, to
help you on your journey to do the same. The project has all the animations
and cinematics in it, so the final products are available to see the results of
our work. This approach is a strong way to learn, and we teach you why
things are done the way that they are. This way, you get to see the end
result, and you’re allowed to be creative and give your own thought to
design, as well as work through the process on your own with new tools
while working your way through the chapters.
Lastly, before we sink our teeth into the content, we’d like to advise you to
open the GitHub repo, navigate to the Builds folder, and play it for

yourself. This will help you to see what our small team put together in its
complete form. After playing it through, you can visualize what we went
through while building this project from the start.
Let’s dive into what topics we will cover in this chapter:
Coming around to 3D
Essential Unity concepts
The Unity interface
Let’s get started by familiarizing ourselves with the basic components of 3D
game development.

Coming around to 3D
We will be going over a basic understanding of 3D work within this section.
From coordinate systems to the makeup of how the 3D model is rendered,
we will only go surface-level to ensure that you fully understand the
foundations as you progress through this journey. By reading through this,
you will gain a strong understanding of how Unity displays items.

Coordinate systems
3D coordinate systems are not all the same in each 3D application! As is
demonstrated in Figure 1.1, Unity is a left-handed world coordinate system
with +y facing upward. Looking at Figure 1.1, you can visualize the
difference between left-handed and right-handed systems.

Figure 1.1: Coordinate systems
While we work within these coordinate systems, you will see the positions
of objects represented in an array of three values within parentheses as
follows:
(0, 100, 0)
This represents (x, y, z) respectively. This is a good habit to get into as
programming utilizes very similar syntax when writing positions within
scripts. When we talk about position, it is commonly referred to as the
transform inside whichever Digital Content Creator (DCC) you’re using.
In Unity, the transform holds position, rotation, and scale.
Now we understand the world coordinates, (x, y, z), and that those
coordinates each start at 0, represented by (0, 0, 0). In Figure 1.2 below,
where the colored lines meet is (0, 0, 0) in the world. The cube has its own
transform, which encompasses that object’s transform, rotation, and scale.
Keep in mind that transform holds the local position, rotation, and scale.
World transforms are calculated from this following their hierarchy.

Figure 1.2: 3D coordinate system
The cube in Figure 1.2 is at (1, 1.5, 2). This is called world space as the
item’s transform is being represented through the world’s coordinates
starting from (0, 0, 0).

Figure 1.3: World space vs local space

Now that we know the cube’s transform is in relation to the world (0, 0, 0),
we will go over the parent-child relationship that describes the local space.
In Figure 1.3 above, the sphere is a child of the cube. The sphere’s local
position is (0, 1, 0) in relation to the cube. Interestingly, if you now move
the cube, the sphere will follow as it’s only offset from the cube and its
transforms will remain (0, 1, 0) in relation to the cube.

Vectors
Traditionally, a vector is a unit that has more than one element with a
direction. In a 3D setting, a Vector3 will look very similar to what we’ve
worked with so far. (0, 0, 0) is a Vector3! Vectors are used in very many
solutions for game elements and logic. Usually, the developer will
normalize vectors so, that way, the magnitude will always equal 1. This
allows the developer to work with the data very easily as 0 is the start, 0.5 is
halfway, and 1 is the end of the vector.

Cameras
Cameras are incredibly useful components! They humbly show us their
perspective, which allows our players to experience what we are trying to
convey to them. As you may have guessed, a camera also has a transform,
just like all GameObjects (which we will describe later in the chapter) in the
hierarchy. Cameras also have several parameters that can be changed to
obtain different visual effects.
Different game elements and genres use cameras in different ways. For
example, the game Resident Evil uses static cameras to give a sense of
tension, not knowing what’s outside the window or around the corner, while
Tomb Raider pulls the camera in close while the player character Lara goes
through caverns, giving a sense of intimacy and emotional understanding,
with her face looking uncomfortable in tight spaces.
Cameras are essential to the experience you will be creating for your users.
Take time to play with them and learn compositional concepts to maximize
the push of emotions in the player’s experience.

Faces, edges, vertices, and meshes
3D objects are made up of multiple parts, as seen in Figure 1.4. Vertices,
represented by the green circles, are points in space relative to the world (0,
0, 0). Each object has a list of these vertices and their corresponding
connections.
Two vertices connected make an edge, represented by a red line. A face is
made when either three or four edges connect to make a triangle or a quad.
Sometimes quads are called a plane when not connected to any other faces.
When all of these parts are together, you have a mesh.

Figure 1.4: Vertices, edges, faces, and meshes

Materials, textures, and shaders
Now that you know what a mesh is comprised of in all DCC tools, let’s
look into how Unity displays that mesh to you. At the base level is a shader.
Shaders can be thought of as small programs, which have their own

language and run on the GPU, so Unity can render the objects in your scene
on your screen. You can think of the shader as a large template for materials
to be created.
The next level up is materials. A material is a set of attributes that are
defined by the shader to be manipulated, which helps show what the object
looks like. Each rendering pipeline will have separate shaders: Built-in,
Universal Rendering Pipeline (URP), or High Definition Rendering
Pipeline. For this book, we are using the second option, which is also the
most widely used: URP.
Figure 1.5 shows an example of a material using the URP’s Standard Lit
shader. This allows us to manipulate surface options, inputs for that surface,
and some advanced options. For now, let’s just talk about Base Map, the
first item in the Surface Inputs section. The term Base Map is being used
here as a combination of the Diffuse/Albedo and Tint. Diffuse/Albedo is
used to define the base color (red) that will be applied to the surface—in
this case, white.
If you placed a texture into this map by either dragging a texture onto the
square (green) to the left of the base map or clicking on the circle (blue) in
between the box and the name, after that, you can tint the surface with the
color if there need to be any adjustments.

Figure 1.5: Base material attributes
Figure 1.6 shows a simple example of what a cube would look like with a
tint, texture, and the same texture with the tint changed. As we progress
through the book, we will unlock more and more functions of materials,
shaders, and textures.

Figure 1.6: Tint and texture base color
Textures can provide incredible detail for your 3D model.
When creating a texture, the resolution is an important consideration. The
first part of the resolution that needs to be understood is “power of 2” sizes.
Powers of 2 are as follows:
2, 4, 8, 16, 32, 64, 128, 256, 512, 1024, 2048, 4096, etc.
These numbers represent the pixel size for both width and height. There are
cases where you may need to mix the sizes as long as they fit the power of 2
scale. Examples are:
256×256
1024×1024
256×1024 (this is less common to see, but is valid)
The second consideration regarding resolution is the size itself. The easiest
way to work through this consideration is by thinking about how large the
3D object will be on your screen. If you have a 1920x1080 screen
resolution, that is 1920 pixels wide by 1080 pixels tall. If the object in
question is only going to take up 10% of the screen and will rarely be seen

any closer, you may consider a 256x256 texture. By contrast, if you are
making an emotional, character-driven game where emotions and facial
expressions matter, you may want a 4096x4096 or 4K texture on just the
face during those cutscenes.

Rigidbody physics
Unity assumes that every GameObject does not need to be evaluated every
frame for physics. Unity uses Nvidia’s PhysX engine for its physics
simulations. To get any calculated physics responses, the GameObject
needs a Rigidbody component added.
By adding the Rigidbody component to the GameObject, you are then
adding some properties to the GameObject seen in the inspector in Figure
1.7 below.

Figure 1.7: Rigidbody
One Unity unit of mass is equal to 1 kg of mass. This affects the physics
decisions upon collisions. Drag units add friction, reducing the velocity
over time. Angular drag is similar but constrained to only rotation speed.
Use Gravity either turns gravity on or off, equal to standard Earth gravity
(0, -9.81, 0) so the mass makes sense! Sometimes you may not want to use
Earth gravity, so you can change the physics settings to make the gravity
what you would like.

A thorough explanation of Rigidbody will be worked through in Chapter 7,
Rigidbodies and Physics Interaction. We will be using Rigidbodies in the
creation of characters as well as environments and interactive gameplay.

Collision detection
A GameObject with a Rigidbody without any colliders will not fully utilize
the physics and with gravity turned on will just fall through the world.
There are quite a few colliders to play with to best suit your games’ needs.
In Figure 1.8 below, you can see that there are separate colliders for 2D.
These use a different physics system from 3D. If you are using 2D only for
your game, make sure to run with the 2D colliders.

Figure 1.8: Collider component options
You are also welcome to add multiple colliders—with the basic options
seen in Figure 1.8 above—to an object to best suit the shape of the
GameObject. It is very common to see colliders on empty GameObjects
that are children of the primary object, to allow the easy transformation of

the colliders. We will see this in practice in Chapter 4, Characters, and
Chapter 5, Environment.

The Unity interface
The interface for Unity is separated into several major components. In
Figure 1.9 below, we will go over the scene (red) and the items within its
interface as well as how to manipulate their properties in the inspector
(orange). Then we will go into items that aren’t active in the scene but are
available to add in the project window (yellow). Finally, we will go over the
game view (green) and the package manager (separate from Figure 1.9).

Figure 1.9: Overall interface

Scene view and hierarchy
The scene view and hierarchy work in tandem. The hierarchy is how the
scene will be rendered when the game is played. The scene view allows you
to manipulate the GameObjects and their values in real time. Furthermore,
when the editor is in Play mode, the game can make changes to the
GameObjects in the hierarchy.

Note
When the GameObjects are being manipulated in Play mode, to include
if you change them yourself in the scene view, after you stop the game,
the GameObjects will revert to their original state before play has started.

Figure 1.10: Scene and hierarchy
In Figure 1.10 above, there is a lot of information that can be seen right
away. On the left, in the hierarchy, you can see that there are objects in the
scene. These objects all have a transform, which places them in the world.
If you double-click on an item or click on an item, put your mouse in the
scene view, and then press f, you will then focus on that GameObject,
which puts the item centered on the scene’s viewport.
When you have an item selected, you can see that at the object’s pivot point
—usually the center of the object—there is a tool showing colored arrows.
The tool allows you to position the GameObject in space. You can also
position the object on a plane by selecting the little square in between two
axes.
In the upper right of Figure 1.10, you will see a camera gizmo. This little
gizmo will allow you easily orient the viewport camera to the front, sides,

top, bottom, or change it to an isometric camera or perspective with a single
click.
Now that you have seen the item in the scene, selected by left-clicking in
the scene or the hierarchy, you may want to change some properties or add
components to that GameObject. This is where the inspector comes into
play.

Inspector
To manipulate a GameObject’s value, when you select the GameObject in
the scene or hierarchy, the inspector will update to show you the viable
options to change per GameObject.

Figure 1.11: Inspector window
The inspector window in Figure 1.11 shows that a good amount of this item
has been chosen. At the top, the name is Cube and the blue cube to the left
denotes a prefab data type. You are able to make changes to the prefab itself
by clicking the Open button just below the name. This will create a new
scene view that shows the prefab only. When you make changes to the
prefab, it will make a change to all instanced prefabs in any scene that is
referencing it.
The transform component shows the position, rotation, and scale of the
prefab in the scene.

The mesh filter shows the vertices, edges, and faces that make up that
polygon.
Below that is the mesh renderer. This component will allow the rendering
of the mesh rendered in the mesh filter component. We can set the material
here and other options that pertain to this item’s specific lighting and
probes, which we will cover in Chapter 12, Final Touches.
Now, below this is a collider and a Rigidbody. These work in tandem and
help this object to react to physics in real time, according to the settings on
the components.
We’ve talked a lot about items in the scene and their properties, but where
are they housed outside of the scene if they’re only referenced items? The
Project window will answer this question.

The Project window
Here you will find assets that will be instanced in the scene or used as a
component to fully realize the game you are building.

Figure 1.12: Project window

This window is the physical representation of the GameObjects that are
referenced. All of the items in the assets folder seen in Figure 1.12 are
physically on your hard drive. Unity makes meta files that house all of the
properties of the items.
The interesting thing about having the raw files in the Project window is
that you can make changes to the items and when you focus on the Unity
project (click on the Unity app), it will readjust the meta files and reload the
items in the scene. This makes it so that, you can iterate on scripts and art
faster!
We’ve looked at the GameObjects in the scene, placed them by
manipulating the transforms, and know where the GameObjects were
referenced from. Now we should look at the game view to know how the
game itself looks.

Game view
The game view is similar to the scene view; however, it follows the rules
that are built in the scene view. The game will automatically render scene
content through the main camera unless you define a different camera to
render through.

Figure 1.13: Game view
You can see that this looks very similar to the scene window, but the top has
different options. At the top left, we can see the Display dropdown. This
allows us to change cameras if we have multiple in the scene. The ratio is to
the right of that, which is helpful to look at so you can target certain
devices. Scale, to the right of the screen ratio, is helpful to quickly make the
window larger or zoom in for debugging. Maximize On Play will
maximize the screen on play to take advantage of the full screen. Mute
Audio mutes the game’s audio. Stats will give a small overview of the stats
in the game view.
Later on in this project, during optimization, we will go through profiling
for a much more in-depth way to look at what may be causing issues within
the gameplay in terms of memory usage and other optimization
opportunities.

Figure 1.14: Game statistics
Continuing on to the right is Gizmos. This is a set of items that show in the
game view in Figure 1.14, which you might now want to see. In this menu,
you are able to turn them off or on depending on your needs.

Package Manager

Your Unity ID will house the packages you’ve bought from the Unity Asset
Store as well as the packages you may have on your hard drive or GitHub!
You can use the package manager to import the packages into your project.
You can get to these packages under Window > Package Manager as seen
in Figure 1.15 below.

Figure 1.15: Package Manager path
After you open the package manager, you will initially be shown what
packages are in the project. You can change the top-left dropdown to see
what is standard in Unity or what packages you have bought in the Unity
Asset Store.

Figure 1.16: Package Manager
By choosing Unity Registry, you’ll see a list of the Unity tested packages
that come free and are part of the Unity platform, available if you need
them. You can read up on every package in the documents that are provided
via the link on the right-hand side labeled View documentation when you
click on a package on the left.
If you select In Project, it will show you what packages are already
installed with the current project that is loaded. This is helpful when you
want to uninstall a package that may not be needed.
My Assets are the assets that you’ve bought or the project you are on and
those associated with your Unity ID as paid for previously.
Built-in is standard with any project. You may need to enable or disable a
built-in package depending on what your needs are. Explore them and
disable what is not needed; a tidy project now leads to less optimization
later.

Essential Unity concepts
In the first section, we already went over some Unity concepts. We will go
over them in a bit more detail here as you’ve read previously where several
of these might be used. Unity houses a very modular focus on the items that
are housed within the game development environment.

Assets
Unity treats every file as an asset; everything including a 3D model, a
texture file, a sprite, a particle system, and so on. In your project, you will
have an Assets folder as the base folder to house all of your project items.
These could be textures, 3D models, particle systems, materials, shaders,
animations, sprites, and the list goes on. As we add more to our project, the
Assets folder should be organized and ready to grow. It is strongly
recommended to keep your folder structure organized so that you or your
team aren’t wasting time trying to find that one texture item that was left in
a random folder by accident.

Scenes
A scene houses all of the gameplay logic, GameObjects, cinematics, and
everything else that your game will reference to render or interact with.
Scenes are also used to cut up gameplay sections to bring down the load
times. If you imagine trying to load every single asset on a modern game
every time you loaded it up, it would take way too much precious gaming
time.

GameObjects
Most assets that are referenced in a scene will be a GameObject (GO).
There are some instances in which an asset can only be a component of a
GO. The one common factor that you will see with all GOs is that they have

the Transform component. As we read at the beginning of this chapter, a
transform holds the local position, rotation, and scale. World transforms
are calculated from this following their hierarchy. GOs can have a long list
of components connected to give functionality or data to be used in scripts
for mechanics to grow.

Components
GOs have the ability to house multiple pieces of functionality attached as
“components.” Each component has its own unique properties. The entire
list of components you can add is fairly extensive, as you can see in Figure
1.17 below.

Figure 1.17: Component list
Each of these sections has smaller subsections. We will go over quite a few
of them in this book. When you add an asset to the scene hierarchy that
requires components, Unity will add them by default. An example of this
default action happening is when you drag a 3D mesh into the hierarchy, the
GOs will have a mesh renderer component attached to the object
automatically.

Scripts

One component that is often used on a GameObject is a script. This is
where all of the logic and mechanics will be built onto your GameObjects.
Whether you want to change the color, jump, change the time of day, or
collect an item, you will need to add that logic in a script on the object.
In Unity, the primary language is C# (pronounced “C sharp”). This is a
strongly typed programming language, meaning that there must be a type
assigned to any variable that is being manipulated.
We will be using scripts in a multitude of ways and I know you are excited
to get right into coding, but first, we need to get into other Unity standard
processes.

Prefabs
Utilizing the modular and strong object-oriented nature of Unity, we can put
together a grouping of items with default values set on their components,
which can be instanced in the scene at any time and house their own values.
To make a prefab, you drag a GameObject from the hierarchy in the scene
to the asset browser. It will create a new prefab as well as turning that
GameObject into the newly created prefab. It will also turn blue by default
in the hierarchy as seen in Figure 1.18.

Figure 1.18: Prefab in hierarchy

Packages
To take the modular components to a whole new level, Unity can take a
package with all of its dependencies and export them out so you can bring

them into other projects! Even better, you can sell your packages to other
game developers from the Unity Asset Store!
Now that you have a solid foundation in 3D and Unity terms, let’s open it
up and go over the interface itself. The next section will be a look into all of
the most common interface pieces of Unity.

Summary
Together, we went over several key areas to begin your journey in game
development. In this chapter, we laid the foundation for what is to come by
going over some fundamental features of three primary topics. For the third
dimension, we went over the coordinate system, vectors, cameras, 3D
meshes, and the basics of Rigidbody physics and collision detection. This
was enough of the basics to allow us to get into Unity concepts, such as
assets and GameObjects, followed by scripting in C# and prefab basics. To
end this chapter, we went through a virtual tour of the Unity interface—
scenes, the hierarchy, inspectors, and the package manager.
In the next chapter, we will be going over design and prototyping
fundamentals. This will allow you to follow along while we describe our
thought processes for the project being created throughout this book. It will
also lay the foundational knowledge for you to follow when you make your
own projects, following your completion of this book.

Design and Prototype
Now that we have worked through all of the primary lingo of game
development and have a stronger understanding of 3D spaces, we need to
talk through the game itself. In this book, we are building a vertical slice—a
fully-functional portion of the game. For this chapter, we’re going to go into
the beginnings of getting the project going. The main topics include:
Game design fundamentals
Your first Unity project
Prototyping
To begin, let’s start from the top and go over the game design fundamentals
in greater detail. Take your time reading through this portion as it’s dense
with knowledge nuggets that will take your game to the next level.

Game design fundamentals
Game design is a young art. With any art, there are some very basic
fundamentals that must be thought about before you can explore. We will
go through ways in which developers like to capture their thoughts in a
“document.” Then, we will start with a micro-lecture on how each decision
should be deliberately as granular as possible. Then, we will build on those
decisions with iteration. Finally, we will go through an explanation of
concepting. Let’s get started with a discussion of design documents.

Game design document
There was a time where our team had some downtime between our
development sprints in which we wanted to all jump on board with a new
tool. Our project management was using the Atlassian stack (Jira,

Confluence, etc.), but we wanted to see what would be better, so we looked
through several different software. This included Hack N’ Plan, Trello,
Notion, and several other tools. We used all these tools to see which ones
would end up getting used after our break. In the end, we found out we
liked Jira for the project management and tasking, but for everything else
we stuck with Miro. Miro ended up being our concepting boards and
design/workflow brainstorming tool. This happened organically through
other tools just not being used by the majority of the team.
No matter how small it seems your game is going to be, there will be some
sort of documentation that will need to take place. There are strong
organizational reasons behind making a document, but the strongest reason
is that when we put something down on paper or draw it out in a
collaborative space, we tend to take time to more seriously consider its
merits. This pause is sometimes referred to as heuristic design. This can be
done alone or in collaboration.
Some designers wish to draw up a beautifully written, well-outlined
document in a word processor or an online collaboration tool. This gives a
neat outline and the ability to write each detail exactly. When the scope of
the game is going to be larger, this works out well. The writers tend to be
technical writers and well-versed in the art of documenting processes. The
approach is to have a single source of truth for any part of the game that
anyone can refer to while developing, but to go to this extent may not be the
best method for you or your team.
Another option for game design documents is done through collaborative
brainstorming software. This allows users to work together to make
flowcharts, draw, and outline in a creative manner. This manner is the direct
opposite of the curated form of the aforementioned written document
approach, but serves a different need. The creative form tends to be more
intimate and art-focused. Some pre-concept art sketches are done,
flowcharts are drawn up quickly to draw out questions about the gameplay
elements, and ideas can be swiftly drawn upon and tossed away or kept.
This way of designing wouldn’t work well for a large-scale team as there is
no real organization of sorts. New members would have a hard time
onboarding in these situations.

Figure 2.1: Example of a flowchart
Neither of these options is the magic pill to make a game design document,
but rest assured, your team needs to have some sort of document to keep
your ideas written down. Ideas are fleeting on the mind and some of the
best ideas slip into the ether if they aren’t written down to keep. Experiment
with your team to find the option that best suits them. There is a saying in
design groups: “The best tool is the tool your team will actually use”.
We’ve gone over quite a few options for game design documents and shown
that they have pros and cons. Even though there isn’t a perfect way right off
the bat, a great starting point would be to start with a more visual and
collaborative approach. If you are together, this could be a dry erase board
with sticky notes. The dry erase board allows for non-permanent thoughts,
while the sticky notes would be tasks that need completing. Place them on
the left side for “need to be completed,” and move them to the right side
when they are complete.
I recommend you spend some time over in our GitHub repo created for this
book. I’ve added a GDD images folder in there for you to take a look at a
large scale of examples to see what we’ll work through in the next set of
chapters.
https://github.com/PacktPublishing/Unity-3D-Game-Development
Now that we have started documenting our game design, we need to take
our thoughts and make deliberate choices with them to make them concrete.

Deliberate decisions
Although this part of the chapter may be slightly shorter than others, take
this section to heart: being a designer means building an immersive world

that makes sense, even when it doesn’t make sense. The player
subconsciously makes observations at an alarming rate. The more that the
player can see non-congruent pieces to the puzzle that is the game
environment or character, the more immersion is broken. The best way to
fix any immersion-breaking issue is deliberate decisions.
To give a very simple explanation of this, take the example of door handles.
You’ve seen them your whole life and used them intuitively. In fact, when
you have to deal with a poorly designed door handle is when your actual,
real-life immersion breaking happens. If you have ever grabbed a handle to
a door and tried to pull inward, only to find out the door was designed to be
pushed, you’ve encountered this issue. If the door was designed to only be
allowed to move in one direction, the correct design for an exit is a flat
panel where the door handle would be. This immediately implies “push.”
Every level, mesh, texture, concept, and feeling needs to be deliberately
thought about with an attempt to implement. Only after you have a strong
reason to place something in a certain way without giving in to clichés is
when you then can explore other unique aspects to build something truly
unique.
The project you will be making and playing with in this book has
undergone prolonged and deliberate thought. To emphasize this, in each
section, you will see a set of questions that are answered in as much detail
as needed in a concise manner.

Iterative production
Game development has an interesting need for immersion to be at the
forefront of play. To get this immersion as complete as we can get it, the
development team needs to continuously ask whether the direction it is
going in works well. Very often, the game that you began developing is not
what you will ultimately end up with. This cycle is called an iterative
design or production.
There are a multitude of patterns you can use when you undertake iterative
design. The approach that will be described here is not the only definitive

approach to completing a design, but it is a good starting point from where
your team can branch off as it sees fit.
Iteration needs to happen often and early for a game to grow in terms of
how easy it is to understand. There is a concept called MVP, or Minimum
Viable Product, where game developers make the minimum amount of
gameplay elements required to give the game to testers. This should take
very little time and the feedback is invaluable. When you hand this off to
the testers, there will be feedback that you and your team could not have
seen as you are very close to the product. Make sure to listen to the
feedback carefully with an open mind as their experience could be common
among your players. We’re working toward a deliberately designed
experience for as many players as possible. This feedback forces you and
your team to iterate on the design, and possibly cut or add game mechanics,
to respond to the main testing feedback.

Figure 2.2 a, b: Examples of iterations in level design

After having iterations resolve major holes in your design, you then move
into a vertical slice (which will be covered in the Vertical slice section of
this chapter) of the game. This should be an iteration where you are
comfortable with the basics of the movement and primary game mechanics.
Your team will want to make a full game loop from start to finish with a
single level that houses a win and lose condition. Then, you guessed it, test
again, but this time with new testers that have never seen this game. Ask
similar questions and some new ones that have surfaced during internal
playtesting.
The loop for development should seem repetitive, and it is:
1. Think and test
2. Create and test
3. Update and test
Then, continue this approach until you are at number of iterations until it’s a
shippable product. The most important portion of each step is the testing.
Make sure to take feedback from testing as strong indications of where
improvement is required. We will begin this cycle with conceptualization.

Concepting
You need to make a game and you have a group ready to go. You are
comfortable with deliberately making granular decisions and know the
iterative process. Now you need to get a concept started.
The first step to getting a project going is to explore what emotion you and
your team want your players to experience. With our art form being so
young and malleable, we can pursue this emotion any way we like. This is
the power of the game developer. Once you know what emotions you are
focused on as regards the experience players will have, start thinking about
how you can create it as a gameplay experience.
If the emotion is fear, you could have the player deal with spaces that are
dark, with just a flashlight as their primary defense tool. This may lead you

to explore sound design as your development focus since vision will not be
the primary experience tool.
If the emotion is grieving, then you may work through a narrative focus,
where you play a child who has lost a family member and the players work
through a narrative-driven gameplay in a dream world. This pushes
storytelling and pacing, with a tight understanding of color theory as well as
the stages of grief through a child’s perspective.
We could go on for a while regarding concepts as there is an infinite
number of scenarios. Choose what your primary goal is and then work
toward it. After this, you may want to put some of these ideas to paper to
get an idea of what the feelings of the immersion will be, from an artistic
viewpoint. This could potentially be silhouettes of character concepts. It
could also be architectural designs.
It could also be a collection of pictures you’ve saved that gave you a feeling
of the emotion you want to evoke that you can draw ideas from.

Figure 2.3 a, b, c: Concepts used in project
Either way, the prominent action is to get the ideas started visually. After
you have some art panels drawn up and you have a visual idea of how this
may be built, we then make a Unity project.

Your first Unity project
You’ve put together a concept that you want to develop, and now we need
to get Unity and create a project. To do this, we need to get the Unity Hub
and then choose a version, followed by a template to start with.

Unity Hub
Unity Hub is a small application that holds all of the projects in a
centralized location so all of your projects are easily accessible as well as
the versions of Unity you have installed. To acquire Unity Hub, you need to
go to unity.com and create a UnityID. After you create an account, click the
blue button named Get Started. Follow the prompts that best make sense
for your needs and operating system. Download and install Unity Hub and
let’s get creating!

Choosing a version
Unity runs multiple versions at once. There are Alpha, Beta, Official, and
LTS releases.
Alpha versions have experimental features that may not be fully complete
or production-ready and are not recommended for builds as there may be
features causing build-breaking bugs. Studios and enthusiasts may use this
for testing mechanics, engine features, or packages. They are generally one
release ahead of official releases. Beta is similar to Alpha versions;
however, they are experimental versions of the most current official release.
Official releases are stable current releases. LTS means Long-Term
Support. These are the final releases of a version with minor hotfixes if
bugs are found.
An easy way to see the versions is through the Unity Hub. An example of
what this may look like can be seen in Figure 2.4:

Figure 2.4: Example list of Unity versions

LTS releases are recommended for a production application. If your team is
experimenting or looking to prototype with new features, it would only be
possible in prerelease versions. After choosing a version for your project to
be built in, you need to choose a template from Unity’s options as you make
a new project.
This book, however, is version independent. If you’ve bought this book
after 2022, the book is still as relevant as it can be. The screenshots may
have slight UI changes, but the foundations still remain intact.

Choosing a template
Unity presents you with a few template choices when you press the New
button on the projects tab. This gives you the options of 2D, 3D, Universal
Rendering Pipeline (URP), and High-Definition Rendering Pipeline
(HDRP). There are large rendering differences as well as some
functionality that might be interesting to you and your team to work with.
These differences between these templates, arose when the Scriptable
Rendering Pipeline (SRP) came to life!

Scriptable rendering pipeline
Rendering and computer graphics are a detailed subject that you could get a
PhD in, so we will scratch the surface of what is possible through a
rendering pipeline. The top level of the pipeline entails three tasks: Culling,
Rendering, and Post-Processing. In each of these categories, many tasks
are taking place in certain orders and to certain degrees of accuracy. The
primary function of all of this is to optimize the view to the end user for a
high frame rate as well as maintain the art style that is required for the
experience you are wanting for the user.
With the advent of the SRP, these templates split into three main categories:
Built-in, Universal, and High Definition. To get an idea of these three
templates, let’s break them out into their respective groups and dive in a
little bit further. For our project, we will be using Universal Rendering as
we will be utilizing several features inside this rendering pipeline.

Built-In Rendering
This is an older pipeline that doesn’t use scriptable pipelines. There are a
great many applications for the built-in renderer. Both of the 2D and 3D
templates run Built-In Rendering systems. This is also the standard for
which most of the assets in the asset store were built before the SRP came
out. You can think of “Built-in” as the base experience in Unity. There are
several reasons why you may not want to use the Built-In Renderer. If you
are looking to use volumetric lighting, GPU particles, or ray tracing you
would want to look into the scriptable render pipelines below.

Universal Rendering
The Universal Rendering pipeline is aptly named as it has the most features
available with a scriptable rendering pipeline available. If you are looking
to make a 2D game, this is the best option to choose as it has built-in, pixelperfect rendering, 2D lights, and 2D shadows. For the 3D option, this is also
a fantastic choice. There are two graphs available to both URP and HDRP,
which are ShaderGraph and VFXGraph. ShaderGraph is a visual shader
creation tool that allows for complex shaders to be written visually.
VFXGraph’s primary function is to be a particle system focused on GPU
particles, allowing you to create millions of particles on screen at the same
time for stunning visuals.
We would like to use GPU-based particles, in our project which VFXGraph
is responsible for handling, as well as show the use of ShaderGraph. With
these requirements, we chose to work within URP as our rendering pipeline.
If you are looking for more of a physically accurate rendering system with
ray tracing and volumetric clouds, then HDRP is what you are looking for.

High-Definition Rendering

This rendering pipeline has one major purpose: to give the best-looking
output while remaining as optimized as possible. Whether to use HDRP or
not is a widely discussed topic. There are several main reasons why HDRP
would be the option for you. This is if you are looking for a physical-based
sky with cloud layers, volumetric clouds, multiple directional lights, highly
customizable shadow options, and ray tracing to include raytraced
reflections, volumetrics, and multiple high-level shader outputs. There are
many other high-level rendering options that HDRP only can provide.
These concepts are deep topics in the computer graphics world and we
implore you to look them up to see the beautiful work of what real-time
rendering is becoming.

Prototyping
Now that you have a project, you can start putting together the assets that
will create the game. In this book, we have worked through how we are
going to build this game out so that way, we can section off each major
chunk into chapters. Prototyping can happen in a multitude of ways. We
can’t go over every way in which every studio will prototype as each
business has its own manner of creation. We will talk about major
progression patterns that are common within the industry as a whole.
Breaking down the life cycle of any task that is built upon iteration, there
needs to be a cycle to pull out the impurities. This is commonly regarded as
analyze, design, implement, and test, and then iterate again until complete.
The prototyping phase goes through all of these steps as well. Take a look at
them all and work through each portion that makes sense to you or the
group building your game.

Wireframing or paper creation
In this form of prototyping, the creator breaks the video game down into
phases in a physical or digital system to go through each game loop or
experience the player will feel throughout your game. Sometimes, this
could be creating a paper board game to run through the rules. Sometimes,
this may involve digitally drawing game wireframes through the user
interface to intuition for the gameplay experience.

Grayboxing
This name is what you think it means! A bunch of untextured shapes,
generally gray boxes, that line out your environment to ensure that the
storytelling of the environment through its silhouette can be defined. This
version of prototyping is particularly useful if you need a very direct
camera angle you need to display, and do not have assets to set up the
environment. This can also be useful in the development of concept art as
you can push the composition to the concept artists for quicker turnarounds.

Figure 2.5 a, b: Greyboxing examples in project

From Figure 2.5 above, you can see how a concept artist could take these
and draw over them to get a rendered concept in order to provide more
design ideas for the space, even if this means changing the environment,
since this was a quick mock-up of the space to get things started.
These can provide enough detail to start working on a proof of concept,
which we go over next.

Proof of Concept (PoC)
The naming is fairly accurate. This is where you are getting very specific
about your testing. Maybe you need to tune a camera to get a very specific
feel for the gameplay. This might take several iterations in itself and
multiple people taking a crack at it if you have a team.

Figure 2.6 a, b: An example of iterating on a game asset
Figures 2.6 a and b above show the iteration of some architecture. We
started with a simple archway that had a feeling of fantasy just to start.
After we put it in the level, we had more time to think about the styling and
add more appealing parts to the archway. This is a helpful concept to
understand that your assets can be perfect in the beginning. To get to an
MVP, you have to start somewhere and work toward greatness!

Minimum Viable Product (MVP)
This is as the name implies: a pared-down version of the game. In a
platformer, there must be jumping. Perhaps you have swinging as your
game demands that as a mechanic, this will not get cut no matter how much
funding you have? You do not need polished art assets or even animations.
The purpose of an MVP is to demonstrate the gameplay’s features are
within an acceptable range to ensure that anything built on top has the
foundation of the MVP’s mechanics working properly.

Vertical slice

Sometimes you have a good idea of the art direction, the primary
mechanics, and narrative, but need to gather some feedback or possibly
funding. A vertical slice is when you take a very thin slice of the game and
polish it to generate hype and a sense of the end product. Demos are a
similar concept to a vertical slice. This is more complex than the MVP as
there is a level of polish to the art, animations, mechanics, lighting, and so
on that MVPs aren’t expected to have, which can take a significant amount
of time as well as an understanding of the final product, which may not
have been available when the MVP was made.
This style of prototyping is the best use case for our project needs within
this book. We are developing a small portion of the game to get a strong
understanding of what the entire game could be. This is our best option.
While making prototypes, your game may need to go through all of these to
get to proper gameplay that feels good to play. You may also not need all of
them. This varies greatly within each development group.

Summary
Within this chapter, we went over some deep topics—game design, what
options to choose for your first project, and prototyping fundamentals. We
went over how you and your team could collaborate in a Word document or
a more visual flowchart to bring your game together. The idea here is to
make the design’s ideas a reality. Once you’ve done this, you should dig
into your first Unity project, choosing which template to work with and
utilizing effects that follow the setting of your game concept, such as GPU
particles. Finally, we covered prototyping to get your project started and get
a sense of whether it conveys the experience to the user that you want it to
convey.
In the next chapter, we will begin to look at programming, helping you to
bring all your game ideas to life.

Programming
Welcome to Chapter 3! We are going to cover all the basics of C# and how
to use it in Unity. We’ll go over the primary chunk of programming
knowledge required for most projects. This chapter should serve as a
referenceable chapter throughout the rest of the book when we get into
scripting in each future chapter. We will first need to begin by ensuring that
your computer’s environment is set up to start programming with Unity and
then flow into the fundamentals of programming. This chapter will serve as
a foundational lynchpin to your Unity projects. Topics include:
Setting up the environment
Variables
Data types
Programming logic
Methods

Setting up the environment
Programming environment specifically refers to the Integrated
Development Environment (IDE) that you will use, and the dependencies
associated with it. C# is part of .NET Framework from Microsoft, which
needs to be installed on your machine to work. Luckily for us, many of the
IDEs in the world will install that for you when you start working in C#.
Even more luckily for us, Visual Studio, if installed from Unity Hub, is
preconfigured and you can get right to developing your project straight
away! Let’s go through the steps to see how you can set up your
environment.

The Unity environment

Microsoft Visual Studio is free, directly connects to Unity, and comes with
tools to help you right off the bat! This is like needing to work on your car
and someone just hands you the right tool for what you need as you put
your hand in the engine bay.
There are some steps to ensure that every application is talking to each
other. Let’s walk through them together so we can ensure we’re on the same
page moving through the book as well as the rest of this chapter; we will
work through small snippets of code right away. No need to check the
water’s temperature, let’s dive in!
1. Install Unity Hub by googling Unity Hub and selecting the top link.
This will take you to the official Unity webpage where you can
download Unity Hub. After installing the hub, you will need to install
a version of Unity to use.
As the previous chapter explained the version of Unity, we are going to
recommend production using the latest LTS version. In Unity Hub, when
you’re installing a version of Unity and if you do not have Visual Studio
installed, there will be an option to install it for you preconfigured. In
Figure 3.1 below, you can see that we already have Visual Studio installed,
however, if you do not, there will be a checkbox next to it to select it. It will
then install the application for you ready to go!

Figure 3.1: Unity Hub Install Unity modal
2. If you didn’t have Visual Studio installed, then this will take care of
configuring Unity and Visual Studio for you. If you did already have
it installed, you will need to check to ensure the connection between
the programs is ready for them to work together. Let’s connect Unity
to it and start learning.
To begin, close Visual Studio and open the Unity project we created in the
previous chapter. If you didn’t make one, no better time than now.
Navigate to these respective menus to connect Visual Studio to Unity:
Mac: Unity (Top left of the screen) -> Preferences -> External Tools tab
PC: Edit -> Preferences -> External Tools tab
In the external scripting tool dropdown, choose Visual Studio. After this
has been selected, go to your Assets folder in the project window and rightclick in the gray open space. Following Figure 3.2, you can create a script
by choosing: Create -> C# Script. Name it ScriptingLesson and doubleclick it to open it. This should open Visual Studio with the proper hooks

from Unity. This means that Visual Studio will read in the project file and
Unity will keep it up to date with any changes.

Figure 3.2: Creating a C# script in the editor
Now we can get started on scripting! In the next sections, we will be
working through the fundamentals. These will stick with you and be part of
every project that you work on in the future. This would be a good section
to put a sticky note in to come back to for reference.
Before we get too far, we wanted to make a point here. There may be a spot
this and other chapters where the code will get unruly. Your script may not
work due to a single line difference or a forgotten semicolon. This happens
very often. There is no need to worry; we will have all the scripts in the
project safely set up for you to recover from. However, a note is that we
have heavily commented on the lines for readability. This may result in
different lines being stated in the chapters than you see in the code. We will
try to be as accurate in the book as possible, but sometimes a single line
comment can cause this. Be flexible with us as a comment can make the
difference in understanding the entire script’s inner workings and is more
important than a single line number being accurate.

Fundamentals
With Visual Studio installed and connected to Unity’s editor, we should go
over the basics. In this section, we will talk about data types, variables,
logic or code flow, methods, classes, and MonoBehaviour. There is a lot of
knowledge in this section of the chapter, but it is meant to be referenced. If
you have a sticky note, it might be a good idea to place it in this chapter to
easily be referenced. When you open the file, there will be autopopulated
C# that we will not need for this part. For now, delete the extra parts so that
it looks like this:
using UnityEngine;
public class ScriptingLesson : MonoBehaviour
{
// Data and Variables
// Logic and Flow
// Methods
}

The code here is doing two primary tasks. The first line imports the
UnityEngine library so that we can use types and methods from the
UnityEngine namespace for our game. This is called the “using directive”.
Inside the UnityEngine namespace, we have access to all of our game types,
such as GameObject. Since we will be working in the editor to manipulate
these GameObjects, we should be using this namespace in our class.
The next portion is a class named ScriptingLesson that inherits from
MonoBehaviour. Inheritance is part of Object Oriented Programing. This
class needs to inherit from MonoBehaviour as it’s directly affecting objects
in the game. During the Programming logic portion below we will explain
how we utilize inheriting from MonoBehaviour.
The // means comment. Anything on that line will not be compiled by the
IDE. You can use this to help yourself out with pseudocode or by adding
some defining words to your code to help other programmers that may
work with your code. We’re using it for organization purposes.

After you make the change to the script, save it by pressing Cmd + s or Ctrl
+ s.
If you then go back to Unity, you will see that Unity will compile the
scripts. Every time we make a significant change to the script, we will go
back to Unity and check on how we are doing. There will be times that the
Unity Editor will not like the code we are working with, but Visual Studio
doesn’t get these editor warnings or errors.
In the Scene, add an empty GameObject. Name it Scripting Lesson and
then select it. In the Inspector, click Add Component and type
scriptinglesson in the search bar. Left-click the script to add it to the
empty GameObject. There is another way to add the component. If you
have the scripting lesson selected, you can also click and drag the script
onto the inspector to add the script onto the component section of the
GameObject. Both ways are commonly used. Smaller projects may drag
more than larger projects. Where there are many scripts and you know
exactly what you’re looking to add, you may use the Add component
button and type in the script name to add it. Now, when we make changes,
you will see them on this GameObject.
Before we get into any data types, we should have a small discussion about
variables.

Variables
Just like in algebra, variables are named containers for something. C# is a
strongly-typed programming language. This means that each variable needs
to have its own data type associated with it when it is declared. There are
guidelines on how to name your variables and which data type to use for
certain situations. We will go into detail on this within each section.
Naming conventions are case sensitive, and each type of naming has its
own set of rules that need to be followed.

Data types

There are 10 Unity data types that are utilized in C#, however, in Unity, we
will primarily need to know 4 well. They are bool, int, float, and string.
We will be creating each of these data types in the ScriptingLesson.cs file
that we created.
Bool
This stands for the Boolean data type, which is designed for either true or
false variables. These values are also represented by a 1 (True) or 0 (False).
As an example, this could be used when your character enters an area that
they shouldn’t have to trigger something to happen, like a SPIKE TRAP!
On line 5 add:
public bool isActive;

There are four parts to this line and all of them have specific purposes:
public allows Unity to access the item we are creating for use in the

editor.
bool is the data type of the item we are creating.
isActive is the name of the bool data we are creating. It will default
to false as a value.

The semicolon (;) is being used here to denote that it’s the end of the
instruction.
If you save and go back into the Unity Editor, you will now see there is a
checkbox in the inspector named Is Active. It should look similar to this:

Figure 3.3: “Is Active” checkbox visible

Int
An integer, or int, is a whole number such as 1, 100, 200, -234571, or 0. It
cannot take decimal places. This is used, for example, if you have a discrete
value needed to count up or down. How many points are gathered in a play
session is a great place to use ints.
On line 6 add:
public int myInt;

This is very similar to the bool. We are declaring that myInt is a publicly
accessible integer data type variable. When you save and go back to the
Unity Editor, you will now notice a text input to the right of a variable
named myInt. Since it is an integer, you cannot put a period (.) in there to
make a decimal as it’s an int and only whole numbers are allowed.

Float
You might be asking, how can I get decimal places in my numbers? The
answer you seek is the almighty float! With a float, you can get decimal
places such as 1.3 or 100.454.
There is a small unique factor to the float. When you are scripting, you
must put a small f after the value to help the compiler know the value is a
float. C# assumes that any number without f at the end, such as 3.14, is a
type of double. We won’t be using a double for our scripting, so we need to
remember to add the little f after our floats.
On line 7 add:
public float myFloat = 3.14;

When you tried to enter this, there was an issue with the number and there
was a red line underneath the 3.14, right? If you hover over the red-

underlined area, you will get an error. It might look something like Figure
3.4:

Figure 3.4: CS0664 error display
Visual Studio is trying to tell you that the number you entered will be
thought of as a double, so let’s make a bit of a change to help the IDE.
Change line 7 to:
public float myFloat = 3.14f;

There we go. Now we have a float declared and initialized. We declared it
as myFloat and initialized the value as 3.14. The default float is 0, but when
you tell it to assign a value as you are declaring it, the IDE overwrites that
default 0 with the value you set it to. When you go into Unity and look at
the inspector, you will now see the value starts out as 3.14.

String
We’ve been working with numbers this whole time. Now it’s time for letters
to shine. Strings hold the values of characters. An example of this could be
the character’s display name.
On line 8 add:
public string mystring = "Myvari";

This looks the same as well, but now you can add letters! The interesting
point to be made here is that these public values’ inputs all look the same,
so we need to make sure our variable names are unique.

GameObject
This is an interesting data type as it’s unique to Unity. Its reference is to a
GameObject that you place in it from the scene or prefab. This is extremely
powerful as the item you place in here has components and we can access
them from the script to do a great many things.
On line 8 add:
public GameObject myGameObject;

Save your code and head back into the editor. You will notice this time,
instead of an input field, it is wanting a GameObject to be placed here. In
our scene, there is a directional light. Let’s drag that light from the
hierarchy and into that spot. You now have a reference to a scene
GameObject! Let’s continue a bit further to logic and flow to see what we
can do with our initial variables.

Programming logic
We’ve created some amazing variables filled with such fantastic data. The
only problem is that we aren’t doing anything with it. Why don’t we start
working some logic into our little script to start making some connection as
to why we would need to program in the first place? For this, we are going
to go into if statements and while loops.
Before we get to do some runtime work, we need to add MonoBehaviour to
our class. The term for the actions we’re about to take is inheritance. We
will derive our class from MonoBehaviour, which will give us access to its
class by inheriting them! To do this is very simple.
Remembering line 3:
public class ScriptingLesson : MonoBehaviour

We are inheriting properly by adding : MonoBehaviour after our class
name, and now we have access to any of the methods inside the
MonoBehaviour class. There are quite a few methods we are able to use
from MonoBehaviour. For now, we will use the Start() and Update()
methods that are inherited from MonoBehaviour.

If statements
We’re now going to set up some simple code to turn a GameObject off and
on according to the state of the isActive bool we’ve defined. To do this,
we will need to check it on an update method, which is part of
MonoBehaviour.
Starting with line 13, we made these changes:
private void Start()
{
isActive = true;
}
private void Update()
{
if (myGameObject != null)
{
if (isActive)
{
myGameObject.SetActive(isActive);
}
else
{
myGameObject.SetActive(isActive);
}
}
}

Inside the Start method from MonoBehaviour, we are setting isActive to
true. This was added here to set the Boolean to be considered regardless of
what was set in the editor.

After that, there is an update method. The update method from
MonoBehaviour will do a check of the entire code inside the curly braces in
every frame. Initially, we check out the GameObject we defined by
comparing it to a null. This is a validity check. Null is a special keyword
that denotes the lack of type or data. If you do not perform these checks,
your editor will not be able to play as there will be a null exception. An
example of this is if you have a public GameObject that isn’t assigned in the
inspector, this will throw a null exception as the GameObject is null!
Inside the validity check, we have an if/else statement. It’s currently saying
if the isActive variable is true, then set myGameObject to active. For
anything other than true, set myGameObject to inactive.
If you save and press play, you will be able to select the scripting lesson
GameObject and then uncheck the isActive boolean checkbox. It will turn
off the light. Since this is checking every frame, you can do this forever and
it will turn on and off until your heart’s content.
Before we move on to while loops, we wanted to do a bit of a refactor of
our block above. This is a good time to learn about this as well. We went
through this if block to learn the syntax, but we could’ve made it better!
We are running this check every frame, so the if block isn’t needed here as
we have a Boolean to compare it with. You could instead write the
following code to refactor this down, saving compute time:
private void Update()
{
if (myGameObject != null)
{
myGameObject.SetActive(isActive);
}
}

How this can be read is, every frame, if myGameObject isn’t null, set its
active state to either true or false depending on what the Boolean is set to.
We don’t have to ask it if it’s true or not since the data type only has two
states! This is awesome.
Let’s move on to while loops for a take on looping code.

While loops
An if statement is a simple branching pattern checking for a true or false to
execute something. while loops will continually run code until the
statement is true or false. This can cause issues – as you can imagine, some
tasks could go on forever. This is called an infinite loop and can hang your
application indefinitely or until it’s forced to close. For the most part, we
catch infinite loops quickly and they don’t cause much of a fuss. We should
still pay attention to our criteria when creating a while loop.
On line 32, add these lines to the update method:
while (MyInt > 0)
{
Debug.Log($"MyInt should be less than zero. It's
currently at: {MyInt}");
MyInt--;
}

There are several new things we’re doing here in this while loop. We are
doing a debug log, string interpolation, and a decrementer. Let’s go
through those.

Debug log
Debug.Log allows us to pass in a string and it will be written out in the

console inside Unity. This is very helpful if there are strange things
happening and you want to get some runtime information out to the
console.

String interpolation
Inside the log, we are performing an action called string interpolation. This
is a very handy way to add your variables into a string. This is started off
with a $ followed by double quotes. Inside this is a string that you want to
write out. It is a literal string to include spaces. The interesting thing is that
there are curly braces {} inside the string! If you place the variable name

inside the curly braces, you will get the data passed into the string. In the
while loop just slightly above you can see us performing this in the Debug
line.

Decrementer
The next line is a decrementer. This is an efficient way to write this line:
MyInt = Myint – 1;

If you save this and then run it, there will be nothing in the console. This is
because we haven’t set MyInt to anything, so it defaults to 0. The while
loop will not run because MyInt is not greater than 0 – it is 0. Let’s make
this change:
On line 16, add this:
MyInt = 10;

Save and run the game. Now if you look at the console, it will quickly
decrement MyInt down to 0 and print out the line letting you know its
current value. If you look in the inspector, you will see that MyInt is
showing 0 as well.
Now that we have an idea about programming logic, let’s add some
functionality.

For loops
Like while loops, for loops are an iteration over a set number of items. for
loops are most used if there is an idea of how many times the iteration will
need to run. We will do a simple for loop to show the syntax of it and go
over it below:
First, let’s comment out line 35 as we don’t need the while loop debug log
cluttering up our for loop debug lines.

Then, on line 39, add this block of code:
for (int i = 0; i < 10; i++)
{
Debug.Log($"For Loop number: {i}");
}
for loops tend to be more common, but let’s go over a bit of reasoning as to

why you would want to use one or the other.

Choosing between for and while
for and while loops are similar in function. They are designed to iterate

over some set of items. The rules on this aren’t written in stone. They are
interchangeable technically, but there is some nuance to readability. The for
loop reads as if there is a set number to iterate over. This value doesn’t need
to be known to the for loop, but an example of this is a group of
GameObjects. If you needed to iterate over all of them and perform logic on
all of them, you wouldn’t need to code the number of items to iterate over
as the grouping has a count. You can iterate over this count. We will see an
example of this in Chapter 6, Interactions and Mechanics.
The difference between this and the while loop is that the while loop reads
as follows: Do something until a condition is set to true. It doesn’t matter
how many items need to be iterated on as it will go until the other condition
is met. while loops have an inherent issue in them for making infinite
loops. If you don’t 100% understand what you are looping over or
accidentally use the wrong symbol (< instead of >) for your condition, you
can run into that infinite loop explained in the while loop section. while
loops aren’t used as much as for loops, but they do have a good place in
programming.

Methods
If logic is the butter of programming, this is the bread. The purpose of a
method is to perform actions in a concise manner. A very simple example

of a method is a basic calculator function called Add. To perform this
function, we will do three things: Create some public variables to add with,
have a way to trigger the method, and the method itself. We decided to use
the input system for all our inputs. To get this working, there are a few new
concepts to add here as well. Previously, we asked you to insert code into
specific lines. We will now just ask you to insert the code into the specific
sections instead.
At the top, we need to let the program know we want to use the input
system. To do this, we will add a using statement:
using UnityEngine;
using UnityEngine.InputSystem;

In the class’s variable section, add these lines:
public int addA;
public int addB;
public int totalAdd;
private InputAction testInput = new InputAction("test",
binding: "<Keyboard>/b");

We’re making the int variables public so we can make changes to them and
see that they are able to be changed during runtime when we run the
method. The input system is private as it doesn’t need to be affected by any
other scripts. This is a good practice to think about when writing your code.
If a variable will not be changed from another script, then keep it as a
private variable. Though it may not adversely influence the current working
environment on a small project, there could be conflicts later on when
projects get more fleshed out. We want to keep the code clean from the
beginning.
InputSystem requires the input to have listeners turned on and disabled
when not being used. We will create two methods that are native to
MonoBehaviour; OnEnable and OnDisable.
private void OnEnable()
{

testInput.performed += OnTestInput;
testInput.Enable();

}
private void OnDisable()
{
testInput.performed -= OnTestInput;
testInput.Disable();
}

These methods automatically fire during runtime. OnEnable is directly after
Awake on initialization. Do not worry if this is a little bit much, we will go
over them multiple times throughout this book for different perspectives.
For now, the reason these methods are here is to add the method
OnTestInput when testInput is performed. We bound the letter B to our
input in the variable portion, now we’re adding a method to be performed
when it’s pressed.
Below and outside the update method let’s add our addition method.
private int IntAdd(int a, int b)
{
totalAdd = a + b;
return totalAdd;
}

This is a method that is private, which means outside of this class, we can’t
access this method. This is going to return an int and its name is intAdd.
Inside the parenthesis after the name are arguments for the method. We
have two ints: a and b. We need to define their data types and their names.
When the method is running, our method makes two ints with the values at
that time and assigns them to variable a and b. We made totalAdd equal to
it so we could show the values change in the inspector as well as in the
console to debug it even further.
To bring this all together, we need to create the OnTestInput method. This
method has new terms, but for this instance, we will give them to you to get
the test going for a simple button press. Later on, in the mechanics portion
of the book, we will need to have more logic involved with our input.

Having this system set up early allows for quick iteration and scalability
with new input schemes, such as controllers.
Create a new method below the intAdd method:
private void OnTestInput(InputAction.CallbackContext
actionContext)
{
// If the action was performed (pressed) this frame
if (actionContext.performed)
{
Debug.Log(IntAdd(addA, addB));
}
}

The magic here is that this method is placed on the performed of the
testInput we enable in this script. This script gets called with the action
assigned to that input. Currently, we are only running simple logic to allow
for the debug log to print out if the actionContext is performed.
In our case, this will be true when the method is called. If we needed other
logic, such as if a cooldown for a skill wasn’t completed yet, we could tell
the user they can’t perform that skill within this method. This is a very
powerful system that can be built to be extremely robust.
Back in Unity, click on the script in the hierarchy and then put some values
in the addA and addB variables in the inspector. Start the game and press b.
You should see totalAdd change as well as the console print out the
number from the Debug line.

Summary
This may have been your first time reading anything about programming.
Going through these small examples is going to provide you with strong
fundamentals. Take your time to fully understand what we went over in this
chapter as it will be the glue holding together the rest of the chapters. We
will be using all these features when programming later as well as adding
new libraries and different implementations of classes. These are the

foundations of programming; we will build upon them thoroughly
throughout the book. If you ever get lost, refer to GitHub where you’ll find
these scripts in their completed form, which you can reference if something
isn’t working correctly.
This is the end of the foundations that we will build upon greatly over the
next five chapters. Part 2: Build and Design will add onto everything
you’ve learned so far, answer even more questions about building the
design of our prototype, and show you how Unity can help you create
games with as much ease as possible. Let’s move on to building out the
character and put some of these programming skills together to get Myvari
moving around with input.

Characters
In Chapter 2, Design and Prototype, we discussed that this book will be
utilizing a vertical slice method for our model. Being a vertical slice, the
project is a simplification of the game. It is similar to a demo, but it has all
of the main mechanics the game would contain, just in a simpler form. It is
meant to give investors a strong example of what could be an entire game
experience. We will be showing the character’s behavior to draw the player
in and then lead into a small portion of the story with mechanics driven by
environment puzzles while learning about the main character’s past.
We will start with the concepts related to the main character; we will then
model the character out and make changes as we see fit by working through
their mechanics and movement. We will make a rig for them so they can be
animated. After this, we will put them in Unity and test out how it feels
moving them around in the engine. This chapter will be packed with a lot of
information, and we will be going over many different production concepts
to create our character and get them properly moving:
Design and concept
Rigging
Character controllers
Scripting your character’s movement
Let’s start with the conception phase for Myvari, the main character of our
small story.

Design and concept
To make a character, there can be many dimensions. We want to make sure
that the hero character of this vertical slice, Myvari, is as fleshed out as

possible. One of the best tools for this is asking “why” for aspects of the
character.

Asking why
We are building an adventure-based puzzle game. The first question that
comes to mind is: why is the character on this adventure? In this case, we
answered that question with: “She is seeking to find answers about her
race’s past that aren’t in the stories being told or the books she’s read.” Now
we’ve defined a few things, but there are still more questions.
To give an idea of the questions that came up from this initial answer, look
at this list:
What race is she and why does this matter to the story?
Why female?
Why is her history hidden?
What is her clothing like?
What does the race look like?
Is she humanoid?
As you can see, this can go on for a while, and it should. All of these
answers should bring more questions. Take them down to their lowest
possible components. This may seem tedious, but when you are done, you
will know how this character acts when they are confronted, their facial
expressions, behaviors, inside jokes, family backstory, and everything in
between.

Concept time!
Now that we have a strong idea of Myvari and who she is, we can draw up
concept art. We first start out with some proportion work and sketch work
to find her basic appearance.

On the left in Figure 4.1, we also drew up a behavioral take. This gives us a
visual idea of how she may act in an idle break animation. An idle break is
an animation that occurs when your character remains still for some time.
We felt that her character would be studious and inquisitive, so she would
pull out a book and just start studying on the spot.

Figure 4.1: Initial Myvari sketches
After we have drawn up the sketches of what she may look like, including
giving a sense of her personality, we need to get a feel for the colors to
finalize the design. The color scheme shown in Figure 4.2 was chosen after
answering all the previous questions.
Myvari’s overall color themes give the sense of royalty, curiosity, and
safety. These are depicted through regal clothing with gold lines denoting
royalty. Blue evokes a sense of safety—a psychological and physical effect,
as seeing this color lowers our blood pressure. Using blue draws the player
slightly more into her character, curious about this bright blue amongst the
rest of her neutrally colored outfit.
Her most unique accessory is her necklace, which has a mechanical
purpose. It will be the key for the puzzles that she will have to interact with.

For this reason, the necklace has a color that stands out from the rest of
Myvari. This color will also be unique in the environment utilizing a
concept known as user guidance, which we will talk about in Chapter 5,
Environment, Chapter 6, Interactions and Mechanics, Chapter 7, Rigid
Bodies and Physics Interaction, and Chapter 12, Final Touches. We will
need to use this color continuously in the environment, the mechanics, as
well as the polishing of the entire vertical slice.

Figure 4.2: Myvari’s color scheme

Once we have a strong idea about the character’s personality and colors, we
need to move into the 3D versions of concepting. This is less creating and
more defining a character. The following image depicts the character’s
facial features using a sculpting tool. Our team has a strong background in
the use of Pixologic’s ZBrush, which allowed us to create the sculpt you see
in Figure 4.3. 3DCoat and Blender also offer sculpting tools.
After we’ve worked through enough iterations with the sculpts, we will use
this as a beginning high-resolution model.
Now that we’ve defined our primary high-res sculpt, we can move on to
getting a low-res model out of ZBrush.

Figure 4.3: Myvari’s high-resolution head sculpt
The low-res model will be our scale bias for everything in the game, as seen
below in Figure 4.4. When you are creating buildings, flora, fauna, or
characters, this model will act as the universal scale for them. There are
multiple ways to work through scale, however, I know that this character is
the main creature in this game; all of the items will be environmental or
props, which will all be scaled off her size as the base scale.

Figure 4.4: Myvari’s low-resolution head sculpt
Some other ways scaling can be done is by building to scale. Unity’s units
are centimeters. If you build to a meter and then export from your Digital
Content Creation (DCC) as a centimeter, everything will follow a single
unit scale. This is a great way to build if you are building a large game with
many teams working around the world. You could also build the game
around the environment itself. An example of this could be a top-down
game using squares for environment creation, so it all clicks together. The
squares may be a 10th of the screen. From this information, you would take
a screenshot at the resolution expected, then draw the character concepts on
that picture to fit the scale. Look at your project and look through what the
single point of scale that you can build off is. This will ultimately save you
time down the road.
You could potentially just build whatever you can and scale the item ingame after it’s imported. However, what will happen with that is the
mechanics may not work properly. Think about games like Tomb Raider or
Assassin’s Creed, where the main character must climb onto walls. This
requires the character to have a very specific height and a large amount of
conditioning to ensure they are in the right spot at the right time for the
animation.

Rigging
After working through this whole concepting phase, we need to work on
getting some bones into the character so we can animate her. We will be

using Autodesk’s Maya 2022 to rig our character. The points we will go
over will be principles, not technical details. Depending on your DCC tool,
you may encounter slightly different terminology, however, the following
terms will generally apply to any of the major DCCs in use for game
development.

Animation-first thinking
When beginning the rigging task, the most efficient way to work is by
having a detailed conversation about the animations themselves with the
artists who will be responsible for them. Even if you’re doing the
animations yourself, successful rigs are ones that ensure the animator
doesn’t need an explanation of what each control does. There may be some
technical attributes, but overall if a control doesn’t need something, it
should be locked and hidden.
When the animator moves a control that oversees the hand, they may expect
all the finger controls to be on that control. This is intuitive but it shouldn’t
be assumed that the animator needs this. They may want all individual
controls to be placed on their own control.

Deformation
This is the ability for a mesh to be able to bend in a predetermined way,
such as the elbows or knees. Since you know how they will be bending, you
can plan your mesh for that deformation to be possible with a proper edge
flow in your model. Edge flow is an art form all on its own, ensuring that
there is enough geometry to keep the shape when deforming. An example
edge flow can be seen in Figure 4.5. Take your time working through other
AAA model examples and learn how each body structure may bend.

Figure 4.5: Example of edge flow on a humanoid
Facial deformation is by far the most specific deformation. If you are
planning on having any facial deformation when you start rigging, look for
some videos explaining how to set up the character for this. Facial
expressions are intricate and hard to do correctly.
A small example of edge flow and separation can be seen in Figure 4.6.

Figure 4.6: Example of facial edge flow
Facial deformation done correctly will result in your character producing
relatable expressions. This can accentuate the experience by bolstering the
immersion through emotion. If you plan on having close-ups of your
character, it’s a good idea to take the time to work through facial
deformation.

Hierarchy
Hierarchy and parenting are an integral part of rigging knowledge. When
Unity imports a skeletal mesh, there may be transforms that your DCC had
in place. This can sometimes be a grouping or hierarchical change that has
its own transform. Unity would see these items as GameObjects and place
them in the same spot in the Hierarchy of the skeleton. Every application
may be slightly different. An example of this is with Maya: if your
hierarchy has a group node as a parent of your rig, Unity will think this is a
transform of its own and import it as such. This may not cause an issue in
the beginning with no logic on the GameObject, but it’s always best to be as
clean as possible. If you are using Maya, we recommend that you don’t
have any parent nodes on the skeleton you will be binding.
This brings up a topic that is interesting to work with: the control rig. The
most customizable rig that we’ve worked with was a binding rig, which was
bound to all the vertices on the character. This was then driven directly by a
duplicate rig, which we called a control rig. This allowed for the bind rig to
only worry about the inputs of a single entity. This is important as
sometimes you may want to have multiple deforming tools moving around
the rig. You might want a separate squash control and twist control. All this
logic on the control rig will drive the bind rig without worrying about
breaking the binding on the character.

Bones or joints
Bones and joints are terms used interchangeably in rigging. The bind
skeleton consists only of bones or joints in its own Hierarchy from the root,

through the spine, arms, legs, neck, and head. These bones can be seen in
Figure 4.7 below.

Figure 4.7: Examples of joints of character inside DCC
After you’ve laid out your bones, you then need to plan out the next level
by constraining systems that will drive the bones’ structure. If you are using
a control rig on top, these constraints would instead drive the control rig
bones.

Forward Kinematics/Inverse
Kinematics
Forward Kinematics (FK) and Inverse Kinematics (IK) are two major
forms of animation for arms and legs. FK is a technique where the animator
will manually rotate every joint individually. If you are animating an arm,
you would start from the shoulder, then the elbow, then the wrist, etc. It’s
called “forward” as you are going forward down the Hierarchy for
animation. On the contrary, IK is where you would animate the hand, and
the shoulder and elbow would follow from the guidance of a rotate plane.
There is a debate on whether to use one or the other, however, they are

tools. If you work with one and it makes your job easier, then use that style.
It is very common to see FK/IK switches on character rigs as both have
their places in certain animation workflows.
Further, the primary concern about IK is that you can keep the hand in the
same position or to the space where it was last placed. Imagine standing up
and putting a hand in the air, then moving your hips up and down while
keeping your hand in the air in the same place. This would be extremely
tedious to animate with an FK-only setup as you would have to key the
shoulder, elbow, and wrist separately to all the hip motions. With IK, you
would be able to key the wrist in the spot where it would be and then just
animate the hips. IK would handle the shoulder and elbow for you.
However, a walk cycle where gravity is working on the hand and it’s mostly
just making an arc with the momentum of the movement is better suited for
FK.
As previously mentioned, these are tools that can potentially produce the
same result. As you build experience with your tools, it will provide you
with insight into your animation style.

Constraints
Constraining is a simple action. Using visual objects, we want the animators
to understand the control’s purpose straight away. A concise example would
be a NURBS (non-uniform rational basis spline—a point in space that
creates something visual) curve that will point to each finger in a rigged
hand to help with making a fist. Figure 4.8 below shows how we did this
with Myvari’s rig.

Figure 4.8: Myvari’s hand controls
These are called controls simply because they allow the animators to
control certain aspects of the character. Reading this may sound similar to
another term we introduced in Chapter 1, A Primer to the Third Dimension:
parenting. It is true that there is a similarity between constraining and
parenting, however, we are allowed to be specific in what we want to
constrain with constraints. In Maya, this is separated into translation,
rotation, and scale constraining. You can also constrain individual
components of each of these, such as “rotate x” only. This allows the rigger
to be able to restrict the animator a bit. The above example with the head
control may only need a rotational constraint. This makes it so the
translation of the box would not affect the bones. With parenting, you
wouldn’t be able to separate these. Parents affect all transforms of the child
object.

Deformers
The deforming tools will be unique to each DCC. The primary function of a
deformer is to control the top-level hierarchy in certain ways. An example
of this may be a twist deformer, which could allow a nice twist of the
controls to make it easier for the animator to build a twist animation.

Some advanced animations use the deformers on another mesh that is
controlling the bones, which is sometimes called a ribbon rig, which is seen
below in Figure 4.9. This image shows the ribbon on the left and the
deformers that control the underlying joints of the necklace. The right side
shows what the animator sees by hiding the underlying ribbon control.

Figure 4.9: Examples of a ribbon rig for Myvari’s necklace

Controls
Animators have the unique job in the 3D world of working with
representations of the items they need to move in real time. Whether this is
a box surrounding the hand or head, each shape gives the animator control.
Each character will have controls unique to their needs. Myvari will have
standard controls for a biped and extra controls for her clothing and trinkets.
Below in Figure 4.10 is our character’s controls for her whole body.

Figure 4.10: Myvari’s whole-body controls

Physics-based animation
Some animation can be done through a simulation. There should be a bone
attached to the mesh, but the DCC will perform physics movements that
would be slightly constrained. These are very good to work with for chains,
necklaces, and basically anything springy or dangly. These things are
notoriously difficult to animate by hand, so it’s best to let the application
handle it for you. In some cases, the game engine can handle all the
physics-based animation and doesn’t need to be keyed by the animators.
This means that the physics animation would be independent of the

animation file itself, which would allow for a much smoother blending of
animations.

Human Inverse Kinematics (HIK)
system
Autodesk has created a biped rigging system to integrate multiple software
easily. This is needed primarily for motion capture work where the
animations are created through separate technologies. Motion capture is
done through suits, facial capture devices, as well as specialized gloves.
The primary purpose of a Human Inverse Kinematics (HIK) rig is to
gather animation data for the biped’s head, spine, arms, and legs. There is
an advanced version that allows for fingers as well as more features on the
arms and legs, such as twists. To gather more information about HIK
skeletons, Autodesk has published documentation about how best to use it.
For our demonstrations, we will not be using the HIK system. With Myvari,
we will be doing all hand-keyed animations and no mocap work. In
knowing this, we decided to stick to just keeping a custom rig and control
system.

Animation
We have now designed, modeled, and rigged a character with controls. Now
we can use our animation skills in our DCC to give some life to the
character. When you are deciding what animations to make, be sure to give
good thought to what personality the character has. Since we spent a good
amount of time asking all the hard questions about our character’s
motivations and desires, we should honor that with the correct movements
expected of someone with that personality.
A strong way to work through animations is the same way that you would
work through any art form. First, we will work with a blocking phase to get
the timing right by working with just key poses. While you are doing this,
get the key posing as strong as possible. Every keyframe should have a

personality in it. If you look at the keyframe and cannot get a sense of the
character, then it would not be considered “key” to the character. After you
have blocked in some keyframes and moved them to get a sense of timing,
this is when you would then add in-betweens.
These are keyframes in between the key poses in timing. These keys will
help sell the movement within each key pose.
Once you get to this point, it can be a good idea to add it into the game
engine to get a sense of actual movement with the character controller to
see if what you see in the DCC translates into the game’s movement. Doing
this at this stage is smart as you will have a good amount of time near the
end of the project to polish all your animations after you learn how to move
your character.

Character controllers
Now that we have put together a character design, model, and rig, we need
to set up a controller to have them react to inputs. There are two general
methods for character controllers. The built-in character controller that
Unity provides will allow you to have a character walk around, up stairs,
and easily build in further functions of interaction, but it has its limits. The
largest limitation is that it is not used as a physics object. If you need your
character to get pushed around by physics, there is a second option
available. The second option is using a Rigidbody and collision capsule
with a character script using these as restrictions to the physics engine. Just
as you may have come to expect by now, to choose the correct option here
we need to ask questions! The following are some examples:
What are the primary mechanics?
Do I need physics for movements?
How many other limitations will there be for my character?
After some time, you may learn to ask these questions very early when you
start seeing what architecture may be needed to pull off the gameplay you

want within Unity. This will only happen after leaving these questions
unanswered and missing the mark slightly. Do not get discouraged by this.
This is the best way of learning: failing fast and failing often. The options
available to you are not always obvious.
An example of this is asking yourself what the primary mechanics are.
Looking at your game, you may try to push crafting weapons in the game,
but the combat mechanics are more fun during production. After finding
this out, you may cut most of the crafting and put more effort into polishing
the combat mechanics. What this does is place more emphasis on the
character controller over UI or interactive crafting work.
In our game, we decided to take a simple approach to the character
movement. We only need movement, and all other interactions will mostly
be through mouse position and camera work. With that in mind, we will
investigate the character controller foundation to build upon.

Built-in character controller
Unity has a built-in character controller component that can be added to
your character. This will give you solid foundations to work with. It is
simply a capsule collider that allows simple movement for a first-person or
third-person game. The interesting portion of this is that it does not use
physics or Rigidbodies for physics. Unity documentation explains this the
best as a “Doom-style” controller: moving very fast and when you let go of
the thumbstick, it stops immediately. This is sometimes desirable, but not
often. An example of when this could be desirable is when you’re making a
game where extremely tight controls are needed. Metroid uses this to flip
the character left and right immediately. If you had to slow to a stop before
turning, the game wouldn’t feel as good as it does.
The best part of this is that it is fast and easy to throw it on your character to
get moving if you want to just test something simple. If you want to add
jumping, floating, swimming, flying, or anything dealing with physics, this
application will not work without a good amount of work.

We will be using the built-in character controller for this tutorial, as Myvari
only needs to explore on the ground without jumping or sliding and none of
her interactions use any focused physics.

Rigidbody character controller
This option for a component starts with coding in mind but offers a large
amount of flexibility that the built-in character controller can’t provide for
many purposes. The initial reasoning for using a Rigidbody is if you are
looking to have different physics materials in your game. If your game is
planning on utilizing physics in multiple ways, then it would be better to
plan on working with the Rigidbody and collision components as your
choice for physics on your character controller.

Scripting your character’s
movement
When you’re scripting your character, it’s a good idea to have as many
movement-related design conversations as you can to know what to
architect out. For Myvari, we wanted to have a few movement-related
specifics in the environment because this game is an environmental puzzle
game. We should have the environment interact with her as she traverses it.
Here is a list of what we went over:
Idling
Walking:
On the ground
In water
On ledges
Rotation

Note
There are two movement-related scripts that we, at this time, haven’t
fully decided on implementing. These are running and jumping. The
reason we aren’t going to implement these currently is that we do not
know for certain that we need them. As we move through the level
currently, it feels good walking through it, and we want the player to pay
attention to the environment as well. We will set up the character
controller to accept a running movement if we think it’s needed later.
Jumping is similar, but we have no mechanics that require jumping up or
over. You would only implement this to satisfy the need for jumping
around in an environment. We may find that this is needed after some QA
passes are done and player feedback states that they need to jump around.
If this is a strong enough case, we can add it in.

Initial setup in Unity
To begin with, to get Myvari set up to even accept scripts for movement, we
should set it up in Unity. We should already have Myvari imported into the
Unity project. Just so you are aware, the way to go about this is just a
simple drag and drop onto the project’s folder you want her to be in. If you
select SM_Myvari in the Character folder, the Inspector will show the
imported settings on the model, as shown in Figure 4.11. The default
settings that are in use here are good for our needs.

Figure 4.11: Import settings Model tab

We need to move over to the Rig tab and set up our rig. In Figure 4.12, we
have a couple of options to go over. We want to make sure that Animation
Type is set to Humanoid. We also want to create an avatar from this model
and then configure it. This will open another window to set up the bones in
the humanoid structure.

Figure 4.12: Import settings Rig tab
This window will default to the body portion, though we’re showing the
head section in Figure 4.13. It’s best to go through every portion of the
body as the avatar system will do its best to align the joints to the right
location, but sometimes it doesn’t work out. If it isn’t set up properly, just
select the correct joint to fill the slot properly.

Figure 4.13: Import settings Rig, configure head portion
Before we set up the controller, we should have a chat about our decisions
on how the game will be played. We have a third-person, over-the-shoulder
play style. This means we must add a camera to the character. As such, we
should make a Prefab with our character and our camera. To set this up, we
make a Hierarchy that will allow for independent camera movement but
keep the camera and character together. In Figure 4.14 you can see the way
we set up the Prefab.

Figure 4.14: Character prefab hierarchy
The reason we set it up this way was that we wanted a container to hold
both the camera and the character. The character GameObject holds all the
scripts needed for the character. The mesh will hold the animator and
avatar. The camera rig will house the camera as well as the scripts needed to
maintain the camera in the position we want. Later in the book, when we
get into the mechanics in Chapter 6, Interactions and Mechanics, we will
be going over Cinemachine quite heavily as there are parts of the game
where we will need to put the camera in a location for a cinematic.
For the rest of this chapter, we will go over just the basics of setting the
character up for movement. On the character GameObject, let’s set up the
components to get her moving around. As shown in Figure 4.15, we will
add four more components. These are the character controller, our
movement script, a Rigidbody component, and a player input system.

Figure 4.15: Character GameObject components
As stated previously, we will be using the base character controller. These
settings are subjective, and we haven’t finalized them, but this is what we
have so far. One note we should add here regards the center attribute. This
is where the character controller thinks the center of the character is. It
defaults to being on the ground, but you need to move it up so the capsule is
closer to the center and slightly off the ground. We try to put it near the
pelvis and then use the radius and height to encompass the general body of
the character. We do this because the pelvis controls the overall height as
the human structure has its center of mass in the belly button.
We’re going to skip over the movement script for now. The Rigidbody here
is to help with future mechanics needs and physics-based work. We will
cover this in Chapter 5, Environment, and Chapter 6, Interactions and
Mechanics.
PlayerInput is a Unity system that sets up modular inputs to easily add
different input systems without needing to change the code. Firstly, open
your Package Manager and see if the Input System is installed. It would
be part of the Unity Registry. If it’s not installed, install it! If it is, then we
need to make an input system for us to work with.

This can be done by adding a new asset called Input Actions, as shown in
Figure 4.16.

Figure 4.16: Adding an Input Actions asset
After you create the input action, name it according to your needs. We are
naming ours Player Actions. We are going to use this grouping of input
actions specifically for any player actions needed. You may need other
actions besides characters in your future projects. At this point, you will
need to double-click the asset to open the Input Actions window. Here, we
will design the input options for use as currently needed for Myvari.
Figure 4.17 shows a completed input system as we need it currently. We
may add more inputs as the vertical slice continues to develop.

Figure 4.17: Input Actions
Action Maps are groupings that have their own set of actions that can be
called upon. Properties are details and options for the selected action. For
this case, we only need inputs for Myvari, so we created a Myvari Action
Mapping. Notice the capitalization of the Action Mapping name, as it will
be used in scripting once we get into the movement script.
In Actions, the green sections are the actions themselves, the blue are the
bindings, and the light red are the binding parts. For Locomotion we only
need to worry about a composite of vectors. When adding a new binding, if
you press the plus (+) symbol on the right of the action, you have two
options. These are Binding or 2D Vector Composite. When you click 2D
Vector Composite, it automatically adds the Up, Down, Left, and Right
composite parts. We are defining them as keyboard inputs currently to stick
with a certain input system. There is a very interesting and useful tool when

setting an action, called the Listen button. Looking at Figure 4.18, you can
see that it’s pressed and is listening for input. For us, being able to press the
assumed button that may be pressed gives us a sense of immediate player
feedback. If it feels odd at this point to assign a keystroke to an action, then
it won’t feel much better during gameplay.

Figure 4.18: Listening for input
The Look input is for camera movement, and we are using Delta for mouse
movement. Our Aim action is meant for when you’re holding down the
right mouse button for precision. This is choosing the Action Type as a
button and expecting a right mouse button input. Finally, we have an
Interact button. This is the same as Aim but designed for the E key to be
hit at certain times. Those times will be defined in, Environment, and ,
Interactions and Mechanics.
We now have a setup for the inputs we as players put into the game. Even if
we wrote scripts to work with this input system, it wouldn’t affect anything.
So, before we start scripting, we need to put together the basics of the
animation setup for Myvari. Let’s look at the animations we will need. For
now, we only need Idle and Walk for animation transitioning. We do not
need to set up Interact just yet here as we do not currently have a use for it.
In Chapter 5, Environment, we will be looking at the use of Interact.

Idling
Myvari may have to stand still for a time as the player looks around. Most
of the time, there is no scripting involved when idling as this should be the
standard state in your animation controller. When you bring the character

into your Scene, you will need to add an Animator component. See Figure
4.19 for a correct configuration.

Figure 4.19: Animator component
Controller and Avatar will be empty. We need to create the controller by
creating a new asset and going to Create > Animator Controller. The
controller is an interface between the code and visuals to move the skeletal
mesh we want to animate.
With Idle, we will make a default state and name it Idle. You can see this
in Figure 4.20. In the Characters > Animations folder within the project,
there are animations we’ve set up with Myvari. Select the Idle state and
drag the idle animation from that folder onto the Motion parameter in the
inspector, as shown in Figure 4.21 below.

Figure 4.20: Controller state machine

Figure 4.21: Idle animation state inspector
When you have the idle animation in place, when you press Play, the
character will enter idle mode and loop that animation forever!
We also want to have a walk animation though. To add this, in an empty
space, right-click and choose Create State and then choose Empty.
Name it Walk. Select it and add the walking animation. After that, rightclick on Idle and choose Make Transition, then left-click on the Walk
state.
This will make a transition from Idle to Walk. Do the same thing from the
Walk state back to Idle. This allows us to set up parameters to transition to
and from Idle and Walk. We will now add a parameter of isWalking to the
controller, as seen in Figure 4.22.

Figure 4.22 Controller parameters
The Parameters section is found on the upper left of the controller. We
want to make a bool and name it isWalking. We will be using this
parameter in the transition points. If you select the transition from the Idle
to Walk states, you will see the transition from one animation to the other
in the inspector. At the bottom of the inspector are conditions. Let’s add a
condition and set it to isWalking is True. The animation state of Idle will
change to Walk when isWalking is true. You can then do the opposite to
revert to Idle.
We now have inputs and animations in place with a transition ready to listen
to the character logic. We now need to get in there and get the movement
script working. Let’s dive into the code!

Code entry point
We wanted to add a small section here explaining how we will go over the
code. In Chapter 3, Programming, we went step by step through every line
to go over the basics of code. What we plan on doing here is having the
script in its entirety available to you, with full comments so you can read it
if you’re more comfortable with code. In the rest of this chapter, we will be
going over small parts we haven’t been over previously and explaining
them as tools. We encourage you to build your own scripts and work with
the tools we go over to build your own character movement scripts.

We are going to be working through the MyvariThirdPersonMovement.cs
file. We have some simple work here as well as a complicated function.
While we are going through this, know that it is OK not to fully grasp
everything that is discussed. By noticing the hard parts and working
through them, you are solidifying that knowledge and understanding how to
work as a developer in Unity.

RequireComponent
When you see a RequireComponent above the class definition, this is saying
that the GameObject that this script is attached to is required to have
something. In our case, we want MyvariThirdPersonMovement.cs on the
character, and we need to ensure it has a character controller. Something
that is very helpful is that if Unity sees that the GameObject you attach this
to doesn’t have the required component, it will just attach it to the
GameObject for you! Isn’t that nice? We think so.
[RequireComponent(typeof(CharacterController))]

Update code
We’re going to go through this part in a bit of detail as each line goes indepth about the previous information and it’s difficult to explain a single
line at the end without showing the context. For the first part, we want to
ensure that if the character is grounded and their velocity isn’t above 0, it is
set to 0. Sometimes GameObjects will move in small increments in the y
direction. This isn’t a common occurrence, however sometimes in 3D
applications, rotations and movement causing rounding to happen for
values and velocity can increment when it shouldn’t. This can be prevented
by using these few lines of code.
if (controller.isGrounded && playerVelocity.y < 0)
{
playerVelocity.y = 0f;
}

In the next section we are breaking down the code we’ve written to ensure a
thorough explanation leading up to the character movement script
assignment in the Editor.
If you recall at the start of the Scripting your character movement section of
this chapter, walking through water was one of the movements we wanted
to have set up. We need to check if the character is in water to know how to
set up that logic. We will be using a method from the Physics library called
Raycast, which takes arguments, as seen in the helper tooltip in Figure 4.23
below.

Figure 4.23: Physics.Raycast arguments
When a Raycast is used, its arguments are as follows: origin, direction,
hitInfo, maxDistance, and layerMask:
We define origin as this GameObject’s position plus one unit in the up
direction
direction is the down direction
hitInfo is being saved as a RayCastHit named hit
maxDistance is set to 2 units
layerMask is set to waterLayer
To test this, make a cube and select Water for its layer value in the
inspector. We will call for this waterLayer check during the
controller.Move portion at the bottom.
// Check for water
standingInWater = Physics.Raycast(transform.position +

Vector3.up, Vector3.down, out RaycastHit hit, 2f,
waterLayer);

This next part is where the Input System is reading the value of the
locomotion we put together. The movement variable is a Vector2, or x and
y only. So, we will need to manipulate this to make sure it makes sense for a
3D movement.
// read in the values of the input action assigned to this
script
Vector2 movement = movementControl.action.ReadValue<Vector2>
();

We make a Vector3 and place the x and y from the read value while
keeping the y of the Vector3 as 0.
// Use the values from the inputs and put them into a
vector3, leaving up blank
Vector3 move = new Vector3(movement.x, 0, movement.y);

We now need to think about the character and camera coordination. We
have a move variable that has the movement we need to move toward, but the
camera may be looking in another direction other than straight forward
relative to your character. So, let’s take that into account before moving.
// take into account the camera's forward as this needs to
be relative to the view of the camera
move = cameraMainTransform.forward * move.z +
cameraMainTransform.right * move.x;

Then we again just zero out that y value. If we were to implement jumping
sometime later, we would need to change this from 0 to different values
depending on the jump.
// zero out that y value just in case ;)
move.y = 0.0f;

Here we go. Now it’s time to move the character. We’ve thought about all
the possible problems we could have with the camera, character, and type of
terrain. The standard Unity character controller has a method named Move.
This method takes a single argument, a Vector3. This tells the character
which way to go. We need to take advantage of a few things. How fast are
they moving? Are they in water? Something new we are using here is
something called a ternary.
Let’s give a slight explanation before we get into the next line of code. This
is the ternary function. What is being said here is this:
If standingInWater is true, this value is whatever the value
of waterSlowFactor is. Otherwise, this will be 1f.
(standingInWater ? waterSlowFactor : 1f)

This is handy! We can slow the character down by a tunable value easily
and if we aren’t in water, she moves at the regular rate we have already
designed.
controller.Move(move * Time.deltaTime * playerSpeed *
(standingInWater ? waterSlowFactor : 1f));

We have gravity defined at the top of this class, and we set the velocity to
that gravity value multiplied by the change in time to account for framerate.
This will not be accounted for unless Myvari is not grounded due to the if
statement on top of the update function, which sets the velocity.y to 0 if
it’s less than 0 and isGrounded.
playerVelocity.y += gravityValue * Time.deltaTime;
controller.Move(playerVelocity * Time.deltaTime);

Here we are calling two methods to handle rotation and animation states.
HandleRotation(movement);
HandleAnimation(movement);

Methods

In an effort to keep the update loop as clean as possible, we refactored out
handling the rotation and animation from the Update function.
Refactoring is the process of restructuring existing code to make it more
readable. It’s running in the update, but it’s only called one line per method.
The initial method we’d like to go over is the HandleAnimation method.
This takes a Vector2 as an input, which is the direct input to the Vector2
reading from the input system. We are only worried about the single
animation parameter isWalking.
We first get the value of the bool at its current state and store it in a local
variable. Then we check if either of the vectors in the input movement is
nonzero as well as if isWalking is currently false. If so, we set the
animator bool to true. Otherwise, we set it to false. When this bool
changes, it will update in the controller and set the animations to the
appropriate state.
void HandleAnimation(Vector2 movement)
{
bool isWalking = animator.GetBool("isWalking");
if (movement != Vector2.zero && !isWalking)
{
animator.SetBool("isWalking", true);
}
else if (!(movement != Vector2.zero) && isWalking)
{
animator.SetBool("isWalking", false);
}
}

This is the most advanced method we have going on here. We think it’s a
smart idea to get out of our comfort zones as often as possible to continue
growth. We will walk through this and if it’s not making sense right now, let
it sink in and your brain will work through it. There are three actions taking
place here. We need to find the angle we want to rotate to, get a rotation
value, and then rotate!
Firstly, targetAngle is doing a Mathf method called Atan2. Atan2 is an
arctangent method that allows you to find the angle given the target position
of where you want to rotate to. It’s an interesting method that is very useful

in games for character rotations in 3D applications. The problem is that we
need to also account for the camera again. Atan2 returns radians, so we
need to multiply it by the radians-to-degrees constant and then add the
camera’s y angle. This is the offset from the character’s angle.
Next, we then take that target angle and create a quaternion from it in the
current camera angle on the y axis. This will allow us to get an angle we
will need to go to without worrying about gimbal locking occurring.
Gimbal locking is when two axes get stuck in rotation due to one axis being
90 degrees off center. Quaternions are not susceptible to gimbal locking,
which is why we transfer to quaternions in the end from the Euler angles.
By definition, Euler angles are oriented with respect to a fixed coordinate
system. This is how we represent the angle we are at in the game where the
reference is from 0, 0, 0 in rotation on import. If you rotate the character 90
degrees on the y axis, it is represented as 0, 90, 0 in the rotational fields of
the transform of that GameObject. These values are Euler angles.
Finally, we need to transition to that rotation value. We do this through a
Slerp. This stands for a spherical lerp. When working with rotations, it’s
best to use the Slerp method. The arguments are our current rotation, the
new rotation we just made, and then how long it should take to rotate to that
new position. We made this rotation speed publicly available so we could
change it on the fly to get the variable that feels best.
Void HandleRotation(Vector2 movement)
{
if (movement != Vector2.zero)
{
float targetAngle = Mathf.Atan2(movement.x,
movement.y) *
Mathf.Rad2Deg +
cameraMainTransform.eulerAngles.y;
Quaternion rotation = Quaternion.Euler(0.0f,
targetAngle, 0.0f);
transform.rotation =
Quaternion.Slerp(transform.rotation, rotation,
rotFactorPerFrame * Time.deltaTime);
}
}

After this is done, your character now has movement and rotation. This is a
great first step to building out an environmental, narrative-driven
exploration game. Let’s finish up with a summary of what the whole
chapter covered.

Summary
In this chapter, we covered a large amount of character information. We
went through design, modeling and rigging, character controllers, rigid
bodies, working in Unity, and scripting a movement controller.
Design will always be boiled down to the question of “why?” You
should’ve taken away from this chapter that the why of your character and
their motivations will help secure a unique character that can be relatable.
Modeling and rigging are heavily dependent on the type of modeling you
will need to do. We went over some key methods to help guide your
modeling to think of animation first. This also applies to rigging. Animation
will be the final stage, and the easier it is to properly animate, the easier you
and your players will find a better overall experience. Animations tend to be
continually worked on until very close to release. Take the design of the rig
seriously, as making changes after animations start could end up requiring a
remake of animations.
We realized that Unity built-in character controller makes the most sense to
us as we don’t need Myvari to be tossed around by physics, such as
ragdolling. We then went into Unity and imported Myvari and went over
the components needed to get input as well as animations for her. Finally,
we finished going over a character script for movement and rotations.
In the next chapter, we will look at the environment, the terrain, and a tool
called ProBuilder.

Join us on Discord!
At the time of writing this book, we had over 200 Unity professionals on
the Unity server and we are constantly adapting to add new channels to

facilitate conversations on key topics such as C# programming, game
mechanics, game UI, animations, 3D games, sound and effects, and a
dedicated channel for Packt authors to connect with the book’s readers.
Tell us about your progress made so far and the game idea you have in mind
to build alongside this book. You never know—you might end up
collaborating with someone on the server to build your mini-team today.
https://packt.link/unity3dgamedev

Environment
When a player enters a game where the narrative is mostly driven by the
environment, you need to ensure that most of the questions they may ask
are answered. We will spend time in three major structures of
environmental development – environmental design, blocking, and
iteration. This should sound familiar from the character work we did
previously in Chapter 4! Fortunately, there are differences involved in the
environment regarding characters that we will cover quite extensively in
this chapter. By the end of this chapter, you will have worked through
enough environment questions to know how we designed our narrative, but
also to work on your own. Let’s break down the topics so that you can get a
glimpse of the chapter:
Design – sketching, mood boards, and staging
Blocking out – Mesh Blocking, Unity Terrain, Unity Probuilder
Working through the iteration process
Environmental design
The environment in a game is just as important as the character. We need to
think deeply about our choices in terms of how the environment is in
keeping with the theme and narrative of the gameplay. This is where we sit
down with concept artists and designers to ask the difficult questions. Work
through as much detail as possible to develop the purpose for the pieces of
the environment.
Conceptualizing an environment needs to start somewhere. We started with
sketching. We had an idea of what we wanted the environment to feel like
from the beginning, so we decided to sketch up some quick concepts. After
sketching, we put together some mood boards for a better definition of the
style.

Once we are happy with the style and general concept, we then want to
work in the following three stages to set the tone for the key points:
Sketching
Mood boards
Staging
Let’s look at these stages in detail, starting with sketching.

Sketching
You may have some strong ideas on what you want the environment to look
like. Just as in the other concept phases, you need to spend a large amount
of time asking “why?”. This question will help define the context of your
environment, so the experience fits together.
To perform sketching, you could employ several methods. Pen and paper
work great for this to get sketches out quickly. Someone might have a great
idea and draw on some napkins at a restaurant! If you’re in front of a
computer, you can use Photoshop if you have a subscription, or try
alternatives such as Krita or GIMP for free. Take some time to sketch out
the architecture, broad shapes, and feeling. Each sketch will give you a
closer look at what the final product could be. After each quick sketch, have
a small conversation with yourself or the team to determine whether you
need to ask more “why” questions in relation to the environment. The
amount of sketching required will vary depending on how confident you are
with conveying the emotion you want the player to experience. If you
cannot fully describe the reasoning for each piece, then continue sketching
and continue asking “why?”. Over time, the granularity will be enough to
move on.
Below, in Figure 5.1, is a series of images, and I will briefly explain what
they brought to the design of the environment for our vertical slice of the
game. We really wanted to paint broad strokes of the environment type,
meaning we’re developing without worrying about the subtle definitions.

We were not looking for the architecture of the ruins or the flora of the
environment. Initially, we were 100% certain of how we would put together
a ruin in the mountains, but we needed to search through our sketches to
figure out what felt right. We discovered that we wanted a remote
mountainous region that was overgrown far enough that it almost felt cavelike in nature the entire time. This built up to a feeling that you weren’t
actually on Earth, but on a planet similar enough to Earth to feel comfort in
the shapes of nature.

Figure 5.1: Examples of sketches
While you are working your way through the tutorial, we wanted the last
section when you reveal Myvari’s past to come with a drastic change to the
feel of the area. This is initially shown in the bottom-right concept sketch in
Figure 5.1. From this point, we knew we needed to push the architecture
question and get the medium shapes defined.

Figure 5.2: Last puzzle area
By furthering the development of the last section, we knew we would need
to have a stark contrast in terms of thematic visuals when the world shifted
into Myvari’s realm. Looking at the differences in the images in the
preceding Figure 5.2, the major difference is daytime versus nighttime.
That’s a large change in itself, but we also wanted to make the ground and
trees disappear while growing the architecture back to its old glory and
bringing up reflective still water that reflects the stars in the sky, thereby
really opening up this place as a new dimension.
After you get to a good point of sketching out your environment concepts,
you want to then take what you’ve learned from the sketches and build out
a mood board. Here, you can solidify references for the creation of your
pieces in the future.

Mood boards
A mood board is a collage of images that draw out the style and mood of
an area. There are hundreds of thousands of images on the internet that
people have drawn, rendered, sketched, or even photographed that may be
close enough to your style and tone that you can pull them together to

inspire a little bit more of the experience you’re looking to provide to the
player.
If you have definitive sketches, then this is your time to shine with mood
boards. Take some time to search out similar features and feelings of
architecture to make a collage of what the environment mood should feel
like. This will define the palette of colors for you to work with on the
modeling portion of this environment journey.
For our project, we had several major requirements. We wanted a
mountainous jungle that brought an ancient magical fantasy civilization
feeling to the game. Even if you were to search for “magical fantasy ancient
jungle ruin,” there is a large chance that you wouldn’t be able to find
exactly what you needed by way of reference. Instead, you break down the
primary functions of each area and come up with a mood board. For our
two examples, we will go over the cave and ruins mood boards.

Figure 5.3: Cave mood board example
In Figure 5.3 above, we focused on the primary function of the caves. What
does it feel like to be small? What are the atmospheric tendencies for fog
and lighting? This gives that sense of an alien environment even though you
are still on Earth, perhaps in an unexplored area of our Earth.

Figure 5.4: Ruins mood board example
In Figure 5.4, we wanted to break down the function of ruins in a magical,
fantastical civilization. What shapes would a nature-focused magical being
want to strive for? How do the colors blend with one another?
Mood boards need to answer for mood and tone. You will know when
you’ve completed your searching for mood when each of your key areas
has a collage that best suits the mood that area needs to convey. In our case,
we needed to feel out the caves versus the ruins. You’ll notice that both are
drastically different in mood without even seeing all the finer details of the
images.
Starting this after sketching makes sense if you can get questions answered
through that step. However, if you find that sketching is only raising more
questions overall, and muddling up the style that you want instead of
defining it, then mood boards should come first. Searching for imagery of
architecture tends to add a lot of clarity in terms of what is conceived.

Staging
After quickly sketching ideas and feelings to define the questions of “why,”
you then built a mood board to further solidify the feeling of the
environment. The next step is to take the previously defined shaping and
mood and use it to push your narrative and mechanics into the stages of the
game. The first location you bring your players to needs to answer a lot of
questions rather quickly. Luckily, you took the time to answer as many
questions as possible before this stage. You can now stage your narrative

design with confidence. For our project, we knew we would need to explain
as much of Myvari’s past as possible in each area you progress through.
When you’re building a stage, place yourself on the stage as best you can.
Take your time going through the stage and ensure your primary questions
were answered the way you expected in previous sections. Now, let’s try a
new experiment: imagine the experience you’ve created through the lens of
a new player. Try to feel what they might feel as a new player of 3D games.
Are there enough hints to describe the experience for them? Then look at it
from the point of view of an experienced player; would adding anything
else take away from these power users?
This could take several iterations. Be patient with this step, and go through
the stage to make sure you can explain the character’s assumed movements.
This is a good time to show someone else your designs and see what
unprompted questions they have to offer you as well; it is amazing what we
answer for ourselves without giving it much thought. Having a fresh set of
eyes at each stage will reveal areas where a little more detail is required.
After some time, a picture of what you need at each stage will be clearer,
and you can then take your stages into a blocking-out phase.

Blocking it out
Now that you have worked through as many of the concepts as you can, you
should have a very strong idea of what would make your environment
appropriate to the narrative and the characters. At this point, the next step
would be to work through “blocking out” as much as possible; the point of
blocking out is to put all the pieces together within Unity to fulfill the
experience we worked so hard to define in the previous stages.
Now that you are aware of, and comfortable with, what goes into each
portion of the entire level, you can speak to the mood and tone in each
portion and become attuned to the general shaping from the concepts. To
block a level out, we will use a few of the tools at our disposal; Unity

Terrain, Basic Shapes, and Unity Probuilder will set us up to put down the
basic environment pieces.

Unity terrain
Working with the Terrain tool in Unity is empowering. It’s very easy to get
going and make a beautiful landscape quickly. To get started, let’s create a
terrain entity. After creating the terrain entity, we will go through the
settings, painting, and foliage that Unity provides us with as tools to create
the terrain.

Creating a terrain
The first step to working with terrain is to create one. There are two main
methods for doing so.
One way is to click on the GameObject menu, then 3D Object, and then
Terrain, as shown in Figure 5.5.
Another way to start is by right-clicking an open area in the hierarchy and
then selecting 3D Object, followed by Terrain.

Figure 5.5: Creating a terrain entity
Either of these options will create a terrain GameObject in the scene at the
global coordinates of 0, 0, 0, sprawling positively in the x and z planes by
1,000 units, each by default. This value may not be what you need, so let’s
go over the terrain settings.

Terrain settings
In our vertical slice, we will be using the default units as these are what we
ended up needing for a sense of scale. This may not be the case for your

game. One nice thing about the terrain is that it can be connected to
neighboring terrain tiles easily.

Figure 5.6: Creating a neighboring terrain
The first option in the Terrain component is the Create Neighboring
Terrain button. When this is selected, you will see an outline of the
adjacent tiles, as seen in Figure 5.6. If you were to click on any of these
squares, the terrain will create a new terrain asset that is linked to the
primary terrain asset.
Now that you understand how the Terrain tool can connect to other terrains
quite easily, you can now think about your terrain settings in terms of the
size of each tile. It may be the case that your terrain only ever needs to be
500 units in length, and 200 in width. A common denominator of those is
100 units, so you could set your settings as in Figure 5.7 below.

Figure 5.7: Mesh resolution settings

If you plan on using grass or details on your terrain, make sure your terrain
is square. If the width is different from the length, the Details Brush will
have a hard time placing the billboards in an orderly way.
Clicking on the open squares will fill them in with another terrain tile.
Clicking several may result in a terrain that looks similar to Figure 5.8.

Figure 5.8: Adding neighboring tiles
This gives you the freedom to add small offshoots that aren’t too large if
you only need a little bit more terrain where you didn’t expect to need it.
In our case, we knew we only needed one block of 1000x1000, so we stuck
with the default sizing. Our entire vertical slice will take place in a single
scene with this default size for ease of setup.

Once you have your terrain scaled and set to the sizing that you will need,
you may then need to add some detail to your terrain. Even though a
stretching plane of infinite flatness is interesting in its own way, there is a
good chance that your concept does have some hills or mountains in it.
Let’s get to painting those in there.

Terrain painting
To get all those beautiful mountains and hills, we need to affect the terrain’s
geometry. The Paint Terrain tool allows just this. You can find the tool
button in the second available option in the Terrain Objects Inspector,
which is shown in Figure 5.9.

Figure 5.9: Brush options
Your Brush option, which is located directly under the Tool options, is a
dropdown that will change the functionality of the brush. To look at a list of
brush options, click the dropdown as seen in Figure 5.10.

Figure 5.10: Painting options
We will go over their exact functions, but I suggest you take a bit of time to
make a terrain you’re comfortable with by playing with the different
brushes. There’s nothing like experience to get a feel for how they act on
the terrain.

Raising or lowering the terrain
This tool will be your bread and butter while making a terrain. Depending
on the size of your terrain and the scale that you need to make changes to
the terrain, your brush size will be unique to your needs. Fortunately, there
is a nice indicator, shown in Figure 5.11, to let you know the size and shape
of your changes before you commit to the change and click.

Figure 5.11: Visualization of brush on different heights

When you select the Raising or Lowering Terrain brush, it shows a
description box that explains if you click on the terrain, the brush will raise
the terrain according to your brush shape, and if you hold down the Shift
key while clicking the brush, this will lower the terrain according to your
brush shape. If you attempt to lower your terrain on the flat parts, you’ll
notice that it will not go below 0. This could be a problem if you’re
planning on making indentions in the terrain to possibly put water in; there
is a way to work around this, which we will go over later in the Setting the
Height section.

Paint holes
After selecting the Paint Holes tool and taking a moment to click around
with paint holes, this tool may not jump out as the most useful tool relating
to terrain as it just erases the terrain. In addition to it just making a hole, it
makes jagged edges, which don’t fit well with the rest of the terrain being
nice and smooth!
But all is not lost! This tool is fantastic for you if you need to have a cave
built as a terrain that is not designed to deal with concave shapes that would
force an overlap in the terrain vertex.
It is common to design 3D meshes that encompass your needed cave system
and then place it below the terrain and cut a hole in the terrain to access it.
Note
We’ll cover 3D meshes in more detail in a later section, but here’s a
rough and ready explanation: a 3D mesh is a set of vertices, creating
polygons, that we use to visualize a 3D space.

The terrain is just a flat section being manipulated; it isn’t ground you can
just dig into with a shovel. If you want a cave in the ground, you will need
to make a hole, and then build a mesh below the terrain. This will leave
some jagged edges, which you can see in Figure 5.12.

Figure 5.12: Example of paint holes before and after in the terrain
You can cover up those jagged edges with rocks, or other meshes that lead
into the cave system.

Paint texture
Now you have most likely played enough that you have some hills,
plateaus, and other various gray terrain-related material. You may want
some color in your life, and luckily, there is an easy way to add some! You
can search for a tileable texture online, or you can use one of the textures
provided in the project to set this up.
When you first select the paint textures tool, there is nothing to paint as you
need to create layers to paint with. Your terrain layers will be blank until

you create one, so let’s do that first.

Figure 5.13: Editing terrain layers for painting
On the bottom right of the terrain layers, seen in Figure 5.13, there is a
button labeled Edit Terrain Layers. If you select this, you can either create
or add a layer. If you haven’t made a layer previously, you can click on the
Add Layer option, but there will not be any options to fill that. Instead,
let’s click on Create Layer. This will bring up a dialog box to select a
texture. A tip here would be to name your texture something that you can
search for easily, just in case you have a large number of textures to sift
through. An example of this could be to name your terrain textures with a
prefix of TT_, such as TT_Grass for grass. Then, when the dialog box is up,
you can type TT in the search bar and it will only show the terrain textures.
This trick can be used all over the project as there are search bars in most
available options to select an asset to fill a role.
When you choose your texture, it will create a Terrain Layer asset that
contains the texture you chose and some material options.
Figure 5.14 shows an example of a Terrain Layer.

Figure 5.14: Terrain Layer example
The primary property you will want to see here is the Tiling Settings.
Depending on the scale of the game, you may need to increase or decrease
the scaling to avoid seeing the tiles of the texture. If you look below at
Figure 5.15, you can see where the texture tiles over and over. This looks
bad from the camera’s current location, but in-game, it will be much closer,
which allows us to prevent tiling from being as visible. The most interesting
part of this is that it’s not connected to the terrain, so if you make a change
to the layer asset, it will update the terrain right away. This makes it nice in
terms of working quickly and getting an idea of what you want the terrain
to look like while you can add normal maps and the metallic or smoothness
elements later on.
The second thing that will happen is that the entire terrain will be painted
with this texture. When you add another layer, you will then be able to
utilize the same brush shapes and sizes to paint other layers onto the terrain.
Note

Technically Interesting!
The way that terrain layers work is that Unity creates a texture map for
each texture painted on the terrain. If you have four layers, each layer
corresponds to the four channels in a texture: Red (R), Green (G), Blue
(B), and Alpha (A). If you have five, the terrain gains a new texture, and
it adds it to another R channel of another texture. Since this is the case,
limit each tile to four textures for reasons of performance!

After you get the hang of working through the layers, it’s good to test small
sections with your character to ensure that the scaling on the layer makes
sense for the game scale itself, while keeping in mind that there will be
other noisy factors to break up the texture tiling, such as grass, rocks, trees,
or anything else that will be placed in your environment.

Figure 5.15: Testing brush strength when painting
If the character looks good at this point regarding the textures in respect to
scale, let’s move on to the next option.

Setting the height

When working with the lower height tool, you may have noticed that it
doesn’t go below the zero point. If you know you will be working below
zero, which is very common, then the workflow to start is: before making
any changes, set the height of the terrain to what might seem appropriate for
the height you would need to go below zero in units.
Do you need to go 200 units down? If so, set the terrain GameObject to
-200 in the position y, Figure 5.16 highlighted as step 1 in red. Then select
the Paint Terrain option while also selecting the Set Height dropdown as
shown in Figure 5.16 marked as 2 in red. After that, the value will be -200,
so set it to 0, then flatten it with the Flatten button in Figure 5.16 marked
as red 3.

Figure 5.16: Setting Height to allow for lower than world 0

This will set the terrain visually back to 0, 0, 0 as its location and keep the
offset in place so that you can lower the terrain below that mark. This is
very effective for making swamps, caverns, and rivers.

Smoothing the height
Smoothing is a straightforward tool. Sometimes, you may need to just
smooth out the terrain slightly as the noise placed on it could have gotten
out of hand, or you needed to smooth a path for the player character to walk
on to help guide the character’s movement.
As a simple example, look at Figure 5.17 below.

Figure 5.17: Smoothed terrain
This is a somewhat extreme version of smoothing, but both looked the same
prior to smoothing. You can also apply smoothing with a noisy brush to
smooth in a non-uniform way to give a look of erosion to the terrain.

Stamping the terrain
The stamp tool is used as a 3D stamp! If you need a specific terrain feature,
you author a height map to stamp the terrain with. You add the heightmap to

the brushes and then you use it on the terrain.
One of the main use cases for this tool is that you can get pre-authored
heightmaps that have already been proven to look good on terrain. If you
want to find nice mountains and hills, you can search for them in the asset
store and there will be examples for you to start with. This will speed up the
process drastically. It may not be what you need exactly, but every step is
progress.

Painting trees
When you select the Paint Trees tool, it will have the options as seen in
Figure 5.18.

Figure 5.18: Paint Trees terrain mode
To get started, click the Edit Trees button, and add trees. You’ll be able to
add whatever mesh you like even if it isn’t a tree! There is a warning, seen
in Figure 5.19, that pops up if your mesh isn’t built correctly for the tree
placement on the terrain. It looks like this:

Figure 5.19: Defined Tree and LOD group warning

Luckily, there is a free asset on the asset store by SpeedTree that you can
download to get a great example of how to properly put together a tree for
the Paint Tree tool.

Painting details
Lastly, we have painting details. Here, you can either add a detail texture,
which will get rendered on a quad, or you can use a detail mesh to create
your own mesh. Here is an example of a simple grass texture being used
and painted on a flat terrain:

Figure 5.20: Grass as a detail
Painting details such as grass helps to break up the ground texture, shown
above in Figure 5.20. These items can also be affected by wind zones,
which are another component that could be added to the terrain object. If
you wish to push this further, please investigate Chapter 10, Sound Effects,
where we will add ambient sounds and other small polishing details, and
Chapter 12, Finishing Touches, to breathe life into the terrain.

3D geometry
Now that you’ve set up your terrain, you will need to augment the terrain
for architecture or building out a cave system. You will need to utilize a 3D
Digital Content Creation (3D DCC) tool to build out the meshes for your
environment. There is another option to build out the block-out phase,
which is Unity’s ProBuilder. In our case, we will be using both ProBuilder
as well as creating our own geometry for custom shape definition to denote
specific architectural portions of the environment.
Let’s dig into what ProBuilder and custom meshes mean for your
environment blockout.

Figure 5.21: Examples of Unity’s ProBuilder and custom meshes from our
3D DCC

ProBuilder
From the Unity documentation, ProBuilder is defined as follows:
You can build, edit, and texture custom geometry in Unity with the actions
and tools available in the ProBuilder package. You can also use ProBuilder
to help with in-scene level design, prototyping, collision meshes, and playtesting.
ProBuilder can quickly set up your scene with collidable surfaces to quickly
visualize your environment with ease. To get started with the tool, we will
go over some starting steps where you can create your own scene for ease
of familiarity. We will go over the installation, creation of the ProBuilder
shapes, editing, and then some commonly used tools in ProBuilder.

Installing ProBuilder
To install ProBuilder, open the package manager and go to the Unity
Registry, shown in Figure 5.22. Select ProBuilder, and then download and
install it.

Figure 5.22: Unity Registry Package Manager
After you install it, you will need to access the Tools menu to open the
ProBuilder Window, as seen in Figure 5.23 below.

Figure 5.23: Probuilder Window path
This will open a floating window with a lot of options. To get started, let’s
dock the window to the left of the scene window. This is a personal
preference, but we like to be able to work with ProBuilder and still be able
to select the items in the hierarchy with ease. Now that we’re set up, let’s go
over the colors in the menu.

Figure 5.24: Probuilder Object mode
In Figure 5.24 above, we are currently looking at the Object mode of
ProBuilder and there are only three colors available in this menu, but there

is a fourth color, which we will go over in the Common ProBuilder Tools
section. The three colors we currently see are used in specific ways to help
work through all the options easily. They work like this:
Orange: Object and windowed tools
Blue: Selection-based functions
Green: Mesh editing tools that affect the entire shape that’s selected
Now that we have an idea of what these are for, let’s get to building our first
shape.

Creation of ProBuilder shapes
Open a new scene and let’s create a new shape from the ProBuilder menu.
This will reveal a small window in the bottom right of the Scene viewport,
seen in Figure 5.23. You will have several options in terms of the type of
shape you want to create. We’re going to select the Plane option so that we
can have something for our shapes to attach to. You can find this located in
Figure 5.25 below.

Figure 5.25: Create Shape submenu
After you select the plane, left-click and drag in the scene to create a plane.
Don’t worry about the size of it for the time being; just create the plane and
we will make edits next.
Now, in the hierarchy, if the plane isn’t selected, go ahead and select it. In
the Inspector, let’s set the transform to 0, 0, 0 so it is centered in our scene
at 0. Then, go down to the ProBuilder script and change the size to 80, 0,
80. This will give us a sufficient size to play with whatever shape we want
to in the scene. The Inspector should look similar to Figure 5.26 when
you’ve finished these steps.

Figure 5.26: Position and shape properties Inspector window
After the plane is created, let’s make a cube. Create a new shape and choose
a cube shape in the interactive tool in the scene. Left-click and drag to make
the base whatever shape you wish. Release the left-click and then you will

be able to drag up to give the cube its height. Finish making the cube by
clicking again at the height you’d like it to be for now. Once you have that,
let’s add one more shape, stairs, to the cube. The goal is to make a set of
stairs that would allow a character to be able to climb up to the top of your
cube. If your stairs turn out strange, don’t worry; just delete them and try
again until you get it close enough. Don’t worry about getting it perfect; we
will go into the editing of shapes next.

Editing the shapes
It’s possible that when you made your stairs, they turned out something like
Figure 5.27 below.

Figure 5.27: Stair placement problem

Not that you wanted that, but it just turned out this way. Luckily, the editing
portion of ProBuilder is very strong. If you hover your mouse over the face
of the stairs, there should be a blue arrow facing up, down, left, and right
respective to the center square of that face, as shown in the preceding
figure.
If you do not have this when you hover over, this means that you may have
deselected the stairs and ProBuilder thinks you don’t need to edit the base
shape anymore. This can easily be fixed by selecting another item in the
scene and then reselecting the stairs. Then, in the Inspector and the
ProBuilder script, there is an Edit Shape button. Selecting this will give
you access to the basic editing features again.
Clicking and dragging the middle square will allow you to move that face
of the shape. Clicking the arrow will reorient the entire shape. This is very
useful for our stairs. The yellow arrow highlighted in Figure 5.27 will
orient the shape to the back of the stairs, which will make the topmost stair
be against the cube. This is what we wanted, so we selected it and then used
the middle squares to redefine the shape to how we thought the stairs would
look the best in this example.
Even though these tools are quite powerful for blocking out, we can go a bit
further and talk about the component manipulation tools.

Common ProBuilder tools
We’ve created some shapes and edited their overall state and shape to get
the basic building blocks of a structure. To get some more medium shapes,
we need to work on the components of these shapes. Looking back to
Chapter 1, A Primer to the Third Dimension, the component structure of 3D
objects are the vertex, edge, and face. These are denoted by a small icon
shape at the top of the scene viewport when ProBuilder is installed, seen in
Figure 5.28.

Figure 5.28: Component Selection tool
From the left to the right, we have Object, Vertices, Edges, and then
finally, the Faces selection. If you select one of them, you will then be able
to select those component types of the ProBuilder shape that you have
selected in the hierarchy. This will also change the available options in the
ProBuilder toolset. Compare this to Figure 5.29, with the options from
Figure 5.24, and you will see we added red to our available options and the
other colors have had changes in their options as well.

Figure 5.29: Component Menu options
The red options that are available are per component. In this case, we’ve
selected the vertices manipulator; the options for component tools relate to
the vertices. The same would be true regarding the selection of edges or

faces. Take some time and cycle through them to see the available options
for each component. When you get to faces, let’s stop for a moment as there
is one tool that is used very often – the Extrude tool.
Extruding a face will duplicate the vertices and keep the faces connected to
extrude your geometry out from the selected faces. This is an incredibly
powerful and fast tool to build many shapes or add detail. We will perform
two versions of this to give an idea of how this works. These are extrusions
and insets.
To make an extrusion, select the face component option at the top of the
scene window, and then select a face of the box we have next to the stairs.
Press the W key to get to the transform tool. While holding the Shift key,
left-click and drag the arrow facing up. You should get an extrusion going
up! It should look like Figure 5.30 below.

Figure 5.30: Extrude tool
The extrusion is the top box that was pulled out from the selected face. You
can now manipulate the face to make it into any shape you would like. We

aren’t big fans of all 90-degree angles, so we pressed R and scaled it in from
the middle to give it a little bit of personality.
Now, insets are interesting as they are a specific set of extrusion to bring
the face back into the current shape. This is great for adding quick details.
How we are going to perform this is by selecting the face that is on the side
of the box facing the camera, hitting the letter R for the scale tool, and,
while holding down the Shift key, left-clicking the gray box in the center to
scale from all sides. After doing that, we will hit the W key to get back to
the transform tool, and, while holding the shift key down again, pull the
blue arrow to bring in the inset. Figure 5.31 below includes both steps for
creating the inset on the same face as suggested.

Figure 5.31: Inset example
Play around with the tools for each of the components. You will find that
they are there to help speed up the workflow so you can get to blocking out
as much as possible, as quickly as possible. There may be a time when you
know a specific shape is needed, but you cannot achieve it with ProBuilder
tools. In this case, you may need to get into an external tool such as
Autodesk Maya or Blender to achieve the look that is needed. We tend to
call these objects premade shapes.

Premade basic shapes

If you have a good idea of the shaping that you need for your environment,
you may already have set up environment pieces that link together at the
right scale. ProBuilder is very good with basic shapes, but you may need
some architecture that is specific to your game. If you have the availability,
it may be easier to just create that and use the mesh instead of using
ProBuilder.
In some cases, you may have shapes already created previously that would
work just as well as ProBuilder, and all you would need to do is import
them into Unity and place them where you’d like. This could prove useful
for speeding up the block-out phase.
In our scenes, you will see that we use all three (Terrain, ProBuilder, and
premade shapes) to put together a cohesive integrated scene. This is
primarily due to the speed at which our artist could create certain models in
a DCC versus ProBuilder. Sometimes, however, a basic block that’s been
extruded is all we need to make the scene make sense for blocking in.
Iteration
The process of iteration is looping through portions of the work to get to a
refined enough state to move on to other parts of the game. We will follow
Figure 5.32 below as a simple track. This is a high level of the process and
after you go through it a few times, you will create more steps for yourself
and your team to follow. For now, let’s work through the highlights.

Figure 5.32: Iteration process
We’ve already gone through several blocks in the process above, such as
conceiving and blocking. We just need to go through refining and testing.

Refining is the action you take to get as close to answering an action as you
can on a granular level. An example of this in relation to our project is
asking how close to Myvari’s culture each puzzle is. We needed to refine
this from blocks to architecture and ensure the puzzle itself makes sense to
the style in mechanics, which we will go over in Chapter 6, Interactions
and Mechanics. If the granular level answer makes sense, extend your
scope to testing. In testing, you will take a broad stroke of the game. If you
can, test the feel of the game by walking around and see whether there are
any other questions on a high level that may have emerged through the
refinement process.
This is where time can easily go out the window. You will need to have a
firm grasp of what “good enough” means for your game. One of the hardest
parts of game development is where you must realize that shipping the
game is more important than making everything perfect. Be vigilant in your
cause to release and get it looking and feeling good enough, and then move
on. You have a lot more to get through!
We’ve only talked about the block-out phase in this environment chapter.
This is because of how important it is to block it out and take some time to
feel it through play. Fail fast and make changes according to your feedback
from either you playing the game yourself or one of your friends playing it.
After you get to the point where you think each section is good enough,
then you can start importing final meshes that are in the shape or in the
place that you’ve decided was the correct space. Once this is complete,
make another run with the game as you may see changes from the final
meshes coming in that weren’t apparent previously with the block-out
meshes.
Moving around the level and throughout multiple parts of the scene, look
carefully at cohesion. Once moving around the level feels good, then you
need to push more into the mechanics of the game itself and get into more
development, beyond just the art. There will be more questions that pop up
in the future. Taking these iterations seriously first will lay a strong
foundation to work through when you get into the next portions of your
game.

Summary
We’ve gone through a large number of Unity tools in this chapter. Take
your time to work through the Terrain tools and the ProBuilder tools to get a
good understanding of how they work.
From this chapter, you gained knowledge of multiple tools to build out an
environment. We took time to explain how to iterate through this whole
process to gain a strong sense of structure in your environment. You learned
how to start with design thinking to build out a concept. Then, you took the
concept and started staging each section of the concept, before finally
putting the environment together and iterating on it to get a clear view
holistically.
Next up, we will go over the mechanics of your game to fit it within your
environment. Keep this chapter in mind when placing the interactions for
the mechanics as there will be more iteration throughout the development
process.

Interactions and Mechanics
Now that we have a character with basic locomotion and an environment to
work with, let’s take a look at how this character should interact with this
environment. Unity allows us to use C# to build logic around GameObjects
that the player can interact with. This is the basis of game design and helps
tell the story or experience through actual interaction.
You’ll learn more about the specific interactions and mechanics that can be
implemented with Unity in this chapter. We will cover:
Game loops
Mechanics toolbox
Interactions within our project
Stairs
Rings puzzles
Tight spaces
Interactive volumes
Design and implementation

Game loops
Video games have a unique concept called a game loop. As you might be
able to guess, it’s a loop of mechanics that are performed throughout the
experience. The game loop itself could be very short, such as Call of Duty’s
multiplayer team deathmatch. The loop looks something like this, where the
goal is to kill more enemies than the number of times you die:
1. Kill enemies

2. Die and respawn
There’s more to it than that, and if you are a professional Call of Duty
player, you may think this is an over-generalization of the gameplay.
Ultimately, however, it really is the case 90% of the time. Now let’s look at
Minecraft’s game loop:
1. Gather resources in the day
2. Build in the day
3. Survive at night
We are going to simplify this: there are specific circumstances that fall
outside this loop, such as creepers in the day and rainfall, which reduces
light levels such that it essentially becomes night. Let’s assume those two
factors aren’t part of this study. This is interesting, as this loop is
particularly complex. By this, I mean that surviving doesn’t always happen
in this loop. The majority of the game is 1, then 2. Only at night does 3,
Survive at night, become a large portion of the gameplay, visually
represented in Figure 6.1. The core game loop needs to be as concise as it
can possibly be.

Figure 6.1: Minecraft game loop
Take a look at your favorite games and break down their main game loops.
You may find that there are layers of game loops. Sometimes this is called
meta-progression. In the game Hades, the game loops are as follows:
1. (Optional) Talk to NPCs

2. (In lobby) Choose skills to upgrade
3. (In lobby) Choose weapon for the next run
4. (In game) Fight
5. (In game) Earn currency for in-lobby upgrades
6. (In game) Upgrades to strengthen this playthrough
7. Die and respawn in lobby
The meta-progression takes place at step 2. Base health and damage
upgrades make it slightly easier to progress further. This is a common factor
in rogue-like genres where the game’s experiences are focused on skill
mastery and game progression through death.
You’ll notice that in the Call of Duty loop we didn’t mention metaprogression, even though there is heavy meta-progression in that game.
This is because meta-progression is essentially cosmetic. You do not have
to change anything between matches in Call of Duty. Any equipment that is
gained in Call of Duty will be the same as another player’s equipment with
the same mods. If you put a player that has played 1000 hours against a
player with the same exact loadout, it would only come down to skill. In
Hades, however, you have to spend points on upgrades to actually complete
the game.
These loops are interesting, but we should take some time to go deeper into
the interactions that make up these loops. In the next section, we will cover
a broad set of game mechanics individually.

Mechanics toolbox
An interaction is an action taken using a mechanic. For example, the
mechanic of Use Item could be used to pull a lever, push a button, or use a
phone. Those three examples are interactions; the mechanic allows the
player to interact with the items through a button press. If we only had the
ability to interact with something in this way, we would have very few
genres to play with. Luckily for us, there is a broad world of mechanics

available for us to use to make interactions. Using interactions, we can
design amazing experiences!
To begin this chapter, we thought it would be a good idea to provide a list of
mechanics and some interactions that come from those mechanics. We will
not be able to go through every mechanic, but we will be going over some
primary concepts to get a good feel for the mechanics landscape.
What we will be providing here is an understanding of mechanics and how
they can be viewed. If this interests you, take some time to read through
several different authors on the subject, as their views on the mechanics
may differ from our explanations. Our way of seeing mechanics is that they
are layers of experiential movement. There are core concepts that can be
layered on top of each other to form an interaction. These include:
Resource management
Risk versus reward
Spatial awareness
Collection
Research
Limitations
Read on to get an understanding of these modular core concepts of game
design.

Resource management
You may know of this as a primary mechanic of real-time strategy games,
or RTSs. Starcraft, Age of Empires, and Total Annihilation are examples of
popular resource management-focused games. The concept here is that
there are finite resources that you need to gather and spend on something
that can help you win. This could be soldiers for an army or experiments to
make your soldiers stronger. A non-combat-related scenario is a city

builder. You need to monitor the people of your city and build things to
make them happy, and you manage the money coming in from them.

Risk versus reward
This mechanic is used in many combat-oriented games. It’s usually given in
the form of cooldowns. Do you want to use your ultimate right now, to take
an example from the popular title League of Legends? It could take out an
enemy and give you a major advantage. However, it could also potentially
put you at a disadvantage if you miss, because the enemy will know you
have one less power to use. This is the risk vs. reward concept. The simplest
form of this is in Super Mario Bros. Should you try for those coins that are
hard to reach? You want those points for an extra life, but at the same time,
there is a pit that you might fall into if you don’t jump just right.

Spatial awareness
It is common to find this in first-person shooters. Call of Duty and
Overwatch utilize this in several ways. First, you have spatial awareness of
the enemy on the screen. You need to be able to place your cursor where
they are on the screen to shoot at them. Secondly, there is spatial awareness
of the entire map. If you are not spatially aware of the map, you can easily
get caught unawares. This is the core of platforming games as well.
Understanding your position in space in 2D and being able to maneuver
deftly is the name of the game in any action platformer. Celeste takes full
advantage of this by giving the player tight control schemes that move as
you expect every time. The movement is so well put together that when you
make a mistake, you feel as though it’s your fault.
This is interesting: if you have loose controls in a game that needs tight
controls, the player can feel cheated by the game and may stop playing.
This is undesirable!

Collection

Any CCG gamers out there? It’s in the name! Collectable Card Game.
Magic: The Gathering, Hearthstone, Yu-Gi-Oh!, and Pokémon are just a
few examples. Although this mechanic is not flashy, the concept of
collection is used in all sorts of games.
Skills can be collected, as well as weapons, codex entries, armor, and the
list can go on forever. Humans enjoy collecting stuff. It could be that you
want every card in the season to unlock an achievement. This is double
collecting, as you want the cards, but you also want to collect those
achievements. It could be that you want to collect all the codices in a game,
such as in Mass Effect, where the lore of the game comes from interacting
with as many unique things as possible and your journal updates a codex,
which holds information on unique items, characters, races, history, etc.

Research
Research is the ability to engage in investigation to establish facts and rules
to your surroundings. We can use the concept of research in a few unique
ways. One thought is that the player should be the one doing the research,
rather than the character. Meaning the player sees the environment for the
character. Because of this, the player can learn about subjects and things
that may be outside of the character’s knowledge. We as designers can
utilize this knowledge and relay information easier to the player by
outlining interactable objects or by making climbable ledges a specific
color.
On the other hand, the concept of research could refer to the character
themselves. The character in-game researches and concludes something
new to them in their world and becomes stronger while expanding their
awareness both physically and mentally. This may seem similar to
collection and resource management; however, if it involves knowledge
transfer from the character to the player or things being inherently learned
from play, it should be considered research.

Limitations

Pressure makes diamonds. Rather than being a mechanic in and of itself,
limitations can be seen as modifiers of other/all mechanics, but we like to
break it out as its own mechanic, as not every interaction requires there to
be heavy limitations. There can be overarching limitations that affect the
overall gameplay. For example, adding a timer to the game as a whole is a
limitation. Another is giving the player only 3 lives before ending the play
session. In a CCG, you may see there is a hard cap to the decks. This limits
the number of turns that can be taken.
When you take the time to figure out how these mechanics fit together to
build interactions and make and experience, you’ve designed a complete
mechanic. How all these pieces fit together is the crux of mechanics and
interaction design. Let’s take some time to go over some of the nuances
involved.

Design and implementation
In good design fashion, we need to break down the reasons for the
mechanics and interactions that we are going to use. In general, you want to
minimize the number of mechanics in a game while spreading their use to
many unique interactions. Mega Man is a great example of minimal
mechanics with elegant use for slight variations. Locomotion, jumping, and
shooting are the only things you have to worry about. After defeating the
enemies, you gain different shooting abilities or skills, but you will still use
the same button to engage the shooting mechanic. This mechanic is kept to
a single button press all the way up until Mega Man 4; when the character is
able to charge up his weapon and the button designation changes to adapt to
the skill change.
This is an interesting thought: the gameplay involves a very limited number
of changes to the mechanics, instead just changing graphics and narrative.
When you begin designing this portion of your game, think about the
smallest action your player should take to progress and break it down to its
smallest components.
If you’re thinking about designing a game that is heavily combat-driven,
you need to ask yourself some questions:

What type of combat style is it?
Does the combat style match the historical theme of the surrounding
environment?
Does the combat style align with the character or contrast their morals?
How do the answers to all of the above questions align with the emotional
experience you are asking the player to feel? These questions aren’t
exhaustive by any means. Each of the questions should lead to a further
clarification of the game mechanics and shape the experience you want for
your players.
It is all too easy to look at the game you are making and fall into the trap of
comfort, just falling into line with other games from the genre that you’re
developing for. If you find yourself designing something and thinking to
yourself, “This is how it’s always been done,” you need to evaluate that
interaction. First-person shooters (FPSs) are a great example of this
because of the restrictions of the first-person viewpoint.
There is one major unique outlier that did very well in the FPS space: Half
Life. Valve created an FPS with physics-based puzzle mechanics and a
heavy emphasis on narrative. This was highly unique compared to the runand-gun hyper-destruction that was the focus of previous FPS games.
Since we are talking about interactions and mechanics through the design
lens, we need to talk about the game Undertale. Undertale is a game that
begins as a low-graphical-fidelity role-playing game. The gameplay
narrative feels normal at first; then combat happens! You quickly learn the
combative mechanics you need to win and combat gameplay feels great.
However, hurting things isn’t always what you want to focus on. There is a
subversion of the players’ expectations, where the game sees you asking the
character to hurt people that the character may have an emotional tie to in
the game. That emotional difference is being brought into view to show the
use of what is standard in a way that turns the players’ expectations on their
head. This is only available if you, the designer, study and know game
design intimately.

This entire chapter could easily be spent talking about the design of other
games’ mechanics and interactions. Instead of breaking down loads of
games, let’s work through our own project and investigate some simple
examples of mechanics and interactions to use within them.
Throughout the sections, we will also be looking at the implementation of
various game designs. Metaphorically speaking, our hope here is that we
will break down the puzzle pieces from top to bottom in interaction, to
show you that developing a game is all about breaking down each piece
while keeping the whole picture in mind.
One piece of advice while reading through these sections is that the
implementations of these game interactions are not set in stone, nor are they
the only way to use these interactions. They are just examples of our
approach. Try to imagine how you might change the design of each piece.

Our project
We are building a 3D puzzle adventure game. Our initial mechanics will be
using research as the primary component. Later in the book, in Chapter 7,
Rigid Bodies and Physics Interaction, regarding our design of telekinesis,
we will layer spatial awareness on top of this. With this understanding, we
will build out our game loop. To make an experience worth playing, we can
define the game loop as follows:
1. Search environment for clues
2. Solve puzzles from clues
With the game loop defined and the understanding that we are focusing on
research as a primary mechanic, we now need to build interactions to make
an experience.
To get started on our interactions, we are going to work through a couple of
simple non-physics-focused actions. The character, Myvari, needs to be
able to interact with the environment to complete puzzles and enter areas to
get to her destination. Thematically the environments are ruins from her

race’s past. Through our demonstrative vertical slice, Myvari will encounter
multiple environmental puzzles where she will need to take in her
surroundings and overcome obstacles. The player of this game, leading
Myvari with their controller, is to pay attention to the detail of the
environment and learn how to work through the environmental puzzles. The
first interaction the character will face is the stairs. Let’s dive into the
design of that to get a real sense of what the rest of the interactions will
need in terms of definition.

The stairs
In this demonstrative level, there exists a set of stairs woven within the
environment for the character to traverse. Understanding what these stairs
convey to the player helps to establish a foundational sense of early
interaction affordance, meaning that your environment will be the primary
guiding factor for players navigating the level. Let’s work through
designing this initial interaction, as it is the first experience the player truly
gets to be part of.

Design
When the player enters the game, Myvari will enter from the woods into a
cave that seems normal. Moving into the cave brings you into a small
hallway that leads to an opening with a steep slope that’s too steep to walk
up. There are two pools, one on each side of this slope. There are levers on
each side. All that needs to happen is that each level needs to be interacted
with. Figure 6.2 shows the blockout of how this will flow.

Figure 6.2: Overview of initial interaction, the stairs
In the first open space encounter, you can get a sense of wonderment. Here
is a cave with manmade features. In the distance, there is a semblance of a
door and a path leading to it. Making your way toward the door, you will
notice the path ahead becoming very steep. Walking around, you research
the area and find levers. These levers bring stairs to the path so you can
climb to the door surrounded by what looks to be ruins.
Simple environment design needs to be in place here with “light pooling.”
This is when you add lighting to an area to draw the attention of the player.
We tend to go to areas with more light. Therefore we need the players to
interact with particular models within the scene. To make it noticable to the
player, you add player affordances to these designated models. For example
when you get close enough to the levers, they will become highlighted
slightly. Suddenly, a tooltip will be displayed to show you which button to
press to interact with it.
Interacting with both levers creates a clicking noise. Moving away from
your current camera, a small cinematic will play showing the stairs rising
and moving into place. From this point, you may move up the stairs onto
the Rings area. The Rings will be the initial puzzle with environmental
research at play. We have a sense of how this should be played out, but

implementation always throws us a few kinks. We need to put things into
practice to see if the design works. Let’s get into Unity and see how it feels!

Implementation
First things first, we need something that we can interact with. Let’s break
this down just a little bit. There are 3 points to this implementation. We
need an interaction block, a stair blocker, and a manager to work with these
two elements.

Interaction block
We know we have two interaction points that both need to be interacted
with to satisfy the success of the stairs. This means we should build a
trigger that we can use more than once. This cube needs to have a box
collider on it, as we will be using collision to help with setting the states.
We’re now going to look at some code. As with Chapter 4, Characters, we
won’t be going over each and every line of code – we’ll only look closer at
code if we haven’t gone over it before or if, for some reason, we make a
change to previously explained code. We are going over
InteractionTrigger.cs, which can be found in the Assets/Scripts folder of
the project’s GitHub. If you haven’t set up GitHub yet, please refer to the
start of this book for instructions on how to do so. When implementing
something for the first time, there may be some key areas that you couldn’t
design for, so it’s a good idea to work through some visual debugging code
to make it easier for you. We want to implement a simple cube that, when
you enter it, you can interact with. unclear wording and noticing when we
interact with it. The way we do this is by using some colors.
public Color idleColor = new Color(1f, 0f, 0f, 0.5f);
public Color occupiedColor = new Color(1f, 1f, 0f, 0.5f);
public Color interactColor = new Color(0f, 1f, 0f, 0.5f);

We define these in the beginning so we can reference them when we define
the states a bit later. We are using the input action interact from the input

system we defined in Chapter 4, Characters. In this case, we need to pay
attention to that input, so we put it on Update.
void Update()
{
interactPressed =
interactInput.action.ReadValue<float>() > 0f;
}

The input here is either 0 or 1, but we want to use it as a bool. This allows
us to make simple if checks when we want to change the state. To do this,
we ask if the value is above 0. If the assigned interaction button is being
pressed, the value is 1, which sets interactPressed to true; otherwise, it’s
set to false.
In the next sections, we are going to use some MonoBehaviour methods that
we haven’t gone over yet. These are OnTriggerEnter, OnTriggerStay, and
OnTriggerLeave. As the names suggest, these methods are useful for
dealing with collision states for when something enters, stays, or leaves a
collision box.
We will start with OnTriggerEnter. We are only using this to set the color
of the box so that we can see that we have entered it. This isn’t
mechanically useful, but it is visually helpful. Maybe later on during the
polishing stage, we may want to spawn some particles or change some
lights to show the player that they are in an area that can be interacted with.
For now, let’s just change the color of the cube’s material for the visual
debugging.
void OnTriggerEnter(Collider other)
{
MyvariThirdPersonMovement player =
other.GetComponent<MyvariThirdPersonMovement>();
if (player != null)
{
mat.SetColor("_BaseColor", occupiedColor);
}
}

What’s happening here is that when the player collides with the box’s
collision box, we are looking to see if the other component that made the
collision has MyvariThirdPersonMovement script. Since no other item that
can collide should have that component, this is a good check. We assign
that to the player variable and then do a small check asking if the player
value isn’t null, then change the color to the occupied color. Now we need
to work through OnTriggerStay, which will be where we allow the player
to interact with this previously collided-with object.
void OnTriggerStay(Collider other)
{
MyvariThirdPersonMovement player = other.
GetComponent<MyvariThirdPersonMovement>();
if (player != null)
{
if (interactPressed)
{
mat.SetColor("_BaseColor", interactColor);
OnInteract?.Invoke();
Debug.Log($"Interacted with
{gameObject.name}");
if (disableOnInteract)
{
this.enabled = false;
this.GetComponent<BoxCollider>().enabled
= false;
}
}
}
}

This should all look similar to the enter trigger until we get to the if block
that is waiting for the interact button to be pressed. When the interact button
is pressed, we do a few things:
1. Set the color to an interact color
2. Invoke an action
3. Log it out for another debug check
4. Disable it so we can’t interact with it again

We’ve already set a color previously, so this should seem familiar. We are
using the interact color instead here, which also makes sense!
The next portion is invoking an action. This has a bit of a two-part
explanation. Our manager will be listening for the action to be invoked.
When we get to our manager, we will go over how this works fully. For
now, understand that another item will be waiting for a signal to enact the
action fully.
We set debugging to the console so we can see what is happening in the
logic. When we remove the debugging color, the console debug will be our
guide if there is a bug in the future.
The last part is to disable it so we can’t interact with it again. We need to
disable both the object and the collider. We’re doing this as this interaction
only needs to be pressed once per side.
That’s it! We now need to go over the stair blocker before we get into the
manager.

Stair blocker
We know that there will be an effect to blocking the stairs beyond, but we
have finished up the look of this blocking mechanism. For now, it is a
debugging red block with a collider. This isn’t a problem, as we know how
we want the experience to play out, so we need to make a blocker that just
doesn’t allow the player through to the stairs yet. We will add the visual
portion of that later in Chapter 12, Final Touches. This could be in the form
of the stairs being flat so that the player can’t walk up to them, and we
make it look slippery, or maybe there can be a rock obstructing the stairs
that disappears after the right interaction.
There isn’t any scripting to be done here. We will be offloading any logic
for this onto the manager. One of the reasons why we need to have this
manager is that we cannot have a script on the stairs themselves to turn
themselves on or off. If you have a GameObject that is disabled, the scripts
won’t be able to be activated without some outside object with its reference

to the disabled GameObject enabling it. So we need to do this with the
manager. Let’s do that now.

Interaction manager
Stitching together scripts is much easier if you have a parent object for
interactive items in a manager of sorts. In the editor, this is often done by
creating a prefab that the parent prefab houses a script to hold the state of
the interaction. What we are doing here is making sure that the stairs cannot
be turned on without both buttons being pressed. It would be difficult for
this to be done without a GameObject knowing the state of each item.
Getting into the code, we define our public variables and class variables to
set up as we normally do, and then we get into the second part of the events
we talked about in the Interaction block section. In the Awake and
OnDestroy sections, we need to handle the events listening.
void Awake()
{
leftTrigger.OnInteract.AddListener(OnLeftTriggerInteract);
rightTrigger.OnInteract.AddListener(OnRightTriggerInteract);
}
void OnDestroy()
{
leftTrigger.OnInteract.RemoveListener(OnLeftTriggerInteract);
rightTrigger.OnInteract.RemoveListener(OnRightTriggerInteract
);
}

We defined each of our triggers publically and they both have their own
events. On Awake, we listen to the OnInteract event, and if it’s invoked, we
will then run the function that is the argument of the listener. In this case,
it’s OnLeftTriggerInteract for the left side. The one for the right side is
similarly named. We’re only going to look in detail at the left side as the
right side is very similar.
void OnLeftTriggerInteract()
{

}

leftTriggerFired = true;
if (rightTriggerFired)
{
stairsRaised = true;
OnStairsRaised?.Invoke();
stairsBlocker.SetActive(false);
Debug.Log("RAISE STAIRS HERE");
}

If the left side gets triggered, we immediately set leftTriggerFired to
true. That checks if the right side has been triggered already. If it hasn’t
been, then nothing happens. If it has, then we will set stairsRaised to
true, invoke another action, set the stair blocker GameObject to not active,
and log out a string to help with later debugging.
The OnStairsRaised UnityAction will fire, but there isn’t anything
attached to this yet. After we finish up this area and finalize what exactly
we need, we will add more to this action.
Interestingly, this setup allows the player to start from the left or the right
without problems. It also sets us up for future development. We don’t need
to have everything laid out, but we do need to have an understanding of
what the general idea is so we can write the architecture accordingly.
This completes the current implementation of the stairs puzzle. Now that
Myvari is up the stairs, we need to work through our first main puzzle, the
rings.

The rings
Passing through the stairs, we’re now faced with a door and rings.
The door signifies the first narrative-driven answer to the puzzle versus
lighting drawing them to an area. The puzzle will only be able to be figured
out if you pay attention to the image on the door and correlate it to the
puzzle rings. Let’s break down the design of the Rings puzzle.

Design
The first puzzle the player will need to work through is the rings. When you
get onto the platform of the puzzle, your necklace will animate in front of
you and both the necklace and the middle pillar will glow a soft blue before
fading. On the door, there will be a time-worn inscription of what the pillars
should look like if manipulated properly.
What the player needs to do is push the pillars in the rings to match an
image of the celestial bodies found on the door. This allows for multiple
levels of research and interaction within a small scene. The player already
knows that there is interaction within the environment from the hints given
previously, and a small outline will indicate the button to press to interact
with the pillars. The new information gathering would be the shape of the
imagery in the door to fit the shape of the ground. Figure 6.3 shows a
concept of the area. The big blank area at the back is the door. The pillars
are within the circles outside the middle pillar. There are three rings in all.

Figure 6.3: The Rings and environmental research puzzle
Working through this puzzle will open the door, but time has not been kind
to this door or the area surrounding the ruins in general. When it tries to

open, there is debris that collapses within the hallways leading further into
the cave. We will take this opportunity to work through another simple
interaction, which is navigating tight spaces.

Implementation
We thought a lot about how we would put this one together. Two pillars on
either side of each ring. Three rings in total. We needed a certain
configuration to end with that would fit our design ideas of a constellation
as well. Another problem with this is how to deal with Myvari moving
these things. At first, we thought of pushing and pulling, but to make things
simpler, we went with pushing only. This allowed us to only worry about
rotating in one direction as well as cutting out an animation. Myvari isn’t a
large character and pulling might not make much sense. We need to come
up with two scripts. The first script will look similar to the one for visual
volumes we worked with previously. We will use this to tell which side of a
pillar Myvari is on. This tells us which way to rotate it. After we have it
rotated to the correct position, we need to have a puzzle manager to know
where to initially place the pillars, what the victory rotation value looks
like, and how to deal with the ending of the puzzle. Let’s run through the
easy one first and look at the puzzle trigger volumes.

Puzzle triggers
This item is simple. We need a box that we will change colors for
debugging, just as previously had for the stairs, and then we need to have a
few choices that are properties in the inspector that we get to choose before
the game starts. These choices (outer, middle, and inner) will be which ring
they are located on and which direction they should move. The direction is
counterclockwise or clockwise.
Even though we’ve seen it before, in this implementation of color changing,
we did something a little bit different that involves the puzzle accessing a
method of this class.

public void SetColor(Color color)
{
meshRenderer.material.color = color;
}

Something to notice here is the public access modifier. It takes in a color.
Remember this when we go over the manager of the puzzle script right after
this. Next, there are two defined enums. We will put them both below:
FirstPuzzleTriggerType and FirstPuzzleTriggerDirection.
public enum FirstPuzzleTriggerType
{
Outer = 0,
Middle,
Inner
}
public enum FirstPuzzleTriggerDirection
{
Clockwise = 0,
CounterClockwise
}

We’ve made public enums in the top portion of this class and here we are
defining them. These definitions will allow us to choose the ring and
direction for each trigger. Look below at Figure 6.4 to see an example of
what the enum looks like in the inspector.

Figure 6.4: Display of a public enum in the inspector
If you were to select either of these, they would display the options that are
seen in the code above. One more small detail in the code is the first value
in the enum, which we are assigning as 0. This will happen by default;
however, making it explicit may be a good habit to get into. When someone
looks at this code, they know for sure that the enum value will start at 0.

The Puzzle pieces
Open the FirstPuzzle.cs file that is in the scripts folder and attached to
the FirstPuzzle GameObject in the hierarchy. We start as we always do by
defining the variables we want to use. For this puzzle manager, it needs to
have a reference to each transform of the pillar sections, the center pillar,
which takes care of finalizing the puzzle, and the properties of the puzzle’s
timing. Directly after the public variables that we will assign in the
inspector, we have quite a few variables that are not public but are assigned
and used within the class’ logic. Take a few moments to read over the
comments on them. We will be referencing those class variables throughout
the rest of this section.
Though we’ve seen this a few times, this is a larger piece of the definition
than we’ve seen previously. We will pull in the whole initialization and go
over each piece.
void Start()
{
// Cache references to the trigger volumes and the
player
triggers =
GetComponentsInChildren<FirstPuzzleTrigger>();
playerController =
FindObjectOfType<CharacterController>();
// Random starting positions
outerPillars.eulerAngles = new Vector3(0f,
Random.Range(-180f, 180f), 0f);
middlePillars.eulerAngles = new Vector3(0f,
Random.Range(-180f, 180f), 0f);
innerPillars.eulerAngles = new Vector3(0f,
Random.Range(-180f, 180f), 0f);
// Starting center spire position
centerSpire.position = new
Vector3(centerSpire.position.x, centerSpireStartHeight,
centerSpire.position.z);
}

Regarding the MonoBehaviour class we’re inheriting from, we are using the
Start method to initialize the cache references and starting positions of the
pillars when the game starts. First off, we need to cache the references to

each trigger volume. We are using a UnityEngine.Component method that
we have available due to us having a using UnityEngine; directive at the
top of this file. This is GetComponentsInChildren<FirstPuzzleTrigger>
();. The type that is used in this is called a generic type. You could place
any type in the place of FirstPuzzleTrigger, in the code above. This could
be Image or Transform. In this case, we only want to grab each trigger. We
will clarify why we need them in this manner shortly. Just know that they
are all in a bucket waiting to be called.
Next, we need to use FindObjectOfType, which is another UnityEngine
method, but it’s on the Object class. It’s part of the UnityEngine library
and we’re already requesting access to its methods. It’s going to find the
character controller and return it to the playerController variable.
The next three lines are for setting the rotation of the rings. We wanted
them to be unique, so if someone played the game more than once, it would
be a little bit different each time.
Finally, we have the position of the puzzle being set. We are using this line
to set the height of the center spire. After the puzzle is completed, the center
spire will raise up to be interacted with. This will move you on to the next
section. We wanted this to be animated as you completed the puzzle to
reveal the way forward.
We’re going to now move on to the Update method. This is again from
MonoBehaviour. The interesting thing about this puzzle is that there are a lot
of points where we don’t do much. We mostly just need to wait until the
character moves the pillars into the right positions. The way that we are
running the update section is like a lock system in a waterway. You must
finish the first step to get to the next step. We have a very simplified logic
flow for this system. You can see it in Figure 6.5.

Figure 6.5: Basic lock flow for the puzzle manager
Let’s keep Figure 6.5 in mind while we finish up the puzzle manager. The
first step here is to check for victory. Let’s dig into that process block.
Victory is dependent on all three pillars being closely enough aligned to the
desired rotation values.
outerAligned = CheckAlignment(outerPillars,
correctRotationOuter);

We’re checking every frame for the right alignment. Because we are
checking the alignment for three separate items, we shouldn’t write the code
on all three rings. Let’s write it once and then ask it to refer to a method for
each pillar instead. This is called refactoring. Digging in even further, we
should break down how it checks for alignment.
bool CheckAlignment(Transform pillarGroup, float
correctRotation)
{
return Mathf.Abs(pillarGroup.eulerAngles.y correctRotation) < correctThreshold;
}

First, we need it to return a bool. This is very helpful when you want to run
a conditional against the response. We’re asking for the current pillar and
the correct rotation value. We look at the absolute value of the current
rotation in the y value minus the correct rotation. We take that value and
check if it’s less than the threshold we’re allowing for “closeness.” If it is,
then outerAligned will return true. If all three pillars are returning true,

then CheckForVictory will return true, which allows us to move on to the
next block in our lock.
The next block is displaying victory. This seems like an innocent block that
is just a display for debug; however, there is one small bit of logic in here
that helps us with the end block.
victoryStartTime = Time.time;
outerStartVictory = outerPillars.eulerAngles;
middleStartVictory = middlePillars.eulerAngles;
innerStartVictory = innerPillars.eulerAngles;

These four values being set are important. We need to have set the values
before we move on to the next block. We could potentially have this done in
the final block; however, sometimes it’s a good idea to set up each bit of
logic in a lock so that you can debug easily and know exactly where you are
and what the data is that you need at that exact point in the logic. To finish
the last block, we know that we need to record what the pillars’ current
information is. We have tolerance as to where we need to place the pillars,
so this doesn’t mean the puzzle’s solution is always the same. Now that
we’ve stored values of the pillars and displayed our victory in the console
for debug, we can move on to the final block.
The final block is in the PerformVictoryLerp method. Take your time
looking over the whole method. We will break down a single Lerp below.
Interestingly, this method is mostly just animating some environmental
items for a final piece and allowing us to finish the block, so we don’t check
for rotations in this puzzle anymore.
outerPillars.eulerAngles = Vector3.Lerp(outerStartVictory,
outerEndVictory, lerpVal);

We’ve seen something similar in the character with using the Slerp method.
That one was better for spherical needs. The Lerp is a linear interpolation.
You’re transforming a value to another value of the same type over a
period. In this case, it’s the rotational values of the pillars to the
predetermined end victory rotational values we need to get the pillars to,
because there is a small amount of leeway we give to each section. It may

feel daunting to work through this method. If you are feeling overwhelmed,
just look at a single line and slowly work through it. Each line has a task
and it’s providing context for the Lerp time, or it’s lerping itself to another
value over that time.
We also have at the end a PrintDebug method outside of our lock system.
This allows us to check for what’s going on in the puzzle at any given
moment. Take some time to go over this method and surmise what it might
show you, and then run the game to see if your assumptions are correct. Did
something print in the console you didn’t expect? See if you can find it in
the code by following the game’s logic and identifying when you saw the
console message arrive.
The next questions that might come to mind are, “That’s a great way to do
it, but how do we actually control it? Also, why didn’t we cover the
RotatePillar method?” These are great questions! Let’s explore them in
the next section.

Puzzle control
Should we have put the control on the puzzle trigger volume? Our thinking
is that all control mechanisms should be on the object that’s containing the
control. We made another script called FirstPuzzleControl.cs in the
scripts folder, which will be attached to the Character GameObjects. This
script is responsible for setting up the color of the trigger volume as well as
calling the rotate from the FirstPuzzle class. We wrote it in this manner as
we wanted to ensure the manager of the puzzle would oversee the rotation
of each ring. Even if the character is the object initiating the RotatePillar
method with input, the puzzle manager needs to rotate whichever pillar
section the player is interacting with, as it owns those GameObjects.
Thinking about it this way is a little unique. Try to imagine a manager
owning the GameObjects and telling them what to do. We have them
already being referenced in this script; we should keep them in this script.
The other option would be to also reference them in the control script that is
on the character, and then you have multiple references, and could
potentially cause a bug that you may not see. Attempt to centralize your
GameObjects in a single script that manages them as much as possible.

The RotatePillar method is slightly tricky. In this method, we need to not
only rotate the rings, but also need to push the character along with it as
well. How are we doing this? Let’s look into it.
public void RotatePillar(FirstPuzzleTrigger trigger)
{
// Rotate pillars
float rot = (trigger.triggerDirection ==
FirstPuzzleTriggerDirection.Clockwise ? pushSpeed : pushSpeed) * Time.deltaTime;
trigger.transform.parent.parent.Rotate(Vector3.up, rot);
// Keep player locked in trigger volume, facing the
pillar. We need to disable the CharacterController here
// when setting a new position, otherwise it will
overwrite the new
position with the player's current position
playerController.enabled = false;
float origY = playerController.transform.position.y;
playerController.transform.position = new
Vector3(trigger.transform.position.x, origY,
trigger.transform.position.z);
playerController.transform.forward =
trigger.transform.forward;
playerController.enabled = true;
}

We first need to know how far we’re going to rotate the pillar GameObjects.
We’re going to assign the rotation angle to a variable in the method’s scope.
We will use ternary to tell if it’s clockwise or counterclockwise and
multiply by deltatime to deal with framerate changes. Then we will rotate
the item using parent.parent.Rotate along its up vector. The rotation
angle and direction are decided on the line above, defined as rot.
One problem is that the character needs to move along with the pillar they
are interacting with. The second problem is that the pillar rotates, so we
need to face the character toward the pillar she’s pushing. To do this, we
will turn off the player’s ability to move and then directly manipulate the
character to the trigger’s location and then keep her there while the interact
button is held down. We will also point the character toward the pillar using
the trigger volume’s forward vector. In the end, we will transfer control

back to the player. This makes it so that the character doesn’t get stuck
pushing the pillar forever.
That is it! We just made our first puzzle. What happens next after solving
this puzzle is that the door tries to open, but it breaks a bit and only has a
small space to move through. Let’s take some time to break down why this
might be useful.

Tight spaces
There are times when your game needs to load the next scene, but you may
not want the loading screen to pull your player out of the immersion, or you
may just want to add some environmental tension. Possibly you want to
achieve both! Tight spaces is a common tool to use to achieve either of
these situations. Let’s go through how we’re using tight spaces in our work.

Design
The concept of tight spaces is an interesting design use. We are using it in
two ways. The first way is to add some tension to the exploration and
movement. You have a character who must get through a space that is very
narrow that she just watched collapse into place.
The second point is that this is a common design used for transitioning.
Since we are only using this design concept on a small vertical of the game
and we do not need to load multiple parts of the map, it isn’t needed for that
reason, but it is a good teaching point to you, the aspiring designer.
This helps with setting expectations for the player, letting them know that
there will be slow-moving sections with tight animation and the camera
close to the player to push up the intensity. While this longer animation and
movement is happening, it will give time for the system to load into
memory the next area without a loading screen. This trick is great as it
doesn’t hurt the immersion while allowing for detail to be retained. Nothing
breaks the suspension of disbelief more than watching objects load into
existence in front of you. After you finish working your way through the

closed-off space, the rocks will fall naturally and close off the hallway. Not
only does this stop any backward movement, but this also gives a feeling of
necessity to move forward.

Implementation
The initial implementation of this is simple. We will make a Cinemachine
camera move through the spaces to get the sense of timing needed for the
cinematic while not allowing the player any inputs. We do this starting
implementation through code as follows:
Void SetPlayerEnabled(bool enabled)
{
var cams =
playerRoot.GetComponentsInChildren<CinemachineVirtualCamera>
(true);
foreach(var cam in cams)
{
cam.gameObject.SetActive(enable);
}
playerRoot.GetComponentInChildren<MyvariThirdPersonMovement>
().enabled = enable;
}

We need to find the virtual cameras in the children and enable them while
also disabling the player character. In Chapter 12, Final Touches, we will
call this code when we trigger the cinematic. But instead of the virtual
cameras that are in the children, we will call the camera made for the
cinematic.
This implementation works very well for setting up the logic, without
worrying about the nuance of each cinematic, which is very time- and
animation-intensive.

Interactive volumes

This is the Swiss Army knife of mechanics. There are so many uses of
interactive volumes that we can’t cover them all in this book. This would
also not make much sense as defining this takes away from the creativity
that could be designed. This is not a tool that should be detailed in high
granularity. Instead, let’s go over how we will use it as well as some
thoughts on it in general.

Design
As this is an adventure puzzle game, there will be points at which we need
volumes where, when the character enters them, something happens. This
definition is purposely broad. We are also using Cinemachine for our
character’s main camera. This allows us to link up virtual cameras in certain
places when you trigger your volumes. Here are some examples of what we
can perform with interactive volumes:
Moving the camera over a cliff to give a sense of heightened anxiety
Triggering rocks to fall
Changing the walking animation to be slower when you walk through
water
Changing the lighting in an environment
Spawning GameObjects
This list is not exhaustive by any means, as volumes are a creative tool to
allow for interaction. We’re using them in only a few ways, but the
possibilities are endless. Let your imagination run wild while designing
with interactive volumes.
This is powerful for many games to have, especially for us, with our
environment-driven, research-focused mechanics. Our interactions require
the environment to explain to the player what is going on and how to move
forward. In the scripting section below, we will go through each interactive
volume for this chapter. You can expect to see more volumes being used in
future chapters, especially in the polishing phase as we can enhance the

experience with many small interactions. This will help to make the
environment and gameplay immersive.

Implementation
Luckily for us, you’ve seen two versions of interactive volumes. Look back
up in the implementations of what we looked at earlier and pay close
attention to the volumes. They are unique in their uses and can teach you
some valuable lessons about developing in an environment without all the
art assets being completed.
It may be a good idea to also think about some other ways we could’ve used
interactive volumes so far. Were there any volumes you may have wanted to
add?
Why don’t we go over a bit of a summary of where we’re using them in our
game?
We’re using interactive volumes in any place where we can use an
input action. An example of this might be the stairs buttons for
accessing the stairs.
We’ve added a volume to know the player is in the zone of the first
puzzle. This allows the camera to move to a more advantageous
position to understand the puzzle visually.
Triggers on the puzzle pieces let you know you are close enough to
interact with them.
There is a volume for you to be able to tell you’ve entered the trigger
point for entry into the tight spaces.
Crossing the bridge, there is a small volume to change camera angles
for a more cinematic shot.
At the end of the bridge, there is a volume to trigger another tight
space cinematic.
While on a ledge, there is a trigger that unleashes a boulder to fall on
you, whereupon you lift your arm up in defense. This will trigger you to

discover a new power, which is a new mechanic.
More triggers are used to open another door.
There are triggers on items that you can interact with using your
telekinetic powers.
There are triggers on the final puzzle pieces.
This is a summary of all the triggers that are part of our core gameplay.
There are a few others that deal with ambient flora and fauna, but they are
simple collision triggers responsible for small changes or the simple
movement of birds or deer. They are in random locations for cosmetic
purposes.

Summary
In this chapter, we went over the design and implementation of interactions
and mechanics. Even though the player’s experiences and interactions
seemed quite simple, the depth of design of player afforadances allowed the
player to know their limits and navigate the gameplay. We spent a good
amount of time talking about interactions and mechanics. We defined the
game loops and broke down parts of the mechanics toolbox. This was a
very quick and short lesson into various game experiences. Finally, we
broke down a bit of our game.
We broke down the stairs interaction and how that would be managed. We
also went over why the stairs problem exists and where the solutions need
to happen. Then, after that was completed, we went over the design of the
first puzzle. After that was fully explained, we broke down our version of
the implementation. Once this puzzle is completed, it’s followed by a tight
space segment, which could be used for loading the rest of the level, if we
were on a larger scale project. Finally, there was a small section on how to
use interactive volumes. As we used two different types of interactive
volumes in our previous implementation, we went over them as well.
Overall, this chapter was very dense in information. Take some time to
pause here and digest what you have just learned. Even if you feel like you

could move on, let’s just relax and let your brain process it all. In the next
chapter, we will go over physics mechanics and interactions.

Rigid Bodies and Physics
Interaction
In many game interactions, there needs to be physics. Whether you have
items falling, bouncing, or just reacting to a collision in a procedural
manner, you will most likely need to use Rigidbody components on your
GameObjects. This component works with physics. We will first go through
several use cases for the Rigidbody component. Once we’ve been through
that, we will take some time to explain how we are using physics in our
interactions for our project. Finally, we will show the scripting that is used
to achieve these interactions in as much detail as possible. As always, the
project files on GitHub will follow the structure in the Readme file. The
topics in this chapter include:
The Rigidbody component
Collision detection
Design and implementation
Telekinesis and physics

The Rigidbody component
This powerful physics-focused component can be added to GameObjects to
determine its position through physics. By default, just adding this
component to a GameObject will put its motion under the influence of
gravity. To understand how Unity uses physics, let’s take some time to look
at the component.
Figure 7.1 is a screenshot of the Rigidbody in Unity. There is a Rigidbody
2D component. Do not use this component for a 3D application. The
primary problem with this is that the 2D and 3D versions of the physics

steps do not interact with each other. It’s best to choose one and stick with
it! We will go through all the pieces to the Rigidbody component after the
figure.

Figure 7.1: Rigidbody component

Mass
The Mass property of the Rigidbody refers to that object’s relationship to
other object’s masses. This will not make gravity affect it differently, but it
will affect collisions with other objects. For example, if two GameObjects
that are identical except for their mass on the Rigidbody collide, the item
with the larger mass will act as though it’s heavier. Just as in the real world,
mass doesn’t cause items to fall faster. This is due to the drag of the objects.
Drag
Objects with Drag will decrease the rate at which it accelerates due to
gravity. An example of this is a parachute. This object drastically decreases
the acceleration of falling. For example, a skydiver has a very low drag, and
when they open their parachute, the drag increases a lot. This is regardless
of the rotation of the object.

Angular Drag

Angular Drag is the same concept as drag; however, it’s specifically
focused on rotation values. If you have a very small value for the angular
drag, the object will rotate when bumped or collided with depending on the
colliding object’s oncoming angle. If you raise the value, it will rotate less.

Use Gravity boolean
The Use Gravity boolean simply allows gravity to affect the GameObject;
the Rigidbody is a component of. As shown in Figure 7.2, in Edit > Project
Settings > Physics, gravity is defined as -9.81, which is the same as Earth’s
gravity. Adjusting the Y axis gravity setting to -9.81 will be the most
familiar to the players in emulating the likeness of Earth’s gravity. If you
are working with a game with less gravity and it’s the same all the time, you
can set it here. You can also set the gravity in code:
Physics.Gravity = Vector3(0, 0, 0,);

The 0s should be replaced with the values of gravity that are needed,
generally in the y direction.

Figure 7.2: Project Settings – Physics settings

Is Kinematic boolean
When designing the level, there may be items that move around that need to
affect the physics of another Rigidbody during runtime. A very simple

example you could imagine is a sphere with a Rigidbody above a large
cube. When you press play, the sphere would fall and hit the cube as
expected. If you had the Is Kinematic boolean set to false and tried to
rotate the cube, the sphere would stay put and clip through the cube. This is
due to the cube not updating itself as a moving body after the sphere hit it
and stopped. Setting this flag is helpful during an optimization pass, and it
can be set for every known static item that still needs to have a Rigidbody
component. Although, if you need to update the physics during runtime, set
the ground to kinematic and when you rotate it, the sphere will react as
expected and try to roll off the sloping downside of the cube.
This is a very common mistake when you start working with physics items.
If during runtime your Rigidbody items aren’t moving in a way you’d
expect, check to see if they should be kinematic.

Interpolate
Interpolate means to place things in between other things. In our case, we
need to know if interpolating is attempting to achieve one of three
parameters in our physics update.
Those parameters are:
None: Do not interpolate or extrapolate
Interpolate: Place the object in between the current frame and the next
frame
Extrapolate: Assume the next location from the previous frames and
put it where you think it might go
Figuring out the appropriate parameters to interpolate can be complicated to
answer. The reason being is that there is more than one option when
addressing interpolation, therefore, making the solution not as
straightforward to resolve.

There are multiple variables to account for. These variables may contain
these questions such as: How is the camera moving? Is the object moving
quickly? Are you worried about the collision looking correct? Are you
worried about the object moving incorrectly every time as the camera
follows its motion? A simple answer is if your camera follows a character
using a Rigidbody, then set it to Interpolate and everything else to None.
Diving into the physics system just a little bit, this system is calculated at a
fixed interval, in contrast to graphics rendering. Graphics on a game can lag
slightly and pop into place, where the physics will always calculate at a
fixed interval. This can cause artifacts to visually occur, such as clipping
into a wall. Clipping into a wall or other game objects within your scene
would be seen if a fast-moving object is being followed closely by the
camera and collides with the wall or surrounding GameObjects. The object
would initially clip through the wall until the physics gets updated, and it
would then update as though it bounced off the wall.
In this case, you would want to choose the Interpolate option because the
physics system would interpolate the in-between values as the graphics are
being rendered. This doesn’t allow clipping while moving in a physics
sense. It does cost some performance as it’s calculating values in different
intervals than it would normally.
Extrapolate does a good job of figuring out what the values will be in the
future. This is helpful for simulating a flying object, but not good for
collision detection as it will assume it’s past a wall or object and clip at a
higher framerate and movement. Movement being followed closely could
use Interpolate or Extrapolate.
It’s best to start with Interpolate and see if it feels good for the movement
of your experience. If it feels slow, try Extrapolate. Weigh the pros and
cons of each with a higher speed of movement in your action sequences to
determine which interpolate method you need to use.
Understanding this will allow you to choose the best option for the physics
values and the graphical representation of the items you are simulating with
physics.

Collision detection
When using physics to determine the position of GameObject, there need to
be collision checks to determine whether your object has collided with
another object, regardless of if it’s staying still or moving in the scene. This
is an interesting dilemma now that you’ve learned that physics are fixed,
and rendering is not fixed. The physics system can’t assume what every
object is using for collision types or interpolation. We need to have several
options that would best suit each GameObject’s physics needs from within
the experience. There are four different collision detection types to
consider: Discrete, Continuous, Continuous Dynamic, and Continuous
Speculative. If you have a GameObject that is moving quickly, it may clip
through GameObjects, meaning that it will not know that it has hit a
collider and will keep moving through it as the physics is updated. This can
be prevented through collision detection modes. Each mode has different
implications on performance; however, the general guideline is that fast
objects are set to Continuous Dynamic while the things they may collide
with should be set to Dynamic. Other options are explained in the
breakdown of each choice below.
Discrete
This collision detection mode is the best mode for performance, and it’s
aptly named Discrete as it’s only checking the physics collision at fixed
intervals, as mentioned previously. If you have a wall with a box collider
and there is a ball moving quickly enough that its known location before the
wall wasn’t colliding with it and the next fixed update was past the wall,
there is no collision! This can be frustrating at first as it looks like it’s not
working, or more frustratingly, it only happens intermittently as the ball
may have collided with the wall when you ran the simulation a couple of
times. It should be understood why this is happening so you can make
different mode choices upon the needs of the physics simulation. The
reason for this is that the physics update does not realize that the object was
supposed to be affected by anything. The physics loop in Discrete mode
will only check if the object needs to change trajectory once it’s in the loop.
If you have a fast-moving object, defined as an object moving more than its

height or width in distance per frame, then there may be a point at which
this object is past the other object and physics will not know to react to it.
If there are no fast-moving items, Discrete is a fantastic choice. If you are
planning on having fast-moving objects, then Continuous is the answer, but
please read about the rest of the options as they all don’t interact with each
other intuitively.

Continuous
If you choose Continuous, you may see that the object still clips through
GameObjects you may not have expected it to. It is very important to
understand that Continuous collision detection only checks if your
GameObject is colliding with static objects. This mode is heavy on
resources and should be used with caution.
Note
Static objects are GameObjects that are in the scene with collider
components on them but no Rigidbody component. They are not updated
with physics. Upon describing collision detection there will be modes
that will only work with static GameObjects.

An example of an object that would use Continuous mode is fast moving
GameObjects that need to collide with static items only. The simplest
example of this is Pachinko. This is a game where a small metal ball gets
dropped from the top of the screen and falls down, hitting static items,
bouncing off them. All of the items on the field are static, so there will be
no clipping.
Continuous Dynamic
This mode is very similar to the Continuous mode; however, it will also
work with GameObjects that use a Rigidbody component. This is a
common usage within game mechanics. As you can imagine, adding the
ability to work with the Rigidbody component increases the cost of

resources within a game. This is more resource-heavy than the standard
continuous mode.
An example of continuous dynamic is a game you might have played,
Smash Hit. This game is a mobile title in which you are a player on rails
moving forward. When you tap the screen, a metal ball shoots out towards
the location you tapped. If it collides with glass, it shatters. The glass is
dynamic and interacts where the ball hits. Those broken pieces are also
dynamic and interact with the environment when falling. If it wasn’t
dynamic, the ball would go right through the glass. This would make for a
much less entertaining game!

Continuous Speculative
The word “speculative” suggests a sense of guessing. The system is
speculating if the collision will happen.
This mode does what Continuous Dynamic does, and objects with this
setting can collide with both static and dynamic GameObjects; however, it’s
cheaper. There is a bit of an accuracy cost, though. Two objects that are
flying toward each other may end up bouncing away from each other
without even touching if they both have Continuous Speculative set. This
would happen because both objects are speculating where they will be in
the next frame, which makes them think they should’ve bounced off each
other.
An example of this is a game called Beat Saber. This is a game where
you’re in VR and you must hit blocks at certain angles to slice them
properly. Having your saber’s detection set to Continuous Speculative will
allow you to know that you will hit the blocks that are moving at a high rate
towards you.
Understanding all the modes for collision detection will help you create the
right setup for physics-based work. Take time to play with these modes in
your own project to get a good sense of how they all work together.

Constraints
Now that we’ve talked about some difficult questions, let’s bring it back to
a simpler topic: Constraints! This does exactly what you may think it does.
If your item should not move or rotate on a specific axis, you may constrain
it. An example of this is a platformer game that has moving platforms. You
want them to move but maybe not along a specific axis. To ensure that the
platform will not get nudged off course, you can constrain the GameObject
in the x, y, or z direction so it will never update in that direction.
This was the last of the editable fields on the Rigidbody component. The
last section is devoted to read-only fields for runtime debugging. Let’s take
a look at what information you can gain from these fields.

Info
The Info block of the Rigidbody component is essential for working with
physics and debugging the strange behaviours that can come about. Every
application may have unique problems that arise. Looking at the Info object
when in play, you can debug what is going on with ease. This section has
many values:
Speed: Magnitude of the velocity
Velocity: Rate of change of Rigidbody position
Angular Velocity: Angular velocity vector of the Rigidbody measured
in radians per second
Inertia Tensor: Diagonal matrix in a reference frame positioned at this
body’s center of mass and rotated by Inertia Tensor Rotation
Inertia Tensor Rotation: Rotation of the inertia tensor
Local Center of Mass: Center of mass relative to the transform’s
origin
World Center of Mass: Center of mass of the Rigidbody in world
space

Sleep State: Optimization strategy to not always account for every
object, with two settings:
Awake: Physics is considering this Rigidbody
Asleep: Physics is not considering this Rigidbody

Each of these values above has its unique purposes depending on what you
are trying to watch or debug during runtime. Working with the previously
mentioned platformer, you may think that your platform should be in the
alignment of your character, but something pushed it out of the way just
enough to not allow the character to land on it. With the Info block, you can
watch the movement or velocity. If there should be no velocity in the z
direction, then looking at that value will let you know if it is working as
intended.
We have a strong idea of how the Rigidbody 3D component works now and
can refer to these pages if there are some confusing movements when
building physics-focused interactions.
Design and implementation considerations
It is very easy to try to add physics to each of your GameObjects to get
movement in your interactions. Not every item specifically needs a
Rigidbody to complete its movement in a manner that your interactions
need to provide a fantastic experience. At the end of the day, it’s all about
frames per second. Try to make any moving item without Rigidbody
components, but if they’re needed, then add them.

Telekinesis and physics interaction
For our game’s first puzzle, we focused heavily on making the environment
narrative the key interest point. From the moment you walk into the first
room, your vision will be placed on the back door, which houses the
puzzle’s solution. In the final puzzle, we need to force the player to use

more brainpower on figuring out the puzzle instead of finding the answers
around them. To do this, we decided to give the player the power of
telekinesis that Myvari, our character, realizes she has had within her the
whole time. We have three steps to get the player to this point of
understanding.

Rocks Falling
Telekinesis hasn’t been seen in this game in any form yet. Some magic
came from her necklace, but we need to provide some information to tell
the player that she has something in her. A cinematic works well for this.
We need to design the interaction.

Design
After finishing the first door puzzle, you encounter a large hallway with old
statues of your past. This is a nice look into the culture of her race’s past.
There is nothing to solve here; there’s just a nice walk. Behind the final
statue is a tight space to walk through that leads to a cliff path. About
halfway along the path, some rocks fall. This triggers a cinematic effect
where Myvari defends herself from these falling rocks with her telekinesis.
Looking confused, she needs to move forward to find out what is going on.
Her adventurous side beckons her to push on.

Implementation
What needs to be implemented here is in two pieces. One large piece is the
cinematic of the rocks and Myvari. Cinematics are when the user doesn’t
have power over the interaction. This is helpful for gaining knowledge but
shouldn’t be overused because the game can become like an interactive
movie. Cinematics should be used with restraint. The second part is
physics-based rocks as a secondary motion from the boulder falling.
The cinematic will be triggered in the same way as previously: we turn off
the player’s ability to manipulate Myvari or the camera and transition to the

cinematics’ animation while moving the camera to emphasize the object we
want, in this case, the boulder. If you need a refresher for this, look at
Chapter 6, Interactions and Mechanics, during the implementation of the
tight spaces.
The physics-based rocks, however, we can’t just animate. We want them to
feel as though they fell on their own. It makes the larger boulder seem like
it fell, which helps sell the immersion that this location might be real.
Even though this shows the telekinesis coming from Myvari, we need to
have the player perform the interaction or else it’s just an ability they can’t
use. We will go over the player’s interaction next.

The Broken Pedestal
This is the first time the player gets to use Myvari’s newfound power. We
need to design this puzzle so it’s impossible to miss because the player isn’t
used to using this power. This pedestal is a small version of the final puzzle.
In this micro-puzzle, you need to place the fallen piece onto the pedestal to
fix it. We will need to be very careful with how we design this to ensure the
player’s experience explains how this works before they touch the
interaction button. Let’s run through the design together.

Design
After we make it along the cliff path and across a small crumbling bridge,
the bridge then falls, and the way back is impassable. The only way to go is
through a large door. When we walk up to it, it will start opening into a
large open cavern, water pooled in the bottom, with ruins in the background
and a fall to certain doom. Directly in front of Myvari is a pedestal that is
broken, but the broken piece is on the ground close to it. Looking at it, we
can see that it is outlined in the same color as the power that protected
Myvari from the falling rocks. We will display a UI helper showing which
button to press, which we will go over in Chapter 8, User Interface and
Menus. This will make interaction with her ability tied to a button to

provide the player agency. When we press the button, Myvari lifts the
broken piece off the ground and fits it onto the pedestal, where it affixes
itself and lights up. Pressing the interaction button will then transition the
open space into a night scene and some water rises up from below to reveal
a pathway to the ruins.

Implementation
We know that the mechanic we want to include here is a subset of the final
puzzle. To do this, we don’t want to write code just for this single item, so
instead, we set it up to be a simple standalone using a public enum.
To keep this as easy to read as possible, we will ask you to take your time
reading this section, which is about the final puzzle. We will be explaining
some more advanced features and it all builds on itself up to the end. We are
using some amazing Unity timing in this code, which will take some
explanation, and breaking it up as we’ve done will help you to understand
it. So, let’s move on to the final puzzle design, and then we will break down
all of the pieces of this and the final puzzle’s implementation.

The Final Puzzle
We’ve made it to the big final puzzle. Luckily, we took the time to show the
player what Myvari gained through stress from the boulder falling toward
her. Then we learned how to use it to get here by fixing the broken pedestal.
Now we have this puzzle slightly open, but allows the environment to teach
the player what they need to do. Let’s dive in to see how we design this last
puzzle.

Design
Now that you’ve made it to the ruins, there is some architecture in the
background that lights up some runes on the pillars. This corresponds with
some cables on the ground that connect to all the pillars. The puzzle
consists of six pillars that connect the power to the main tree, which is in

the center of the ruins and has wires connected to it. The wires are only
properly connected from three of the pillars. Myvari needs to use her
telekinesis to connect the correct pillars following the wires on the ground.
Bringing power to the tree opens a small compartment in the tree, which
houses a tiara. The tiara is revealed through a cinematic and will end the
gameplay of this vertical slice. Now that we have the general idea of what
we need to do, let’s move on to implementation.

Implementation
The implementation of this puzzle is the completion of the telekinesis
mechanic. When we wrote this, we allowed ourselves to push into more
advanced topics. To ensure this makes sense, we will go over all the topics
here and break them down as much as possible. Ensure that you pay
attention to the minutiae as there are bits of information here that will seem
hidden or counter-intuitive at first.
Programming topics that we will be covering are:
Execution order
Static methods
UnityAction (delegate)

Coroutines
Let’s first go over the execution order for Unity. We haven’t spent any time
talking about the nitty-gritty of how it works under the hood.

Execution order
There is an order to the execution of every frame when in runtime, or
playing, inside the editor and opening a build. We would show you a
screenshot of the flowchart, but it’s a bit too large. Instead, we will place a
link here as well as a Google search term for you to search online to find

the website and see this flowchart. I will cover the higher-level topics here
and the reason why they matter within each portion that they affect.
https://docs.unity3d.com/Manual/ExecutionOrder.html
Google search term: Unity Execution Order
The major concept here is that there has to be a hierarchy of execution of
certain bits of information. We needed to have a strong think about this to
have a baseline of what will be dealt with at each frame. The uncomfortable
truth is that there is a lot to think about. Here is the list in chronological
form with highest-level terminology for the execution order, with a small
snippet of information on each of them:
Initialization: This is for Awake and onEnable only.
Editor: Reset when scripts are added and not in play mode.
Initialization: The second part of initialization is for the
Monobehaviour method Start only.
Physics: This is where all physics updates will happen. It can
potentially be run more than once per frame if the fixed time step is set
higher than the frame update time.
Input Events: Any non-update focused input, such as OnMouseDown.
Game Logic: Update, coroutine logic and yielding, animation events,
write properties, and LateUpdate run in here. These will be more
apparent during implementation of the game logic further in the chapter.
Scene Rendering: Many scene-rendering functions run here in every
frame to deal with culling objects from the camera, visible objects, and
post rendering. We will not be breaking this down heavily, if you are
curious, please read into the execution order manual for more
information.
Gizmo Rendering: Specifically, the OnDrawGizmo method of the Unity
Editor.
GUI Rendering: The OnGui method, which can run multiple times per
frame.

End of Frame: Allows coroutines to be paused or yielded at the end of
the frame, waiting for all of the rest to finish before starting again at the
top of game logic section.
Pausing: When the application has been paused; before the application
is paused, a single frame is run.
Decommissioning: Cleans up memory with OnApplicationQuit,
OnDisable, and OnDestroy in that order.
Before we move on to the next section, there is something you need to
make sure you understand. You do not, by any means, need to understand
all of the preceding list. There is a lot to learn there, and if you go to the
execution order documentation you will see every method that is listed in
more detail. We will be showing portions of the execution and explaining
what is affecting our code during the rest of this chapter.
The key takeaway from the chronological list of higher-level sections being
listed is that Unity has an order. That’s a relieving concept to wrap your
head around as a developer. When you get confused about why something
is happening the way it is, you can rely on this to see if it’s an execution
order problem that you might be running into.
During the next sections, we will have images of the section of the
execution order we had to pay attention to. This will allow you to see how it
can be used for your future development work.
Now that we’ve looked at the execution order, we should get into the code.
We are using three scripts to make this work with the telekinesis mechanics:
PhysicsPuzzleTrigger.cs
PhysicsPuzzlePiece.cs
FinalPuzzle.cs
PhysicsPuzzleTrigger.cs has two pieces of code that are important to
know about first: the PhysicsPuzzleTrigger class and the
PhysicsPuzzlePieceType enum. We will tackle the

PhysicsPuzzlePieceType first as it’s much easier to get into than the

trigger. We have an enum that allows us to choose which puzzle piece type
it is on the GameObject. We define this as follows:
public enum PhysicsPuzzlePieceType
{
First = 0,
Second,
Third,
Intro,
Any
}

Then, in the PhysicsPuzzlePiece.cs script, we implement it as follows:
public class PhysicsPuzzlePiece : MonoBehaviour
{
public PhysicsPuzzlePieceType pieceType;
}

When we add the PhysicsPuzzlePiece.cs script to any GameObject, we
then get a dropdown to choose which type it is. This is very useful when
you want explicit items to fit together. We’re using this to use the same
mechanics but allow for different puzzle types.
We said in The Broken Pedestal section above that we would explain it
within the implementation of the entire mechanic. What we do is allow the
Intro option to be aligned with this mechanic and be explicit for that
action. Even though it’s impossible to get the final puzzle pieces in that
location, this is a great practice to ensure data is consistent with your code.
Let’s get back into the PhysicsPuzzleTrigger.cs code. We start off by
declaring the fields we’re used to working with so far, but then on line 12,
there is something unique that has two concepts we need to go over. This is
the use of static and UnityAction:
public static UnityAction<PhysicsPuzzleTrigger,
PhysicsPuzzlePiece> OnPieceSlotted;

We’re going to break out of describing exactly what we’re doing with this
line to explain the context of what both static and UnityAction are. After
we do that, we will then proceed to how we are using them in this code for
this mechanism.

Static methods
A static method, field, property, or event is callable on any class that is
within the namespace without needing the using directive or inheritance.
Let’s say you have one script that has a field as follows:
public class StaticTest
{
public static int StaticInt = 10;
}

You could then have another script in the same project that, without
specifically calling for that script when using or inheriting it, could access it
like this:
public class UseStaticTest
{
int BaseNumber = 0;
int NewNumber = BaseNumber + StaticTest.StaticInt;
}

This may not look very useful by itself, but the concept is the important part
to take away at this time. Static members of a class can be accessed by
other classes by just using the class name before the required member.
An example of this being used commonly is keeping a count of something
as the static field has only one instance. We’re using it to store a
UnityAction. We need to go over that next before we get into how we are
using these directly.

UnityActions

A UnityAction is a Unity-specific delegate. A delegate in C# is a sort of
generic concept of a method that has a parameter list which also returns a
specific type. Interestingly, a UnityAction returns void by default. A
common way of explaining delegates is through the concept of the
subscribe model. This means that the delegate is looking for methods to be
attached to it and when something uses the delegate, it will try to run the
methods attached as long as the methods are returning the same type. This
is a bit abstract, so let’s look at an example. We will be using the
UnityAction MathAction to add to how many times a button is pressed and
then see if that new number is even or odd:
using UnityEngine.UI;
public class UnityActionTest : MonoBehaviour
{
public Button AddButton;
private UnityAction MathAction;
float TimesClicked;
void Start()
{
AddButton = GetComponent<Button>();
MathAction += AddOne;
MathAction += CheckEven;
AddButton.onClick.AddListener(MathAction);
}
void AddOne()
{
TimesClicked++;
Debug.Log("Clicked count : " + TimesClicked);
}
void CheckEven()
{
if (TimesClicked % 2 == 0)
{
Debug.Log("This click was even!");
}
else
{
Debug.Log("ThIs ClIcK WaS OdD.");
}
}
}

We’re using the Button class, so ensure to import UnityEngine.UI so we
can use buttons from that class. Following the lines down, we made a new
UnityAction named MathAction. On Start, we grabbed the button so we
could add logic to it. Then we attached the AddOne and CheckEven methods
to UnityAction. The += that you see is MathAction attaching itself to those
methods in order.
Note
Addition assignment operator – we’re using a special “syntactic sugar” to
make the code a bit cleaner to read and less redundant. The addition
assignment operator looks like this:

MathAction += AddOne

Note
Written another way is:

MathAction = MathAction + AddOne;

You then see that we assigned UnityAction to the button’s listener. When
you press the button, both of these functions will be running because
UnityAction is assigned to both of them.
Before we can go further into the code, we need to cover one more topic,
coroutines.
Coroutines
A coroutine allows you to spread a task over multiple frames. This is not a
form of multithreading. Every action is still being run on the main thread.
The power of coroutines is that they allow directable pausing through a new
term, yield. Taking a look at the execution order in the figure below, you
may remember seeing yield null after Update in the Game Logic section.
If you don’t have the execution order up on a browser tab, look at Figure

7.3. The small note on the left says it nicely. If a coroutine previously
yielded or paused, and it’s due to resume, it will resume at that point in the
execution order.

Figure 7.3: Game logic of the execution order
That’s awesome, isn’t it? How does it know to resume, you ask? Good
question, reader. It knows that it should resume because of the logic in the
code. There is a fantastic example from the Unity Docs going over a basic
fade from opaque to transparent using a coroutine. Let’s go through it
quickly:
void Update()
{
if (Input.GetKeyDown("f"))
{
StartCoroutine(Fade());
}
}
IEnumerator Fade()
{
Color c = renderer.material.color;
for (float alpha = 1f; alpha >= 0; alpha -= 0.1f)
{
c.a = alpha;
renderer.material.color = c;
yield return null;
}
}

I put in bold the three things that may be new to you.
StartCoroutine(Fade()) is asking the application to start a coroutine with
the Fade method. You will start the coroutine during the start of the game

logic at the bottom of the yield statements; refer to Figure 7.3 again for
this.
IEnumerator is stating that this method is iterable. Remember back to the

last time you made a method. The keyword before the name is the type. We
use void if it returns nothing, but since this will be iterated on, it needs to
know. We let the computer know this by adding IEnumerable as the return
type.
The last part is yield return null. This is tricky the first time looking
over the for loop. In most cases, a return will take you out of a loop, but
since we have a yield there, Unity asks if we’ve finished with everything
in the method. It pauses after subtracting 0.1f from the current alpha and
waits for the game logic portion to start again to do it again until it satisfies
the for loop logic. Once that is completed, it no longer yields.
Summarizing this code, pressing F will fade the GameObject this script is
on out from the scene. We think you have a good enough grasp of these
concepts. Let’s get back to the code in our project to finish up our
implementation.

Back to the code
OK…we took a little aside to explain some key concepts, but we’re back
now. Let’s open PhysicsPuzzleTrigger.cs back up. The concept here is
that you have telekinesis and when you move an item close to its trigger
volume, it will then, on its own, move into place over a transitional period
we define. We’ve seen OnTriggerEnter previously, so that isn’t surprising
with a volume trigger. We do want it to move on its own, so we need to
disable a bunch of fields of the Rigidbody and disable the collider. This is
done on lines 28-33 in PhysicsPuzzleTrigger.cs.
Now, this is where we get to see new code. We need to set up the references
to where the items need to transition from and to as this script is on several
GameObjects, so we need to reference their relative positions.
Then we start the coroutine on line 40.

StartCoroutine(TransitionTween());

We have some code for changing the color of the trigger; this is temporary
for debugging.
Then we have a tween loop, which is an animation term for “between”
which means the change in movement in our case. We have our while loop
running for as long as tweenDuration is set to, normalized from how long it
has been from the start. This is defined as delta. We then Lerp the position
and Slerp the rotation to the transform we want it to end with:
while (Time.time - tweenStart < tweenDuration)
{
float delta = (Time.time - tweenStart) /
tweenDuration;
tweenPiece.position =
Vector3.Lerp(tweenStartPos, transform.position, delta);
tweenPiece.eulerAngles =
Vector3.Slerp(tweenStartRot, transform.eulerAngles, delta);
yield return null;
}

Finally, we see the yield return null!
We’re now paused until the next game logic loop unless tweenDuration is
complete and we don’t enter the while loop, which means we have
completed the tween. We set the position and angles on line 61 for the
moving piece to ensure the transform is ready to be referenced in our
UnityAction.
tweenPiece.position = transform.position;
tweenPiece.eulerAngles = transform.eulerAngles;
OnPieceSlotted?.Invoke(this,tweenPiece.GetComponent<PhysicsPu
zzlePiece>());

Now, we move into our UnityAction:
OnPieceSlotted?.Invoke(this,
tweenPiece.GetComponent<PhysicsPuzzlePiece>());

This looks interesting. Why is there a question mark there? There is a
conditional operator called a “null condition operator”, which asks if
OnPieceSlotted is null or not before performing the following method.
This is another syntactical sugar. You could get the same result by making
an if statement checking if OnPieceSlotted is null.
In the case of UnityAction, this is saying something very specific. It’s
asking if anything has been attached to this action.
If there is a method assigned to this UnityAction, then please call whatever
function is assigned with the following arguments; the this GameObject
and the tweenPiece as the PhysicsPuzzlePiece type.
This is where some magic happens. Remember that we assigned
OnPieceSlotted to be a static member of the PhysicsPuzzleTrigger
class? Well, open up FinalPuzzle.cs and let’s show the power of static
members.
On Start, we add a local function named OnPieceSlotted to the static
UnityAction from PhysicsPuzzleTrigger.OnPieceSlotted. We know
that when our player puts an object into the right position, by the end of the
coroutine it needs to update which object it was. Was it the final puzzle or
the intro puzzle? We defined that through our enum on PuzzlePieceType:
void OnPieceSlotted(PhysicsPuzzleTrigger trigger,
PhysicsPuzzlePiece piece)
{
if (piece.pieceType == PhysicsPuzzlePieceType.Intro)
{
Debug.Log("FINAL PUZZLE INTRO SOLVED. Trigger
environment transition here");
tempBridge.SetActive(true);
}
else
{
numPiecesSlotted += 1;
if (numPiecesSlotted >= 3)
{
Debug.Log("FINAL PUZZLE SOLVED! Trigger
portal event");
}

}

}

This local method being run from UnityAction gives us the trigger and
piece tells us if we have finished the intro puzzle or if we have worked on
the final puzzle. We can use any script later on in the game for this specific
mechanic as it’s static and available to us. Static is not only fun with socks
on the carpet shocking your siblings. It’s also magic in programming!
We just did some intermediate-level Unity programming. These tools are
usable in so many situations, but they aren’t always easy to think about as
the first option to the answer of your problem. Take your time and work
through each section. Make some coroutines with GameObjects. See if you
can make your own UnityAction within one script, as we showed above.
Test static methods and see how they work, and in time these tools will
become natural to you when developing your games.

Summary
What a jam-packed chapter! We went over a lot, so I think we need a small
summary here. The concept of physics is already a tough subject to tackle.
We’re using it for simulation in games on a small scale. We went over the
Rigidbody component in its entirety and then dove deep into some brandnew C# work. For C#, we went over:
Execution order
Static methods
UnityAction (delegate)

Coroutines
All these new concepts are tools to use on your next project. Take as much
time as needed to digest these concepts. You will see them used in almost
every project that you work with.

In the next chapter, we need to add menu systems and a user interface so
that the user can have more context for the gameplay.

User Interface and Menus
The collection of visual information and components laid out across the
screen of a video game is known as the User Interface (UI). An intuitive
UI and menu system creates an opportunity for your players to have quality
experiences. This interactivity and direct influence of a game’s playable
outcome is called player agency. Designing for this agency is crucial to
creating an intuitive and successful interactive experience within your game
world. This agency allows players to interact with the game’s narrative and
engage within that game space accurately.
User interfaces and menu systems throughout your game also provide
player affordances. Player affordances are the communication with your
player about how to use an object within the game, conveying controls, and
navigating your game world from start to finish.
Game menu systems specifically give the player agency over the various
modes of gameplay. These gameplay modes signal to a player when to start
and the options and actions available before, during, and after gameplay.
Getting the player into the game is important, but during the game, your
interface may be more important to the experience.
There are four forms of user interface: Diegetic, Non-diegetic, Spatial, and
Meta. Spending some time breaking down these UI definitions will give a
better understanding of how we will be using them in our project. Then we
will look into scripting each of them to give an idea of the proper way to
implement them.
This chapter will cover the following topics.
Defining UI
UI elements
UI in our project

Unity Canvas system
Unity UI objects
Let’s begin by explaining the user interface.

User interface
The need for a user interface is a double-edged sword. You will need to put
user interface features in place for the experience to move forward, but this
can also easily distract the player from that experience when not done
correctly. There isn’t always a mechanic that can be made to teach players
how to interact with the world they are playing in. This can break
immersion, which isn’t always bad, but there needs to be an understanding
of how one can break this immersion without ruining the experience.
We’re going to talk about the four forms of UI, which are broken down
across two defined spaces, Narrative and Internal. Narrative lends itself
to UI-driven storytelling, whereas Internal is functional UI within the game
world itself.
Pro Tip
When reading through the various forms of the user interface, realize that
these are not exhaustive explanations and will need to be understood
more as a tool to help design the right UI for the experience you wish to
provide.

While we are going through Diegetic, Non-diegetic, Spatial, and Meta UI
forms, we will be explaining how the UI fits into a simple 2x2 diagram of
Internal and Narrative functions. The 2x2 grid below, in Figure 8.1, is a
visual representation of how to integrate a holistic view of the UI and
incorporate it throughout the overall gameplay experience. In the following
paragraphs, each section header of the UI forms will also be supplemented
with an “if this, then that” double-answer response.

Figure 8.1: 2x2 user interface design
Answering with Yes or No on both Narrative and Internal on the 2x2 grid
above helps us to understand what UI form is needed. Follow along as we
describe each of these four forms in detail.

Diegetic – Narrative Yes, Internal Yes
A user interface that blends internal and external spaces is called Diegetic.
This type of interface commits to not breaking the immersion while
providing the information to the player that they need to understand the
internal game space.
You may want to convey the location the player needs to go, but you want
to give a sense of difficulty. You may, during the story, give the player a
direction and provide a compass. When you press a button to pull up the
compass, this is giving the player the information without breaking out of

the internal space. We will consider this compass when discussing the rest
of the four types to see if we can convert it into a different type.
Now that we have explained the Diegetic UI form type, let us take a look at
a great example that is within a published game. When explaining Diegetic
UI, there is an eerie game that comes to mind, called Dead Space.
Electronic Arts (EA)’s Visceral Games studio (dissolved and merged into
EA Vancouver and EA Montreal; October 17, 2017) created a gritty,
survival cosmic horror video game that drew inspiration from other works
of horror such as Resident Evil 4 and the Silent Hill series.
The game designers of Visceral Games needed to think of ways the player
could look dead center on the screen and focus their attention there as much
as possible. That way the player could simultaneously witness the
abominations, jump scares, gore, and horrors of Dead Space’s world, and
navigate the narrative of Isaac Clarke. Isaac is the main character of Dead
Space and the unfortunate spaceship systems engineer that is thrown into a
variety of unfortunate situations over a span of years.
How can you do that in a role-playing game where you have a lot of
information that your player needs to know? You put that important player
information on the character itself. When done this way, the information
becomes 3rd person on the screen, allowing the player to still retain a view
of the screen and its environment. Isaac’s health indicators are on a health
bar that is integrated into the lit-up nodes on his spine, seen in Figure 8.2,
and the stasis meter is incorporated on his right shoulder blade as a partial
glowing circular ring. Now the player doesn’t need to look away from the
main character to know his health and character statistics.

Figure 8.2: Dead Space health visualization

Non-diegetic – Narrative No, Internal
No
Looking at the grid, you may think, how can you have any UI that isn’t in
the narrative or the game space? This is a great question and it’s more
common than you think! Virtually every menu system and, unintegrated
heads-up display (HUD) is non-diegetic, as seen in Figure 8.3. Pressing
play in a game isn’t part of the game narrative, but it’s part of the game and
an important part too.

Figure 8.3: Forza non-diegetic HUD
Let’s think about the compass and see if we can convert it into a nondiegetic UI element. Its purpose is to help the player know the direction of
where to go. Can we do this without the game characters being aware of it?
You could make a minimap that shows the direction the player needs to go
and shape it like a compass on the screen. With this being defined, we’ve
decided that yes, you can convert the compass into a non-diegetic form.
There are so many examples of a non-diegetic UI element in production,
but one of our favorites is in a racing game UI. Forza has a clean UI that
shows the gear you’re in, the speed, and the location in the world to help
you along your path on the minimap.

Spatial – Narrative No, Internal Yes
Here is a fun case for user interface design. Spatial UIs exist in the game
world, but the characters inside the game are not aware of their existence.
Taking another look at the compass, maybe we want it to be spatial. How
can we convey the direction we need to go without the character being
aware of it?

There could be a projected compass on the ground that shows the direction
of the next waypoint or goal. It only shows up when you look topdown
from your character so it doesn’t always disturb the gameplay in general.
One of the best spatial UI elements in a game is in Path of Exile. The items
that are on the ground have a colored spire to denote certain item types and
the names of the items give a description of what the item may be, as seen
in Figure 8.4 below.

Figure 8.4: Path of Exile spatial item names
The character in the game doesn’t know about this screen but it is in the
game’s space as you need to move your mouse over it to view it.

Meta – Narrative Yes, Internal No
Meta is interesting for a user interface as we can’t have the interface in the
game world, but the character needs to have knowledge of it. If we look at
our compass example and try to transform it into the meta space, we will
need to think a bit harder. Breaking the fourth wall by interacting directly
with the user while the character is aware of the scenario is rather unique.
Let’s give it a try.
The outer area of the screen houses the compass degrees and follows the
character’s rotations. The character looks at their compass and you can see

that the direction is or isn’t close to the correct location due to the screen
UI. This is cumbersome and doesn’t feel intuitive.
A much better example of meta is in first-person shooter games. Have you
ever played an FPS game and were hit? There is a splatter of blood and a
red vignette around the screen. The character knows they were hit and
generally makes a sound; the meta UI lets the player know the possibility of
death if they keep getting hit. The camera showing the player isn’t the
player’s vision, and we know this, but our rendering with a bloody vignette
that darkens and intensifies gives the sense of dramatic life-ending anxiety.

Figure 8.5: Call of Duty Meta screen UI
What we have just discussed are the design methodologies to understand
what your UI elements are displaying for the user. As shown, there are
several ways to break down a UI element. We will now go over some
common terminology in the UI development for games.

UI elements
There are common UI elements that are used during any game. Whether it’s
the main menu, inventory system, health representation, or a spatial item
interaction system, they all serve a single purpose: give the player as much

information as possible without directly affecting their immersion too much
that it pulls them away from the experience.
In the next few sections, we will cover the topics previously mentioned.
These are generalized terms for the user interface and are not supposed to
be set in concrete. These are design thoughts following common topics that
currently exist for the UI portion of game development.
Use these sections as references for design when thinking about your game
projects in the future. We will begin with the main menu; coincidentally,
this is the menu that will appear first for your players.

Main menu
When a game menu pops up for the first time after loading the game up,
this is the first time the developers get to create an emotional response. Is
your game a horror game? The font and imagery should reflect this. There
are many ways to set up a menu. Do you need a news screen to pop up
before you pick your characters when logging in? Does the main menu
jump right into gameplay when you press play? Are there several layers of
menus that need to be there as the game is focused on menu systems? All of
these are legitimate questions.
The simplest way to go about building a menu system is to ensure that it
isn’t difficult to play the game with its intended difficulty, or connection if
it’s a multiplayer game. We tend to call this “low barrier of entry.” If a
player wants to come in and press play without looking into the settings,
they should be able to do so. This includes looking at the recommended
specs and building the system to allow for that.
The player’s experience shouldn’t rely on them understanding what their
system can handle. A good way to think about this is the game experience
from arcade machines or consoles. PlayStation and Xbox require game
developers to ensure framerates are high, so the experience is of a good
standard. This should also be the case for PC as well as mobile.

Inventory systems
There are other forms of menu systems that are similar in nature but not
part of the initial player experience. Role-playing games (RPGs) often use
an inventory system that shows what you have stored on your character in
the form of armor or equipment. This can be used as a bottlenecking system
to force players back to the city to sell or upgrade their equipment. It can
also be used to help define the experience as the character couldn’t possibly
hold 30 sets of armor and 200 weapons on them at once while roaming the
world. This is an attempt to straddle the line between breaking immersion
and keeping realism in check.
Some interesting forms of inventory systems are quest logs and
achievements. A quest log is just an inventory of quests that can be
completed or removed by finishing the required quest. Achievements are
the opposite in that you gain them by performing certain tasks.

Health representation
Health can be represented by “lives left,” as in Super Mario Bros. It can
also be represented by how many more times you can be hit, such as in the
Dead Space reference above. It may not even be represented by a specific
value, but an amount of blood on the screen, as seen in Call of Duty. Even
more abstract is not health, but a timer left on the screen of how much time
you have left to complete a quest or level. All of these can be considered
health representations and can look different on the screen using any of the
forms we previously spoke about.

Item interaction system
There may be items in your game with which your player needs some help
to know that they are interactable. There are two main ways to work
through this and both of them can be spatial. Sometimes this will be nondiegetic, which we will go over next.

One way is to make a tooltip on the screen that is only available when your
mouse or crosshair is covering the item. This is usually when you want
something to be contextual to that specific item. This can be done when the
tooltip is in the screen space — this means it’s always the same size and is
more akin to a floating window. This is the same concept that was shown in
the Path of Exile image above. You may also see instead a floating icon
around or above the item under the context. This could be for the player to
know that they can interact with something. These are similar in nature, but
screen space denotes that it’s not part of the world and the character isn’t
aware of it either. This makes it non-diegetic. The second example of the
icon floating above the item is spatial as it shows itself in the world, but the
character doesn’t know about it.

UI in our project
Our project is not user interface-heavy. We purposefully wanted to keep it
as light as possible to create a tight immersion within the environment. To
keep it as light as possible, we have three major portions to talk about.
Main menu
Escape menu
Spatial UI
To begin, we will talk about the main menu and how that starts our
immersion into the game right from the beginning.

Main menu
Our menu is going to be primarily a non-diegetic menu system. From the
start of the application, Myvari will be in the woods looking at her book.
The menu will be off to the left with the Title, Play, and Quit options
available to select. When the Play button is pressed, there will be a camera
movement with a small cinematic animation that triggers the beginning of
the game. Possession of our character happens right after Myvari starts her

idle animation after the cinematic animation finishes from the Play button
press. This system gives a feel that it is within the world as the camera is
not fading to black for a scene transition, but it is not part of the world or
part of the narrative. Myvari doesn’t know the menu system exists and it’s
not affecting the game world in any way, therefore it is non-diegetic. The
screenshot we are showing below in Figure 8.6 is a mock-up to illustrate
the logic without the need for all the art. This is a common tactic when
working within game development. In further sections we will go over the
implementation of the actual UI.

Figure 8.6: Main menu mock-up
We like the concept of a UI that allows the player to feel like the game they
are playing is immediately immersive. When you hit Play, the menu should
go away and the camera should move into a position where you then take
control of the main character. The goal is to not have a loading screen. Keep
the players involved as much as possible.

Escape menu

To give as much immersion as possible, we wanted to utilize one of the core
features of our character’s personality: exploration. To us, this means that
we needed the book on her right hip to be a feature of her passage through
the game experience. We also knew that we would need to have in-game
settings somewhere, which we could also place in the book. This is spatial
in that it breaks the immersion of the game as the settings aren’t part of the
narrative. When Myvari flips to the Options portion of the journal, this will
feel disjointed enough but will be familiar to someone who is used to
playing games. This portion will be spatial as it is part of the world but
Myvari doesn’t know that it’s a menu to close the game. When she is on the
left pane, this is all story-driven elements that are part of the world and both
Myvari and the player are using it as hints to move forward in the game. In
this case, we will call this portion of the menu diegetic as we will be
selecting the art to fit as though someone from Myvari’s race made this
book.
How we will do this is through a small cinematic animation of Myvari
pulling the book out and it opening to the journal, which will have small
updates depending on where you have been in the game. The book has art
to look as though she didn’t write in it, but another person of her race did.
The book is old and has led her to this cave. There will be markers with
small notes to help guide the player if need be. This is a linear progression
game, so we will update this at every milestone or sub-milestone. If she is
standing still, we will also have her get the book out and read from it, which
will bring the immersion of the book being her journal into a closer
convergence to keep the experience as congruent as possible.

Figure 8.7: Journal UI mock-up
The journal is an interesting menu system for us. It’s acting as an escape
menu as well as giving the players more clues about the engagement that
Myvari is working through. Figure 8.7 above shows our mock-up, which
we use to visualize what it may look like. This helps us understand where to
put the camera, as well as helping the animator know how to animate her
grabbing her book out of its holster.

Spatial tooltip
When designing feedback to the player, there are quite a few options as we
saw with the compass problem. In our case, we thought about how we could
best show the ability to interact with the environment. We settled on a
spatial system. This system will be in the form of what is called a tooltip.
This tooltip is a small icon that is in the world space above the GameObject
that is interactable by the player. We chose to use a spatial system to keep
the item within the world for spatial context to the UI element; however, we
did not want it to be part of the narrative. This allows us to use a slight bit
of immersion breaking to be in stark contrast to the rest of the game. When
the player sees the tooltip pop up, it will be interesting. We can use this
system throughout the entire vertical slice! We are creating a simple key
item example, which will be an icon that floats in the game world, but

Myvari will not be privy to its existence. This allows us to make a robust
system; if we choose to use a different button for a different type of
interaction, we can just change out the icon for the correct button to press.

Figure 8.8: Spatial UI mock-up
This very pink circle is just an item placeholder to be our indicator later on.
With it being bright pink, there is no mistaking it for a “completed” item
later on!
We have gone over the definition of the user interface and explained our
project’s use of UI. Now we need to take some time to go over how we
actually made the UI work.

Unity UI
Before we dive fully into our implementation of UI in our project, we will
go over the basics of Unity’s UI system. This will give you an
understanding of what items we are using in our systems as well as a couple
that we aren’t using that you could use in your projects later. There are two
main parts to make this work:

Unity Canvas system
Unity UI components
We need to go over the Unity Canvas system in a bit of detail first before
we start implementing the UI with code so you have a good foundation of
its inner workings before trying to add art to it.

Unity canvas system
Unity places its UI inside a canvas system. This is a GameObject that has
several components on it by default. To make a canvas, right-click in the
Hierarchy window and choose UI, then Canvas. This can be seen in
Figure 8.9 below.

Figure 8.9: Menu to create a canvas
When this gets created, you will have a Canvas GameObject and an Event
System GameObject. If there is already an Event System on that level
where it was created, only the Canvas would be created.
The Canvas has a Rect transform, and it also has a Canvas component, a
Canvas Scalar component, and a Graphic Raycaster component. We will
look into each of these in light detail to explain their purpose.
There is also an Event System that could’ve been created if there wasn’t
another in the scene hierarchy already. This will house the messaging for

input to the UI.
Note
If you are using the new input system, please make sure to click on this
and replace the StandaloneInputModule with the
InputSystemUIInputModule. This allows the event system to know
which input systems are working in the project.

Why don’t we take a look at the components individually, starting with the
Rect transform, Canvas, Canvas Scalar, and then the Graphic Raycaster
in more detail?

Rect transform
The canvas itself has a Rect transform, but it’s meant to be a parent of the
other UI, so its Rect transform needs to be read-only. Right-click on the
canvas and choose UI > Button to make a child button inside the canvas so
we can look at the Rect transform clearly.
Below in Figure 8.10, you can see the button’s Rect transform component
in the inspector where you may be expecting the regular Transform
component. We still have the position, rotation, and scale options in our
Rect transform, but we also have the width, height, pivot, and anchors.
When working with UI, it’s best to leave the scale as 1, 1, 1. This allows the
canvas to set the scaling if needed. The safest way to make size changes is
through the width and height values.
Rotation will rotate from the pivot location, which is a small blue circle and
can be changed from the values of the Pivot fields.

Figure 8.10: Rect Transform component
The position fields will set the local location of the GameObject. When you
need to make changes to the size of the UI element, it’s best to use the Rect
tool instead of scaling. Inside the scene view, there is a Rect tool button,
shown in Figure 8.11 below, which will allow you to change the size of the
UI, which will update the position, width, and height.

Figure 8.11: Rect tool used on the selected button
The pivot of the UI element is an x or y value that is a normalized value to
the width and height of the element. This means that a value of 0.5 in both
will place the pivot at 50% of the width and height, or local center, of the
item.
The last unique item is the anchors. The anchors are designed to allow the
UI elements to remain in place, even if the canvas scales. This could happen
if you have multiple devices or resolution changes. There are Anchors
options of Min/Max, which will set each anchor to its corresponding

normalized value similar to the pivot location. Doing this by hand
sometimes takes a little while, so we have a handy tool to make it easier. If
you click on the top left of the Rect Transform it opens up a useful tool
that allows you to select from common anchor options.
This looks like Figure 8.12 below.

Figure 8.12: Anchor common options
What this tool allows you to do is select the most common anchor positions
for the GameObject you are working on. There are two primary types of
anchoring: Positional and Stretched. The 3x3 grid in the middle of this
tool will make it so the UI in question will be anchored and not stretch or
change when the screen resolution is different from what you have built for.
This is a good option only if the resolution will not change drastically. The
second type is stretching, which is located around the right and bottom
edges. If your game is built with 1920x1080 resolution and the player
chooses to play on an ultra-wide monitor, you may want to allow for some

scaling on certain UI elements. If it is a 4k monitor with a 16:9 aspect ratio,
then you will need to think about stretching all your elements; otherwise,
the UI will appear very small.
Anchoring is a bit of an art form. The tricks above that were outlined will
treat you well. The best way to go about properly anchoring is by playing
the game in the editor and resizing it. It may not give you every scenario,
but it will give you a good perspective on how the UI elements are reacting
to a resolution change.

Canvas component
The canvas component only houses a few options, but they are crucial! In
Figure 8.13 below you can see the sections that we will go through.

Figure 8.13: Canvas component
We have Render Mode with a few options below it: Pixel Perfect, Sort
Order, and Target Display. After that, we have Additional Shader
Channels. Let’s look at these options one by one.

Render Mode
There are three render modes that can be chosen: Screen Space - Overlay,
Screen Space - Camera, and World Space. They each have a certain type
of use and games can have multiple canvases in their world that fit their
needs. As we go through them, think about how we might use them in our

current project. After we describe all the features of the Unity UI we will
get into the implementation.

Screen Space - Overlay
This is a common canvas rendering mode. What is nice about this mode is
that it can be used within its own scene and loaded additively to your game
for runtime. This allows you to make mobile menus that are separate from
the PC monitor menu systems with ease. This works very well; however, it
should only be used with simple UI. If you are going to be dragging around
UI elements or animating them from a mouse context, such as rollover, then
it’s best to use the Camera option.
A good example of this type of canvas is the main menu or a HUD, which
isn’t very interactive.

Screen Space - Camera
As with the overlay option, this is a great mode if you are going to be
making functions that utilize the EventTrigger class. You also cannot
instantiate this like overlay mode. It must already be in the scene and have a
camera that it will be referencing for bounds. It will attach itself to the
camera, so if you make this change and it disappears on you, double-click
your camera and it will be right there!
A great example of this mode is something similar to an ARPG where you
need to drag and drop equipment to equip the items.

World Space
This rendering mode for the canvas is used when you need a menu that is in
the world space. The best way to explain this is through best use cases. You
would use this when you want chat bubbles over your character’s head in
space. You could want landmarks in UI that are selectable, which could
potentially use a World Space canvas. It would be best if that landmark had
text or another form of UI attached to it as well.

Render Mode options
Underneath the Render Mode are three options:
Pixel Perfect – This is only used if you are working within 2D space
where the UI needs to be exact to every pixel. It helps develop the UI to
the constraints of the pixels in creation.
Sort Order – By default the sort order is set to work through the
hierarchy under the Canvas. The higher up an item is on the hierarchy,
the sooner it will be rendered. You can overwrite this by typing in a
value. Lower values will render first. Higher values are sent lower down
the list. This is helpful if you want a single item to always be at the
back. Just put 999 in for the value and it will always be rendered after
the others regardless of the hierarchy order.
Target Display – Should be used if you need another UI for a second
display. You can set this up to display only on the second display. This
can be used for up to eight displays. The use case for this would be for
games similar to racing games, which commonly use three curved
monitors.

Additional Shader Channels
When in overlay, the UI generally will not include normals, tangents, and so
on. Use dropdown shown in Figure 8.14 to select them.

Figure 8.14: Additional Shader Channel options
These would need to be selected if you specifically need them in your UI
elements. Otherwise, leave it on Nothing.

Canvas Scaler
This component is in charge of making sure the scaling is correct for all the
child UI objects under the GameObject with this component attached. It is
not only in charge of scaling the UI itself, but also the font sizes and any
image borders attached to images.
There are several unique parameters with the Canvas Scaler component.
They are placed in the window depending on which of the UI scale modes
are chosen. There are three UI scale modes.

Constant Pixel Size
This is used when you need to keep the pixel size the same regardless of the
screen changing. The use case for this is if you know that you will be
playing this game with a single resolution. If your game can be scaled at all,
then you must work through dynamically setting the scale factor and
ensuring your pixels per unit are the same as well. These parameters are
seen in Figure 8.15 below.

Figure 8.15: Canvas Scaler component Constant Pixel Size UI Scale Mode
If you think that your game will be adjusted at any point then consider
working with the Scale With Screen Size option.

Scale With Screen Size

When you choose Scale With Screen Size, there are different parameters
that pop up than with the Constant Pixel Size option. As seen below in
Figure 8.16, we have Reference Resolution, Screen Match Mode, the
Match slider, and Reference Pixels Per Unit.

Figure 8.16: Canvas Scaler component Scale With Screen Size mode
Reference Resolution – The resolution you’d expect the most-used
screen resolution to be. From there it will scale down or up from the
different resolutions the players may be playing from.
Screen Match Mode – Contains three options:
Match Width Or Height – This will allow the application to
match a blend of width to height when it’s changed. This works
pretty well overall until you hit ultra-wide monitors. This is also the
only option where the Match slider is available to change. With the
next two options, this slider will not be visible.
Expand – This means that the canvas will scale up but will be no
smaller than the reference resolution. This is excellent as it expands
width or height needs. This option is by far my favorite to work
with.
Shrink – This option is just like the Expand option but it will
scale down and not get larger than the Reference Resolution. This
works well, but you have to work from a large resolution from the
start.
Reference Pixels Per Unit – This option refers to how many pixels
are in a centimeter (which is a Unity unit). This is very important to pay

attention to when you are making a 2D game with sprite options. If you
have your sprite set to 100 pixels per unit and this Reference pixels per
unit is set to 50, your sprite will be twice as big as expected.

Constant Physical Size
This is similar to the Constant Pixel Size mode; however, this works with
physical units, as seen below in Figure 8.17. You may be comfortable with
sizing in these units rather than pixels.

Figure 8.17: Canvas Scaler component Constant Physical Size
If it is the case that these units are better for you to use, then make sure you
change the scale of all your fonts to these scales. The list of the physical
options is shown below in Figure 8.18.

Figure 8.18: Physical unit options
Working with any of these options will force you to change all of your UI
items to fit within the scale units of the same type. For example, it is
common for sizing in pixels to be 300 wide, whereas 300 centimeters is
massive! The scale should probably be 0.1. For this reason we would

recommend that you work through your systems and know which one you
will be using if you want to use this scaling mode from the beginning.
The last component is the Graphic Raycaster. This is the second-to-last
default item that comes with the canvas. Let’s explain how the Graphic
Raycaster works with the canvas.

Graphic Raycaster Component
This component is created on the canvas. The purpose for this is to be the
function of what your mouse is clicking on. Below are the available
parameters for the Graphic Raycaster, in Figure 8.19:

Figure 8.19: GraphicRaycaster Component
There are three parameters to quickly go over here.
Ignore Reversed Graphics – This parameter ensures that you cannot
click on objects that are turned around. Remember that backfaces are
culled in the camera. You can flip elements of the UI off by flipping
them around, but they would still be clickable without this being
checked.
Blocking Objects – This allows for items that are 2D or 3D in front of
the UI to block clicking the UI. This defaults to none.
Blocking Mask – This parameter allows you to place layers to block
the UI. Since UIs are sprites, they are generally a rectangle and can
overlap fairly easily. To get around this you can make a UI block layer,
which will allow you to place objects in front to block clicking even if
it’s invisible, with alpha being 0.

We took the time to go over these default items as they are the primary
items you will see when you start working with Unity’s UI. There are quite
a few more options to learn in time as you create more UI, but this
foundation will help you get started. Next, we will look into some UI
objects to add to your canvas.

Unity UI objects
We now have a canvas! This is great because we’ve learned how it works
with dynamic resolutions and how to set it up for your game’s needs. Now
we need to add some objects for it to be useful. Unity UI objects are broken
up into two types: Visual and Interactive.
Visual elements are what you expect. They are items that are meant to be
visual elements only, but they can be attached to interactive items. The
following are examples of these objects, including a description and a
visual example:
Image – There are two types of images: Raw Image and Image. Raw
Image is only used where you want no border; however, it’s generally
best to just use the Image object. Images take sprites and a border can
be added to them. You can also tint the sprite within the Image
component in the inspector. There is also another UI option named
Panel. This is another UI object with an image component attached
designed to be a panel of UI. The only difference between Image and
Panel is that Panel will be set to stretch and fill in the entire canvas by
default.

Figure 8.20: Default Image and Image UI component
Mask – A Mask component will cut out the GameObjects underneath
it. This is great for masking out extra items underneath it that may not
want to be seen. Below, we added a mask to the image and added
another image below it. The outline is the mask; the image that should
be a square is cropped on the top and bottom due to the mask hiding it.

Figure 8.21: Masked default image from Figure 8.20
Text – This is text! Sometimes this is also known as a Label. You are
able to add a specific font to your UI if you need it. When you create it,
you will see TextMeshPro after the text option. This is due to
TextMeshPro (TMP) being so popular that it’s been integrated into the
core Unity features.

Figure 8.22: TextMeshPro UI component
Interactive items can house visual elements, but they come with interactive
UnityEvents. The following are examples of these, including a description
and a visual example:
Button – This interactive object comes with a label by default in its
hierarchy. It also comes with a UnityEvent for when it’s clicked. It has

the ability to be tinted if it’s highlighted, pressed, or disabled. This is a
primary function of UI with interaction.

Figure 8.23: Button UI component
Dropdown – A Dropdown is a user-selectable field of a predefined
group of options. When the user makes a change to this value, it will
invoke the OnValueChanged UnityEvent.

Figure 8.24: Dropdown UI component
Input Field – This is a standard input field where the user clicked into
it or “focused” on it. There is an interesting property we’d like to
mention called Content Type. This allows the developer to error check
without needing to write code. Setting this to Integer Number, for
example, will only allow the user to input numbers. This interactable
object has two UnityEvents:
OnValueChanged – This will return the string of what value is

currently in the input value every time a change has happened
EndEdit – This will return the string once the user clicks

somewhere else or otherwise loses focus on that input field

Figure 8.25: Input Field UI component
Scrollbar – The Scrollbar is used generally in conjunction with a
Scroll Rect. Its purpose is to be a scrollbar for a field if you need
something that might be large. The value is from 0 to 1 regardless of
how large the scrollbar is, and it can be vertical or horizontal. It also has
a UnityEvent that can be used to know the OnValueChanged, so that you
can return the value when you move the scrollbar.

Figure 8.26: Scrollbar UI component
Scroll Rect – This can also be called a scroll view. This can be put in
conjunction with two scroll bars to set up vertical and horizontal
scrolling if needed. This is also set up with a mask to hide information
outside the mask itself. It also has an OnValueChanged UnityEvent on
the scrolling of the Scroll Rect.

Figure 8.27: Scroll Rect UI component
Slider – This is a slider that has a draggable object, which will set the
value of the slider from a minimum value and a maximum value that

you set. It also has a UnityEvent, which returns a value from that min
and max value OnValueChanged.

Figure 8.28: Slider UI component
Toggle – This is a checkbox that has a label assigned to it. When
clicked, you can use the OnValueChanged UnityEvent to evaluate if it’s
on or off.

Figure 8.29: Toggle UI component
Toggle Group – If you add toggles to a group, you can set this group
to allow only one within the group to be selectable. If you select another
one in the assigned grouping, it will switch off the previously on toggle
and switch on the selected toggle. There is an Allow Switch Off option,
which lets you select the currently selected toggle to make none of the
groups selected. There is no unique UnityEvent connected to the group
itself; however, each toggle still has its own OnValueChanged event that
will trigger. One small note, if you are going to make a toggle group,
make sure that each toggle has that Group assigned in their Toggle
component.

Figure 8.30: Toggle Group UI component
These are all good examples of UI items available for the Unity UI. From
here, we need to go through the implementations of the Unity UI to fit our
game. We previously went over the design; now we need to look into the
code to see how it works when players need to interact with it.

Implementation
We need to now look at our implementation. Knowing what all of the UI
objects look like and their purpose is helpful, but we now need to see what
it looks like to have them in practice. We will start off with the Main Menu
before the game starts for the player. After that, we will break into the
journal or escape menu. Then we will finish up with the spatial UI for
interaction with the game’s mechanics.
When reading this part, remember that we will not be going over all of the
lines of the script as at this point we assume that you’ve gotten comfortable
with looking at the code that we have on GitHub.
If at any time you feel confused about how the book is laid out for
explaining the code, ensure that you pull up the scripts that are being
referenced and get yourself realigned. The primary goal of us explaining
code in this manner is to be as concise as possible about what we are doing
and why. Seeing every line of code doesn’t help with that!
That being said, let’s get into the main menu implementation.

Main menu implementation

As we wanted this menu to be non-diegetic, but sitting in the world space to
give an illusion of space, we chose to go with a World Space canvas.
Below in Figure 8.31 is the hierarchy and the inspector with collapsed
components that have no changes from the default.

Figure 8.31: Left, hierarchy for MainMenuCanvas; Right, Inspector for
Canvas
The MainMenuUIControl.cs script is how we will control our main menu.
When working with the UI, you need to make sure that you import the UI
library:
using UnityEngine.UI;

When you use the UI library you will be able to access all the UI objects
and their methods. Though the next line I’d like to place here isn’t
specifically part of the UI, I’d like to show you something we haven’t
talked about yet. This method is called FindObjectOfType. We know that
there will only be one MyvariThirdPersonMovement class in the scene ever,
so we are using this method to get it and then ask for its parent so we know
the player root.
playerRoot = FindObjectOfType<MyvariThirdPersonMovement>
().transform.parent;

We also need to disable the character and set up listeners for the event
system so it knows what to do when we click on the buttons in the canvas.
To disable the character, we have a method we call on awake to turn off
what we need to. When using Cinemachine, you want to disable all the
cameras that are available or Cinemachine will go to one of the cameras.
Then we disable the player’s control script only. This allows the characters’
animations to keep playing in place, but we just can’t control her.
On awake:
SetPlayerEnabled(false);

Separate private implementation on line 50:
void SetPlayerEnabled(bool enable)
{
CinemachineVirtualCamera[] cams =
playerRoot.GetComponentsInChildren<CinemachineVirtualCamera>
(true);
foreach (CinemachineVirtualCamera cam in cams)
{
cam.gameObject.SetActive(enable);
}
playerRoot.GetComponentInChildren<MyvariThirdPersonMovement>
().enabled = enable;
}

We’ve set up listeners several times before, but let’s take a look at them as
well:
startGameButton.onClick.AddListener(OnStartGameButtonPressed)
;
quitButton.onClick.AddListener(OnQuitButtonPressed);

What is happening here is that the respective buttons that are in place for
startGameButton and quitButton will activate the methods in their
listeners when they are clicked.

The OnStartGameButtonPressed method looks like this:
void OnStartGameButtonPressed()
{
SetPlayerEnabled(true);
Cursor.lockState = CursorLockMode.Locked;
Cursor.visible = false;
this.gameObject.SetActive(false);
}

When it’s pressed it sets the character to enabled so we can use the input to
move her around, lock and hide the mouse cursor, and disable the main
menu so you can’t see it anymore. If you hit the quit button, you will close
the application. Unity has an easy way to quit the application:
Application.Quit();

This is the entire main menu! The trickiest part of what we needed to do
was to lock the player down. Otherwise, they would’ve been moveable
while the main menu is up, which is not what we wanted in this case. Next,
we need to work on the journal.

Journal implementation
In most games, there is a common concept of an escape menu. This is to
say, when you press the Escape key, you will encounter a menu that
generally pauses the gameplay. In our case, we wanted it so when you
pressed Escape, our character would open up her book and look at it. This
would be good as, it allows the game to pause a bit as the camera moves in
to see the book and we can house the normal escape menu options, such as
resume and quit the game. There will be some similar concepts from the
main menu here in this, such as locking and unlocking the cursor. There is
also a player enabling method, which is the same as in the main menu as
well.
Below, in Figure 8.32, is another representation of the hierarchy and script
in the inspector for the Journal UI. One of the unique items in the public

fields is that we are using an input system as opposed to only relying on the
mouse inputs.
For us to load up the journal, we can press the letter B or the Escape key.

Figure 8.32: Left, Journal hierarchy; Right, Book inspector panel
This is an interesting turning point in the book for us. All of the coding
involved with this script has been done previously. I recommend opening
the script and looking at it to help remember the prior coding lessons.
The last piece of UI is the spatial UI that helps players know that the item
they are looking at is interactable. Let’s break this implementation down.

Interaction UI implementation
This is unique to set up as there is no canvas for this item. We will have a
single GameObject that is in the scene and we will move it to the location
that is needed and turn it off or on depending on what we are looking at if
it’s intractable. We have a simple GameObject, which is a sphere without a
material on it so it’s bright pink.

In the script InteractiveHighlight.cs, on awake we find this
GameObject and grab its renderer. If it’s not found, then we have an error
that lets us know we can’t find it.
We grab the mesh renderer so that we can disable it when we don’t need to
see it.
void Awake()
{
highlightIndicator =
GameObject.FindGameObjectWithTag("InteractionHighlight");
if (highlightIndicator == null)
{
Debug.LogError("Highlight indicator not found in
scene");
}
highlightIndicatorRenderer =
highlightIndicator.GetComponent<MeshRenderer>();
}

Now that we have the highlight indicator, we should perform the hiding and
movement of the indicator itself. We are using a raycast to know if we are
hitting an interactable item or a piece of the game’s puzzle pieces. This is a
physics method, so we will put this on the fixed update. This will ensure
that the code is run in accordance with the physics update timing that we
talked about in Chapter 7, Rigid Bodies and Physics Interaction.
void FixedUpdate()
{
Ray ray = new Ray(transform.position,
transform.forward);
if (Physics.Raycast(ray, out RaycastHit hit,
maxDistance, rayMask, QueryTriggerInteraction.Collide))
{
highlightIndicator.transform.position =
hit.transform.position + new Vector3(0f, height, 0f);
if (!highlightIndicatorRenderer.enable
d)
{
highlightIndicatorRenderer.enabled = true;
}
}
else

{

}

}

if (highlightIndicatorRenderer.enabled)
{
highlightIndicatorRenderer.enabled = false;
}

As stated previously, the fixed update here runs on physics timing and is
checking to see if what is raycast from the center of the screen is hitting
items on the two masks. If it is hit and it’s within the max distance, then
move the highlighted piece and turn on its renderer. If not, then turn it off!

Summary
This chapter was quite meaty with information. Even though we only had
three pieces of UI to go over, we needed to break it into all of these pieces
to help you with your future projects. You will now also have a strong sense
of how other game developers design their UI for their games. During
Chapter 12, Final Touches, we will be going over the clean-up of it and
how polishing the UI makes a difference to the player’s experience. In the
next chapter, we will go over visual effects and some particle systems.

Visual Effects
The game does not currently have all of its features. We’ve gone from
concept to blockout, then developed the game into a state where it is
playable. This doesn’t mean we are finished quite yet! We need to look at
how we can bring more emotional immersion to the player. Luckily for us,
Unity provides fantastic assets and tools for us to take the current state of
our game and visually turn it up another notch. This is done through various
vehicles, such as shaders, particles, and other polishing tools that we will
cover in Chapter 12, Final Touches.
These topics are very complex. For now, we will go over the main focus of
visual effects by looking at shaders and particles at a high level. Then, we
will progress to an overview of their advanced forms. Because we are using
the Universal Render Pipeline (URP) for this project, we will go over
important tools such as Shader Graph, VFX Graph, and Shuriken. Shader
Graph visually displays shader detailing and coding. VFX Graph was
created to help you understand the various properties of GPU particles.
Shuriken, a CPU-focused particle authoring tool, is available in all render
pipelines. We will cover that as well.
In this chapter, the following topics will be covered:
Visual effects overview
Shader Graph
Particle Systems:
Shuriken
VFX Graph

Visual effects overview
Getting started with visual effects may feel daunting at the onset. We
currently have a simple scene. The world won’t feel alive and immersive
without time spent making deliberate answers to questions needing to be
solved to progress the narrative and design of the game.
Throughout this book, you’ve worked through many general game design
questions. You’ve been able to answer them yourself and may use them for
any project you may want to work on. Then, you were given the answers
we discovered ourselves while creating this project and how it would move
forward. We had a pretty good idea of what the feel would be for the player:
fantasy exploration in the simplest of terms. We now need to be able to go
through our scene and find areas in which we need a touch more fantasy.
Exploration is done through the mechanics and narrative design.
Fantasy is a broad term. We could have gone with any theme really. We
decided to push through this vague starting point and found a theme of light
science fiction focused on an ancient race. These beings hold onto the
power of the celestial bodies of the natural space surrounding them.
Working with nature, they at some point constructed a cave the player will
explore. We need to come up with a way to embody this storytelling
through visual gameplay, and the player accepting themself as the main
character of this world is what we are aiming for.
To carry out this visual storytelling, we need to incorporate the multiple
visual effects tools available in Unity. Shader Graph allows us to build
shaders that can have interesting properties that play with lights and
twinkling effects in various ways. Shuriken provides us with particle
systems to add ambient dust, glowing particles around bioluminescent
plants, and simple details of other fantasy elements. VFX Graph allows us
to push simple particles to the limit and bring GPU systems into play. By
pushing GPU systems into play, VFX Graph will give us the ability to use
many particles. Though this isn’t practical, you could spawn tens of
millions of particles. Finally, we will use the lighting in Unity to provide
hints to the player for where to look and set the mood and tone of the
current action, system, or place.

To start this chapter, we will be laying the foundation of terms and going
over the individual visual effects tools in detail. After these explanations,
we can then expand upon how we incorporate the tools that Unity has to
offer into our workspace to create a visually immersive environment.
Moving forward, this section may become a useful reference point to come
back to re-familiarize yourself with the tools and their purpose.

Shader Graph
Shader Graph is a visual scripting tool designed to allow artist-driven
shader creation. Shaders are scripts that inform the graphics pipeline how to
render materials. A material is an instance of a shader with parameters set
for a certain mesh inside of a GameObject. A simple example of this could
be leather. If you think of leather, you could probably think about many
different types of leather. What color is it? Is it shiny? Does it have a unique
texture? All of these options are parameters in the shader that can be set in
the material to render the object properly.
In Unity, a shader is written in High-Level Shader Language (HLSL).
Knowing how to properly write this code requires a detailed understanding
of the graphics pipeline in your computer and can be a bit daunting to get
going. The graphics pipeline is a complex conceptual model. Simplified, the
computer goes through layers and stages to understand what 3D visual
graphics are in a scene, then takes that information and renders those
visuals to a 2D screen.
In fact, just reading the paragraph above might’ve seemed a bit confusing.
This is natural. There are many moving parts here and we will break this
down within this portion of the chapter. In an effort to not dive in too deep
with HLSL, we will be focusing purely on Shader Graph. If after spending
time in Shader Graph you want to move into a more technical position, we
recommend learning HLSL and handwriting shaders. Once you have
learned HLSL and handwriting shaders you will have a solid foundation of
general shader creation.
Let’s go through the setup of Shader Graph first, then how to create a
shader. We should then take some time to talk about basic and commonly

used nodes that are used to create shaders. Nodes are a visual representation
of a block or chunk of code. These nodes can be linked together to create
larger functions of visually layered effects.

Setup
We have been talking about using the URP project, which should
automatically have Shader Graph installed on it. If it isn’t installed, you can
easily install it by heading to the Package Manager and installing it from
the Unity Registry packages.
Figure 9.1 below shows what’s needed to install Shader Graph properly.
If you have a green checkmark like in the figure below, then it is installed
already!

Figure 9.1: Checking if Shader Graph is installed
Now that we have either installed Shader Graph or verified it’s installed,
let’s move on to creating your first shader.

Creation

Right-clicking in an open area of your project window gives you the
marking menu for that space. We want to make a new shader, so we mouse
over Create > Shader > Universal Render Pipeline and then get four
options. These four options are the basics from URP that automatically set
up the shader settings for you. Refer to Figure 9.2 for the path to follow to
create your shader.

Figure 9.2: Path to create a shader in Unity Editor
You may be wondering, “Which one should I choose?” If so, that is a great
question. Let’s go over all four of these types just in case you want to mess
around with any of the other types after we move along with our choice.
From top to bottom we have Lit, Sprite Lit, Sprite Unlit, and Unlit Shader
Graphs to work with. Let’s go through each of these types in that order.

Lit Shader Graph
The Lit Shader Graph lets you render 3D objects with real-world lighting
information. The shaders that use this will be using a Physically Based
Rendering (PBR) lighting model. A PBR model allows 3D surfaces to
have a photo-realistic quality of materials like stone, wood, glass, plastic,
and metals across various lighting conditions. With the Lit Shader’s
assistance, lighting and reflections across these objects can adhere to
dynamic shifts, such as bright light to a dark cave environment, accurately.

Sprite Lit Shader Graph
URP comes with a 2D rendering and lighting system. This system would be
used in this graph type as the items that this shader would be rendered on
would be sprites. A sprite is a two-dimensional bitmap (an array of binary
data that represents the color of each pixel) that is integrated into a larger
scene. This will allow the sprites to take in the needed lighting information.

Sprite Unlit Shader Graph
This is similar to the Shader Lit Shader Graph above, but the difference
with the Sprite Unlit Shader Graph is that it is considered always fully lit
and will take in no lighting information. This graph also only uses the 2D
rendering and lighting system in the URP.

Unlit Shader Graph
The unlit type of graph for URP uses the 3D PBR lighting model like the
Lit Shader Graph type. The major difference is that it won’t take in lighting
information. This is the most performant shader in URP.

Shader Graph interface
Choose the Lit Shader Graph type for our Shader Graph. When you rightclick in the project window, a new shader file will be created. Doubleclicking this file will open the Shader Graph window.
There are some pieces we should go over so you can understand what is
covered in the following subsections. We need to go over the Master
Stack, Blackboard, Graph Inspector, Main Preview, and then Nodes. In
Figure 9.3 below, four out of five of these sections are displayed. We will
be going over them in detail in this chapter.

Figure 9.3: Shader Graph window breakdown

Master Stack
The green-outlined item in Figure 9.3 is the Master Stack. There are two
sections to the Master Stack, Vertex and Fragment. The Vertex block of
the Master Stack contains instructions to the actual vertexes of the 3D
object that the material with this assigned shader will be manipulated.
Within this block, you can affect the vertex’s Position, Normal, or Tangent
attribute. These three attributes occur everywhere in a 2D and 3D
environment. Position represents a vertex’s location in object space.
Normal is used to calculate which direction light reflects off or is emitted
out from the surface. Tangent alters the appearance of vertexes on your
surface to define the object’s horizontal (U) texture direction.
In our case, we do not need to change any of the vertex attributes, so we
will move on to the fragment shader portion and leave the object space
alone.
Fragment instructions can be thought of as possible pixels on your screen.
We can affect the pixels depending on the changes made to the inputs to the
stack. The attributes that are listed in the fragment shader depend on the
shader type we choose when making the shader.

The blocks inside of the Fragment stack are called Fragment Nodes. If you
do not need a particular Fragment Node, you can remove it by rightclicking on the Fragment Node individually and selecting Delete. You can
also add other Fragment Nodes to the stack by right-clicking the bottom of
the Fragment frame and selecting Add Node.
In Figure 9.4, you can see a selection of all the node choices to add to the
stack. If your shader isn’t set up to accept those new Fragment Nodes, they
will be gray and not usable. For now, let’s go through the Lit Shader
Fragment options.

Figure 9.4: Fragment Node options
The Fragment Nodes in the Fragment stack represent the pixels that will
potentially be displayed in clip space or on your screen. 3D objects also
have a 2D representation of their faces in the form of UVs. UVs are a twodimensional texture representation of a 3D object. UVs have a flat, 2D axis,
0 (U) to 1 (V) graph. This particular UV graph is a representation of each

vertex on this UV plane stretched over a 3D object. The UV graph is also
called a UV texture space.
Looking at Figure 9.5 below, you can see that the geometry has been
unwrapped to make it flat. This is like papercraft or origami. Knowing how
this works sets up the concept of how shaders can manipulate not only the
vertex of a mesh but also the color of the faces.

Figure 9.5: Basic mesh, UV layout, gradient on base color
We wanted to show you how we achieved the gradient within Shader Graph
for Figure 9.5. Though this isn’t the simplest graph we could’ve started
with, it does a good job of breaking down some key concepts early.
If you look at Figure 9.6 below, you will see our graph to build a gradient
that we placed in the Base Color. The gradient is then applied to the 0-1
space of the 3D object we assigned this material with this shader. It is not a
complex shader as it has hardcoded gradients coming from the UV node.
We will add more complexity to the parameters we make in the
Blackboard in the next section.

Figure 9.6: Test gradient shader
We will be breaking down commonly used nodes in the next part of this
chapter. For now, a quick explanation of what we are doing will help break
this down.

Base color
We are taking the UV’s 0-1 space, represented here with two gradients, x
and y in the Red and Green channels. Red and Green channels are a part of
color space; there are Red (R), Green (G), Blue (B), and Alpha (A)
channels. RGB represents the color values. The Alpha channel indicates the
opacity of each pixel, from 0 (fully transparent) through to 1 (opaque).
We’ve seen that the 0-1 space starts from the bottom left and ends linearly
in the top right in Unity. This means that the Green channel will be a linear
gradient from bottom to top. Splitting off that channel allows us to
manipulate the 0-1 in a Lerp node, with red replacing black and teal
replacing white. There is a lot going on throughout the next few sections,
but stick with it! As we break down the nodes, it will be much easier to
follow per node.

Normal
Normals tell each fragment how they are supposed to react to light that hits
the face.
This is extremely useful to add detail to a face without changing the
silhouette, reducing the number of polygons needed for higher detail.
Looking at Figure 9.7 below, you can see that it looks as though there are
bumps pulled out of the cube. This isn’t a color change; this is light reacting
to the surface of the faces. If you look closely, there are no protrusions on
the edges. This is because the shape of the cube didn’t change. This is just a
cube that acts as it does because of the normal maps.

Figure 9.7: Normals on a cube
On the left side of Figure 9.7, the left cube is blue due to the normal map
using its color scheme from the RGB channels in the tangent space. This
means that a flat normal map would represent 0, 0, 1. Red and Green
channels are used to represent the shifts in how the light should act on
either the x tangent or the y tangent. When we work with materials in
Chapter 12, Final Touches, we will go further into detail about the
functions of a normal map.

Metallic
Metallic is exactly what it sounds like. This is how metallic the material is!
That isn’t a great definition though, so let’s try to break it down a little.
The metallic field is a scaler float from 0 to 1, with 0 being not metallic and
1 being bare metal. Metallic materials take in their surrounding
environment’s color. In Figure 9.8 we have four spheres with four different
settings for their material properties. We’re only using the URP/Lit shader
that comes with URP out of the box to test these out. For this section we
will only look at the left two spheres. The far-left sphere is white and the
metal setting is set to 0. This material is not taking in any of the
environment’s color. It’s only taking in lighting information and its base
color of white.
The second sphere, though it still has white for a base color, has the metallic
setting set to 1. The smoothness is set to 0.5 to be neutral, which you will
hear more about shortly. If you look closely the second sphere has the Unity
default skybox in the color. Now we need to throw in smoothness to this
material.

Figure 9.8: From left to right: No metal, all metal, all metal not smooth, all
metal all smooth

Smoothness
Continuing with Figure 9.8, we will move on to the right two spheres. The
third sphere from the left is very interesting. This one has a base color of
white, the metal setting set to 1, and smoothness set to 0. This means that

the entire sphere is fully diffused! Diffused in this instance means that all
the colors of the environment are blended across the whole sphere, leading
to an almost perfect true neutral gray. The fourth sphere is the same, but
smoothness is set to 1. This means that the entire sphere is reflecting the
direct environment.

Emissive
For an object to emit or radiate light you look toward an emissive map. The
purpose of an emissive map is to be able to push colors to have brighter
values than 1. Pushing past the value of 1 allows that part of your object to
glow brightly. This is useful for lava, sci-fi lights, or anything you want to
emit brightness. Otherwise, the Fragment Node defaults to black and no
emission is created.

Figure 9.9: Left is no emission, right has emission with 2.4 intensity, no
bloom
This doesn’t look like an emissive glowing mushroom! This is due to
emission needing a post-processing volume. To do this, create an empty
GameObject and name it _PostProcess. We’re naming it this to give it a
distinctly different name. Using the underscore as a prefix, we’re letting our
developers know that this object houses logic only. There aren’t

GameObjects for use in the game itself. Then add a Volume component,
seen below in Figure 9.10.

Figure 9.10: Volume added to post-process GameObject
We’re not done yet! We need to add a profile and an override to get our
bloom set up. Pressing the New button on the right-hand side of the Volume
component will create a profile for your settings to be added to. This allows
you to store those settings for other scenes if you need to. When you add a
profile, you will then be able to add an override.
We want to click on Add Override, then Post Process, and finally Bloom.
Then select the Intensity Boolean checkbox to allow for intensity to be
changed. Change it to 1. The settings are shown below in Figure 9.11.

Figure 9.11: Bloom override for post-processing volume
Now we see it emitting light around the mushroom on the screen. This isn’t
adding light into the scene; it is only adding a brightness value outside of
the mesh to the render on the screen.

Figure 9.12: Left: no emissive, Right: emissive and bloom set up
We have a shiny, glowing mushroom! Go forth and add emission to things!
We will now look into Ambient Occlusion.

Ambient Occlusion
The point of Ambient Occlusion (AO) is to add dark spots to sections to
show creases. This adds a nice, clean effect of shadows even if there aren’t
any specific lights making shadows. AO is designed for light at all angles.
This attribute expects values from 0 to 1. If you do not have an AO map for
your model, it’s best to leave it at 1. In Chapter 12, Finishing Touches, we
will be working with Myvari’s material, which will have an AO map to go
over.
This was the master stack in summary. Each of the attributes on the stack
can be used to provide unique shaders. Something that helps with even
more customization is the Blackboard part of Shader Graph.

Blackboard

The Blackboard allows the user to create properties and keywords to use in
shaders that can be dynamically changed in various ways. Properties can be
used within the shader or be exposed to the material in the Inspector using
the Exposed checkbox.
You can locate the Blackboard button on the top right of the Shader
Graph window. Once you click this button, Blackboard will open its own
separate UI.

Figure 9.13: Variable types available in the Blackboard

There are 16 available data types that can be created. These data types can
be changed through scripting during runtime as well. Keywords are
designed to be changed per material instance during runtime. There are only
a few options for this as the compiler needs to account for all the variations.
This is handy for things like mobile specifications. You may make an enum
(user-defined set of constraints) or list for different systems to change the
fidelity (perceptual quality) of the shader to adapt to platform limitations.

Graph Inspector
The Graph Inspector gives you the options for the shader type itself. We
chose to start with a URP/Lit shader as our base, which sets specific
settings in the Graph Inspector for us. Figure 9.14 below shows the
Graph Inspector. These are the settings that are set by default with the
URP/Lit.

Figure 9.14: Graph Inspector
Each of these properties available to the shader we are building has great
use in certain situations. When we go over using them in, Finishing
Touches, we will explain why we are making the changes to the graph
settings. For now, understand that the material we chose was the Lit option
and it defaults to a metallic opaque workflow. This means that you do not
see the color from items behind it as it isn’t transparent.

Main Preview
The Main Preview is an overall glance at what the shader would look like
in the game. The default is a sphere.
You can right-click in the window to access multiple options, such as to
include a custom mesh, as noted in Figure 9.15 below.

Figure 9.15: Screenshot of the main preview in Shader Graph and its
options
Until you plug in some nodes to the Master Stack, this preview will default
as a gray sphere. Let’s talk about nodes next!

Nodes
A node is a piece of code that will have at least an output but could also
have an input depending on the needs of the node. The purpose is to have a
change in data to provide manipulation to the input in the attributes on the
master stack. If you can recall back in Figure 9.6, we showed a few nodes:
Color, Lerp, Split, and UV. We used them in combination to make the
base color be manipulated to show the gradient we made. Figure 9.16
shows a snippet of the screen when we pressed the spacebar down while our

mouse was in the empty gray area of the Shader Graph. There are many
nodes that can be used together to make many different effects. You can
take the time now to search through the node menu and find the nodes we
made in Figure 9.6 to play with the gradient yourself.

Figure 9.16: Node creation menu
If you took some time to build this out, you may have also opened some of
the node groupings and realized that there is a very large number of nodes
to choose from. This may cause a little bit of anxiety. Fortunately, we will
go over some common nodes that are used in many shaders in the next
section.

Commonly used nodes
Below is a simple list of commonly used nodes to make shaders. We want
to stress that this isn’t the full list of nodes. In fact, there are over 200 nodes
now in Shader Graph 10+. Going over all of them could literally be a book
or two. The interesting thing about these sets of nodes is that they can be

built up to make some incredible shaders. Something to keep in mind when
reading about these is that there may be information in the previous node
that helps describe the current node you are reading. Read through them all
even if you’re reasonably comfortable with, say, knowing how to add, for
example.

Add
To be able to explain Add, we need to make sure you remember that 0
means absence, or the color black in this case. This means that a value of 1
is white. We normalize our values on a 0-1 scale across many applications.
You may remember that UV coordinates are also between 0 and 1. This is
no mistake! So, if I had two scalars, or Vector1s, and added them, the value
would be greater.
Let’s show a quick example: 0.4 + 0.4 = 0.8.

Figure 9.17: Add node
0.4 is a darker-than-medium-gray value. If we add two of them together, we
almost get white! 0.8 is 80% to pure white in value, seen in Figure 9.17.

Color
This node is a Vector4 with nice visual sugar on top. Vector4 (0, 0, 0, 0)
represents Red, Green, Blue, and Alpha in shader values. Color has an
interface for you to select the color you want, and it will set up the RGB
values for you with an Alpha slider for that value while outputting a
Vector4.

Figure 9.18: Color node
This would be difficult with the Vector4 node as there is no color visual to
know what your values need to be.

Lerp
Lerp stands for Linear Interpolation. The Lerp node can be used in many
applications. One instance is how we set up a gradient to be used for the
base color in Figure 9.6. There are three inputs: A, B, and T. You can think
of it as A is 0, B is 1, and T is the driver. The driver (T) is a value of 0-1.
However, the value will map to the value of A, B, and the values in
between. If T is at 0, it will display an 100% value of what is in A. If T has
a value of 1, it will display an 100% value of B. Now, if T is at 0.4, then
that will be in between the values of A and B: 40% A and 60% B.

Figure 9.19: Lerp node
This is difficult to visualize with just numbers alone. Luckily, in Figure
9.19 we used the UV to input T as a gradient. This allows us to see the 0-1
going from bottom to top. You are seeing a gradient from A to B from
bottom to top.

Multiply
We’ve seen the Add and Lerp nodes; now we need to work through
another operation, Multiply. By the nature of basic arithmetic, Multiply
will make the value lower.
This is happening because we are in the range of 0-1. Let’s put together an
example in Figure 9.20.

Figure 9.20: Multiply node
We have used the same example we used for the add node but we are using
multiplication instead of using addition. Simple math states .4 * .4 = .16.

Sample Texture 2D
This node allows you to take textures you have authored in other Digital
Content Creation (DCC) software such as Photoshop and use the color
information to manipulate the attributes of the master stack. There are two
inputs, the texture you want to sample and the UVs, as seen in Figure 9.21.

Figure 9.21: Sample Texture 2D
The UV node allows you to manipulate the UV coordinates of your mesh.
A nice feature of this node is that it outputs the Vector4 as well as each float
individually from the node itself.

Saturate
There may be a time when your values go above 1. This may happen
because you are working with multiple nodes that push your values outside
the 0-1 range.

Figure 9.22: Saturate node
If this happens, you can input the data into a saturate node and it will return
all of your values within the 0-1 range. Place the float value in the In
portion, and the Out value will be normalized to the 0-1 range.

Split
As we saw in the Sample Texture 2D node, the Vector4 was split into
individual outputs. This isn’t always the case. The Color node only outputs
a Vector4. If you only want to use the Red channel value from Color, how
could you get it? You guessed it, a split node. Input a Vector2, 3, or 4 and
use whichever channel you desire as a float.

Figure 9.23: Split node
This is very helpful to be able to break out an image that you put four
grayscale images onto. We call that channel packing so you can have three
images on one texture lookup.

UV
There may be a time when you need to manipulate the UVs of the object
you want to render. A reason for this may be that you want to tile the UVs
because the scale of the item was larger or smaller than what was intended.

Another reason to use the UV node is that it automatically creates
horizontal and vertical gradients.

Figure 9.24: UV node
If split, the R channel is the horizontal gradient and the G channel is the
vertical gradient.

Vectors
These guys are used everywhere. You’ll notice that a Vector1 is named a
Float. Another name for Vector1 is Scalar. Something else you may have
noticed is that the outputs are all different colors. Float is cyan, Vector2 is
green, Vector3 is yellow, and Vector4 is pink. This is incredibly useful to
know the colors as they are shown on the connection lines between the
nodes. These nodes are used in infinite use cases. Do you need three points
of data? Vector3!

Figure 9.25: Vector nodes
With all of these basic nodes, you can make some powerful shaders to make
beautiful materials with. In Chapter 12, Finishing Touches, we will be
covering shaders for multiple purposes and showing how we use these
nodes to create some nice visual candy. Now let’s move away from Shader
Graph and work with Particle Systems so we can add nice visual effects to
our experiences.

Particle Systems
When you think of visual effects in a video game, the first thing that pops
into your head most likely is the trails of legendary weapons in ARPGs or
the amazing explosions from intense first-person-shooter campaigns.
Whatever popped into your head, there are systems that allow for these
effects to happen. Particle Systems allow for the spawning of meshes with
certain rules to create these effects. Two of them in Unity are Shuriken and
VFX Graph.

Shuriken
This system is full of features to help spawn 3D meshes (structural
collection of vertices, edges, and faces that define a 3D object). You can
create fire embers, trails, explosions, smoke, and everything else to help sell
the experience that has been defined. As you can see in Figure 9.26 there
are a lot of options to go over. We will leave the explanation of this to the
examples covered in Chapter 12, Finishing Touches when we create
Shuriken-based effects.
Some high-level knowledge of Shuriken to know is that it is a Particle
System that uses the CPU to direct the particles.

This limits the amount of particles that can spawn directly on that hardware.

Figure 9.26: Shuriken Particle System
Shuriken is fantastic for particle systems on the CPU, but if you want to
have large amounts of particles moving around, VFX Graph is the way to
go. This makes GPU-driven particles and can handle many thousands of
particles at once.

VFX Graph
Firstly, you will most likely need to install VFX Graph. Open the Package
Manager as you have done before and find Visual Effects Graph from
within Unity Registry and install it! After you’ve finished this, you will
need to create a VFX Graph system. In your project window, right-click and
then select Create > Visual Effects > Visual Effects Graph.

Figure 9.27: Installing and creating your first VFX Graph system
Opening VFX Graph will present you with a new window. This window is
like the Shader Graph. You’ll notice there is a Blackboard, which we can

use to create parameters that can be changed at runtime and is exposed in
the inspector.
There is a UI that is unique to the VFX Graph and a few specific terms:
Contexts, Blocks, Nodes, and Variables. Contexts are portions of the
system broken down, such as Spawning, Initialization, Update, and
Output.
Each of these contexts has blocks inside of them and can be added to the
contexts by right-clicking. The Spawning context controls how many
instances of the system feeds into an Initialize context. Initialize context
processes the Spawn Event and engages a new particle simulation. Update
context takes in the Initialized particles and executes explicit behaviors
upon certain conditions. Output contexts account for the simulation data
and render every living particle according to the Output context
configuration. However, Output context does not modify simulated data.
The first context is spawning. This context will allow you to add blocks to
affect the spawning logic of each system. There are some questions that
should be considered here: How many particles should spawn from this
system? How quickly should those particles spawn? When are they
spawned?

Figure 9.28: Spawn context

After the spawning is completed, you need to have parameters to initialize
them with. These blocks answer these types of questions: Where do the
particles spawn? Are they spawned moving or do they have velocity? How
long does each particle live for?

Figure 9.29: Initialize context
Now that you have them spawning, it may be a good idea to add some
unique behavior to them as they update, or they will be floating sphere
gradients. You can expect this to answer the ultimate question: How will the
particles change over time?

Figure 9.30: Update context
Then finally, as you have an understanding of how many particles there are,
where the particles are, and what the particles are doing, you can now
decide what they will look like.
The questions are: Which way are the particles facing? What shader is
being used?

Figure 9.31: Output context
You may have noticed the left side of the blocks sometimes have circle
inputs like the Shader Graph. If you thought that you could put some input
to this, maybe from nodes, then you’re correct! There are nodes that you
can work through to get the right data flowing to the blocks that are in each
context.

Nodes
As this was in Shader Graph, the nodes are meant to take data values and
manipulate them in a way to get the desired outcome. In VFX Graph’s case
the values are meant to be read into one of the blocks as opposed to one of
the attributes from the Master Stack. For the most part you will utilize the
Operator nodes and variables that are created in the Blackboard to
complete the complex maths.

Summary
We learned that visual effects have heavy technical implications through
two major sources in Unity: shaders and particles. Taking our time through
shaders, we built an example of a material on a 3D object to get the concept
down so when we have multiple different scenarios, we can follow how the
shader was created. This was done through Shader Graph. After that, we
dove into the concept of particles. Shuriken was shown to get a simple
understanding of CPU particles and will be used in later chapters to explain
the finishing touches. GPU particles are created through VFX Graph; we
went over the interface and some vocabulary of VFX Graph so when we
use it later, there is an understanding to work off.
Visual effects are a very large topic to master. Mastering these tools takes a
long time. Take your time when working through this and fail fast. This will
guide you through understanding visual effects.
The next chapter covers the implementation of sound in the game. Sounds
are generally overlooked until nearly the end of games, but they are integral
to ensuring the product has captivating emotional tie-ins with the
environment and the character. We will go over implementations, some
sound design, and other sound-focused knowledge points in the next
chapter.

Sound Effects
Sound effects! Sound is the only part of a video game that comes from the
real world and makes it into the game. Using microphones, sound designers
will record common video game sounds such as voiceovers, music, UI
sounds, weapons, and ambient sounds to help bring a game to life! Sound
tends to have a very subtle effect on how players perceive a video game’s
quality. A good-looking animation in a game can only be as good as its
sound.
In this chapter, we will be going over the five elements of selecting or
designing sounds. These are Source, Envelope, Pitch, Frequency, and
Layering. Understanding these five elements will give you a strong
foundation to ensure your sounds fit the overall design of the narrative,
character, environment, and mechanics we’ve worked through so far. Then
we will go into how to scale these elements in the game engine with our
code and mixing! Sounds tell a story on an individual sound effect basis as
well as working together to tell a greater, more in-depth story. Finally, we
will go through specific examples of our sound design in our project as well
as their implementation in Unity. These examples include magical sounds,
footstep sounds, and ambient sounds. Here’s a quick summary of this
chapter:
The five elements of sound design
Designing for scale
Our project’s sound design and implementation
Triggering sound through player interaction

Sound… design?

Sound design! The forgotten stepchild of video games, but also the soul and
emotion behind them.
A straightforward explanation of sound design is that a sound is recorded,
processed, and then coded directly into a game. Therefore, this makes
sound the only part of a video game that comes directly from the real world.
Any sound that we reference in this chapter can be found in
/Assets/Sounds/[Name].

The five elements of sound design
The elements of sound design we’ll be discussing are source, envelope,
pitch, frequency, and layering. These apply to the process of making an
individual sound effect, as well as a broader scope of how sounds work
together in a game.

Source
A source can be a person, place, or thing from which your inspiration
comes or is obtained. Your source is what helps your listener understand the
real-world characteristics of your sound. If you record the sound of a
footstep hitting a grassy surface versus a concrete surface, the minute
qualities and differences between these two sounds help us distinguish
them. And thus, we can utilize the source as a creative limitation in creating
our sounds authentically.
Limitations are what artists use to cut out all of the clutter in our brains to
help create their visions. So, in our recording process, if we needed a
magical water sound in a video game, we would record some water as a
base layer. Or, if we wanted to record the sound for an animation of a dog
rolling in dirt, the first and best thing to record would be the sound of a dog
rolling in dirt. What we are creating sounds for helps us select what to
record!

Recording sounds can be a difficult process and has an entire art form
behind it; while it will help with your growth as a sound designer, I highly
recommend using existing sound libraries. Almost any sound that you can
think of has already been recorded, so it makes more sense to just buy or
download sounds online! This will help speed up your workflow drastically.
If you don’t want to use sound libraries, then you can use a microphone!
Using a microphone is a very in-depth process that we won’t be covering in
this book because you could literally write entire books on this art.
Note
Here are some popular free websites and sound libraries:
Blipsounds: https://blipsounds.com/community-library/
Andrew V Scott: https://www.andrewvscott.com/Building-A-LargeSFX-Library-for-Free
SKYES Audio: https://www.skyesaudio.com/blog/2019/4/1/theultimate-free-sound-effects-list-free-to-download
Freesound: https://freesound.org/
There are many more that can be found with some internet searching.
Don’t be afraid to look around to find what fits your needs.

In video games, the source of a sound effect is usually determined by what
you see visually. For an ice mage that casts an icy wind spell, you’d limit
yourself to using wind and ice sounds to get started. If you have a gun made
of jello that shoots tiny horses with the power of radioactive farts, you’ll
likely utilize jello, horses, farting, and gun sounds.
So, if we take a magic sword that has metal textures, and purple magic VFX
that runs along the blade, what kind of sounds are we going to look for?
You’ve probably put together that we’ll use sounds from a magic sound
library and some metallic ringing sounds.

Another way to determine your source is via story context. The same magic
sword may look like it’s magic, but maybe the writers of the game
determined the blade uses futuristic magic so you need to use sci-fi sound
elements.
It should be mentioned that there are many games that have limitations
where the sound must fill in the gaps. A game that emulates graphics from
an Atari 2600 with realistic sound design might require some imagination.
A green area that your player walks on could be grass or a toxic waste
dump depending on the context of the game’s world.

Envelopes
An envelope is a way for sound designers to explain the volume of a sound
over time (volume as in decibels, not 3D models). The two parts of an
envelope you’ll use are the “attack” and “release.”
The attack, shown below in Figure 10.1, is the start of the sound, and the
release is the end of the sound. We describe the attack and release of a
sound by speed (i.e., fast and slow).

Figure 10.1: Envelope explanation

Attack

An example of a sound with a slow attack would be something like a
“sword whoosh” sound effect when a sword is slashed through the air. The
sound starts off being almost inaudible and raises in volume over the course
of half of a second. We can make the attack even slower by making the
volume raise over the course of a few seconds. You can see a direct visual
in Figure 10.2 of how the envelope would look in its waveform. Sounds
with a slower attack tend to appear more subtle and gentle to the player.
Some other examples of sounds with a slow attack would be a car passing
by or a kettle getting ready to whistle.

Figure 10.2: Fast attack sound
An example of a sound with a fast attack as in Figure 10.2 would be a
punching sound effect. As soon as the sound starts, it will be almost at max
volume, creating a transient sound. A transient sound is a sound with a
faster attack, seeming more aggressive to the player, usually to create an
impact of sorts to convey power or shock the player. Some other examples
of a sound with a fast attack would be a gun firing, a cymbal crash as seen
in Figure 10.3, or a hammer hitting an anvil.

Figure 10.3: Cymbal crash example of fast attack

Release
Then we have the release of a sound. As you can probably guess, we’ll be
using speed to determine the nature of the release. An example of a sound

with a slower release would be a car engine turning off or an explosion.
Most sound effects will have a slower release as it sounds more appealing.
There aren’t many examples that you will hear in video games that will
have a short release. A hard cutoff in a sound effect is unnatural and
unpleasant to hear in most cases, barring some advanced stylized
techniques. A sound with a slow release could be a big gong ringing out, or
the sound of a car driving into the distance while you hear the sound’s
volume dissipate. For the sake of example, here is what a slow release looks
like:

Figure 10.4: Slow release sound
And here is what a fast release looks like:

Figure 10.5: Fast release sound
Another element of sound is pitch.

Pitch
Pitch is an element of sound that determines its “highness” or “lowness.”

This is probably one of the easiest concepts to grasp as we hear it in
movies, video games, and even day-to-day life. A big, buff character in an
animated movie will commonly have a low-pitched voice, while a smaller,
cuter character might have a high-pitched voice.
The example given above is one of the most common reasons to control the
pitch of a sound effect – size. The other one is speed. Think of a car that is
going slowly versus one that is going quickly. The one that is going faster
has an engine revving at a higher pitch while an idle or slow-moving car
will resonate low-frequency bellows.
To fully understand pitch, it will help to understand frequency, which is
directly tied to it.

Frequency
Frequency is the most complicated element to explain, but it’s one of the
most important to understand. You have probably listened to music in a car
or on a stereo and have seen the option to control “bass” or “treble.” Treble
refers to “higher frequencies” while bass refers to “lower frequencies.” The
human hearing range is from 20 Hz to 20,000 Hz (Hertz), and many sounds,
no matter if they sound high-pitched or low-pitched, hit every single
frequency. When you play a sound in your car and turn down the “bass,”
you’re turning down the lower frequencies.
The best example is white noise. White noise is simply a sound that plays
every single frequency at the same volume. If you’ve never heard it, it
sounds like TV static. You can listen to the sound in
/Assets/Sounds/WhiteNoise.wav. You can find it in the project on
GitHub, which you can find a link for in this book’s Preface.
The weird part about this sound is that, just by listening, it feels like the
sound consists mostly of higher frequencies. But we can use a tool called an
equalizer (or EQ for short) to visualize the frequencies that are playing, as
well as controlling the volume of individual frequencies.

Generally, higher frequencies are perceived as louder, which is an important
fact to consider when making sounds for your game. If you want to make a
sound stand out, including higher frequencies will help quite a bit, while
cutting them out might help blend sounds into the background. But if you
want every sound to stand out, but also want them to have weight and
power, we will have to utilize our lower frequencies. So, a balance must be
struck.
The yellow lines on this graph indicate where the frequencies are hitting,
and you can see that it’s practically at the same volume across the whole
spectrum. This means that every single frequency has generally the same
frequency volume.

Figure 10.6: Example of similar-frequency volume
I’ve provided a few sounds below so you can all hear the differences when
we remove the lower and higher frequencies, along with a graph showing
which frequencies we removed. As you listen, you’ll hear and see that
every sound seems to cover higher and lower frequencies to a certain
degree, and we can control these frequencies to elicit unique feelings with
each sound.
Listen to Assets/Sounds/Explosion.wav then
Assets/Sounds/ExplosionLP.wav to hear what it’s like to have the higher
frequencies cut. And then listen to ExplosionHP.wav to hear what it’s like
to have the lower frequencies cut out.

Listen to Assets/Sounds/BeamSword.wav then
Assets/Sounds/BeamSwordLP.wav to hear what it’s like to have the higher
frequencies cut. And then listen to BeamSwordHP.wav to hear what it’s like
to have the lower frequencies cut out.
Listen to Assets/Sounds/MagicIceSpell.wav then
Assets/Sounds/MagicIceSpellLP.wav to hear what it’s like to have the
higher frequencies cut. And then listen to MagicIceSpellHP.wav to hear
what it’s like to have the lower frequencies cut out.
Listen to Assets/Sounds/Footstep.wav then
Assets/Sounds/FootstepLP.wav to hear what it’s like to have the higher
frequencies cut. And then listen to Assets/Sounds/FootstepHP.wav to hear
what it’s like to have the lower frequencies cut out.
The reason frequency is one of the toughest concepts to grasp is because
your ears aren’t trained to listen for it. We just hear a sound and know
whether it sounds good or not.

Layering
Layering is the simplest concept to grasp of the five elements. While visual
mediums are almost all multiplicative, sound mediums are additive.
Layering is simply the process of playing multiple sounds at the same time
in a unique sequence.Next, we have four unique sound effects that stand
alone. We have the “impact,” the “bloom,” the “tail,” and the “bass.” If you
listen to each on their own, they feel empty, but as soon as we add them all
together, we have a beautiful explosion sound.
This is a useful process because we can take a source like “Sci-fi Energy”
and “Metal Sword” and combine these together to make a “Sci-Fi Energy
Sword.” Or, we can take our horse fart gun and choose our layers based on
the description and functionality of the gun. Listen to
Assets/Sounds/ScifiEnergySword01.wav, then
Assets/Sounds/ScifiEnergySword02.wav, then
Assets/Sounds/ScifiEnergySword03.wav.

Layering also allows us to break down our frequencies to more isolated
parts. We can take a sound that is primarily lower frequencies and add it to
a regular sound to give it more weight and power. Listen to
Assets/Sounds/Splash01.wav, then listen to the lower frequencies added
to Assets/Sounds/Splash02.wav to hear how it becomes more powerful.
We can also layer together two sounds with different envelopes, one with a
long attack, and one with a fast attack to create a cool buildup effect to add
impact. Listen to Assets/Sounds/EarthSpell01.wav to hear the sound
before we add a buildup, and then listen to
Assets/Sounds/EarthSpell02.wav to hear what happens when we add a
buildup to hear how we can change the story of our sound!
Now that we’ve gone over what makes up a sound and how it applies to a
single sound effect being created, we’ll go over the applications of these
five elements on a broader scale of a game.

Designing for scale
Unlike art, which is multiplicative, making sound effects is a completely
additive process. As an example, if we have 100 sounds without paying
attention to the volume or frequency range of them, this can end up creating
a lot of clutter. In the space of a video game, we must be prepared for any
sounds, whether it’s a sword swipe, ambient sound, an orchestral score, or a
voiceover reading, to be played at the same time. We have tools to control
these sounds individually, but we must make sure that we have what’s
called a balanced mix.
How to approach making sounds for a game
So where do sounds go in your game? Sounds can often go overlooked
since they are technically not necessary to make what is defined as a
“game.” And because of this, it’s tough to think immediately about what
needs sound and what doesn’t.
Put quite simply, I like to look for anything that moves in a game. Even
down to the smallest subtleties. Adding sounds for an NPC can include

breathing, the sound of their feet hitting a surface, the sound of their clothes
rustling... All of these are viable sounds to put into a game. We’ll talk about
some reasons later in Chapter 11 as to why this much attention to detail
might be difficult to achieve.
Sometimes the art in a game is minimal. What you see isn’t quite enough
information, so use your imagination as to what sounds could be included!
The more you add to the sound, the better. Sometimes a game can be
nothing but pixel-art, and you might be incentivized to add fewer sounds,
but you should always think about what attention to detail you can hear that
isn’t being seen! If a player falls into a pit where you can’t see what’s
happening, creating an audible experience can tell a more detailed story
than visuals can allow! Maybe there are spikes, a bottomless pit, or lava!
We would want the player to hear the bubbles of the lava, the impact of the
spikes impaling the player, or the whistle of a player falling off a steep cliff!

Our project’s sound design and
implementation
We find that the best way to learn is to jump in headfirst and start
understanding how things work. This process is relatively simple now that
we’ve gone over the Unity engine.

Getting our first sound to play
To start off, let’s get some audio files into our project. We’ll start by
creating a folder called Audio in Unity, and then dragging our
Assets/Sounds/TestTone.wav file into it.
Now that we have our audio in the folder, let’s create an empty GameObject
in the scene right by our player. We’re going to begin by placing an object
in the scene next to our character. For now, let’s call this GameObject Sound
Emitter.

As it stands, this GameObject won’t do anything. So, let’s click and drag
our audio from its Unity folder directly into our Sound Emitter
GameObject’s inspector.
This will automatically create an Audio Source component on the
GameObject. This is what allows our sound effects to play in Unity! Let’s
go ahead and hit play to see what happens!
If you followed properly, you likely already heard your first sound!
Congrats! This is of course just a placeholder sound, so we’ll focus more on
adding other sounds that we’ll use in the game. In this process, we’ll go
over the parameters we can change on the Audio Source component.

Organization
To better organize this project, let’s go ahead and add a new prefab called
====SFX====. We will put all our sound effects that exist in our scene into
here.
In addition to this, we’ll create two new folders in /Assets/Sounds/ in our
GitHub project. We’ll have a sources folder and a prefabs folder.

Music
Music is a massive part of video games. Sound effects help bring a game to
life through detailed ambient sounds, player sounds, and expressive
voiceovers, but music is what helps drive moment-to-moment emotions for
the player.
You might have some questions about the difference between sounds and
music. Technically they are the same, but to make it easier to communicate
about them, most professional sound designers will consider music to be the
score, or pitched instruments like piano, violins, guitars, and drums working
together to make a cohesive song or musical track to listen to as background
music. Meanwhile, sound effects are usually real-life instances like
footsteps, swords, UI sounds, etc.

Let’s add music to our game! To add music to our game, all we must do is
take our SFX GameObject that’s in our scene and rename it to Music.
Let’s give our Assets/Sounds/Music_01.wav a listen. First, select the audio
file in your folder and click the looping button at the bottom of the
inspector. It’s the button right above the waveform to the far right, seen in
Figure 10.7 below.

Figure 10.7: Wave play UI in inspector
Now, hit the Play button, which is the sideways triangle to the right in the
inspector, but to the left of the looping button.
If you listen to the music all the way through until the end, you’ll recognize
that the music is a seamless loop! To hear this in action in the game, let’s
take our Sound Emitter GameObject in the scene, and rename it to Music.
Next, let’s click and drag our music into our new Music GameObject. We’ll
be putting it into the AudioClip space of our Audio Source component
seen in Figure 10.8.

Figure 10.8: Audio Source component
If we were to test playing the game right now, we would be able to hear
sound but it would stop eventually. But we pressed the looping button in the
inspector for the .wav file, right? So why isn’t it working?
Well, that looping button was strictly for playback in that one instance. If
we want to loop the sound on the Audio Source component, we must check
Loop as on, seen under Play On Awake in Figure 10.8. Now if we play the
game, our music will loop! How exciting!
Later on in this chapter, we will adjust the volumes of all of the sounds in
the game, otherwise called “the mix,” or “mixing the game.” We aren’t
going to mix the game immediately because the volume of every sound in a
game is entirely dependent on how it sounds relative to other sound effects!

2D sounds
Up until now, we’ve only heard 2D sound effects. 2D sound effects are
sounds that have no in-game location and will play anywhere for the player.
No matter where you move on the map, a 2D sound will play as a consistent
trigger.
The following is a list of 2D sounds that you’ve likely heard while playing
video games:
Music: Intro music that plays during the opening menu before you
press play
UI: Pressing a button, hearing the “click” of the button
Voiceover: The narrator speaking over gameplay
Ambient sound: General sound being played when in an area, such as
wind
All the categories above can be triggered by player action, by a game event,
by just starting the game, or by entering a new area of a game. But not all of

them will exist in a 3D space in the game. This makes them 2D sound
effects.
So now that we’ve gone over what 2D sounds are, let’s talk about 3D
sounds.

3D sounds
Unlike 2D sounds, 3D sounds exist in the world of the game. When you
play a game, you can usually tell what sounds are 3D by moving around in
the world and hearing what sounds occur in which ear. This is called
panning.
Panning is the stereo quality of a sound. Have you ever listened to a song
with headphones on and taken them off one of your ears only to hear some
of the instruments playing instead of the full song? This is what panning is!
The music producers who made that song purposefully put those
instruments in one ear to create better “stereo imaging” (we won’t be going
much deeper than this, I promise).
So in the real world, if someone is speaking on your left, you will hear them
in your left ear while you won’t hear them as much in your right ear. We
want to recreate this feeling in video games. So, we define positional sound
as 3D sounds.

Using 3D sounds
Let’s do a little experiment. Let’s take our Music GameObject and move the
Spatial Blend option from 0 to 1.
We now have spatial audio! This means that our sounds will be in 3D!
As it stands, it might be difficult to pinpoint exactly where the music is
playing from because there’s no visual indicator for it. So, to fix this, I like
to create a sphere GameObject as a child of our audio source to visualize
exactly where it lies!

Figure 10.9: Sphere GameObject being set to a child object
Now when we hit play, we can see exactly where the audio source is
playing from! Next, we will talk about how to control the parameters of our
3D sound effects.

Audio listener part I
How are we able to hear sounds in a game? We hear them through our
audio listener. It’s a component that we can place on any GameObject that
acts as a virtual pair of ears. Placing this listener in most cases is very
simple, but sometimes we require more complex integration.
In a game that uses a first-person camera, it’s simple: we just add the
listener to the camera GameObject and we call it a day.
We use an audio listener on the camera because it acts as the ears of the
player. But sometimes the camera can be in an isometric view, and the
camera is too far from the player to properly pan and hear sounds as they
move around in the world, so we offset the audio listener on a new
GameObject to be offset from the camera.
We’ll get back to this in the Audio listener part II section. For now, let’s set
up some 3D sound settings. We won’t be able to utilize the audio listener in
a practical sense until we get our 3D sounds set up.

3D sound settings
When you hear a sound in real life, you can usually get close to it and it will
become louder, while when you get further away from it, it gets quieter, and
eventually becomes silent. We can control this effect using the 3D sound
settings on our Audio Source component.
We’ll be focusing on Min Distance and Max Distance for our 3D sound
settings.
Go ahead and change Max Distance to 10 in the Audio Source component
and hit Play. Assuming you still have the sphere on your GameObject, get
closer and further away from it in-game. To help visualize this further, let’s
undock our scene tab in Unity and put it side by side with our Game tab.
Now that we’ve done this, we can visualize the min and max distance with
a wireframe gizmo sphere in-game! And we can see that when we move our
player outside of the range of the sphere, we will no longer hear the sound.
With our max distance slider, we can control the distance from where we
can hear the sound. And with Min Distance, we can control at what point
the sound will be the loudest. Let’s go ahead and change the min distance to
3. You’ll notice that the smaller sphere inside of the larger sphere changes,
as shown later in the chapter in Figure 10.17.
When we move our player inside of this sphere, you will notice that there is
no panning. This is because the sound has reached its maximum volume,
and inside of the smaller sphere, the sound will turn into a 2D sound!
Lastly, we just want to take Volume Rolloff and set it to Linear Rolloff
instead of Logarithmic. The reason we do this is when you change the max
distance to a number less than 500 in Logarithmic mode, the sound doesn’t
actually get cut off at that distance. So if we were to set the max distance to
10, then we would continue to hear it even if we’re 400 units across the
map, even though we set the max distance to much less than this.
For reference’s sake, here is Logarithmic:

Figure 10.10: Logarithmic Rolloff
And here is Linear:

Figure 10.11: Linear Rolloff

Audio listener part II
You may have noticed that the audio feels a tiny bit off while your player is
inside of the sphere. Usually, when our player passes the sphere, it isn’t at
its loudest; it only reaches its loudest when the camera is next to the sphere.
This is because the audio listener for Unity defaults to being set on the
camera.
In a third-person game, like the one we’re making, we’ll want to add it to
the player, but there’s a catch. We want it on the player without rotating
with the player. We want to rotate it with the camera, showing the selection
in Figure 10.12 below.

Figure 10.12: Selecting the camera in the Hierarchy
If we open our scene, we can see that MyvariWithCameraRig has Main
Camera attached. And inside the inspector, we’ll find a component called
Audio Listener, shown below in Figure 10.13.

Figure 10.13: Audio Listener on Main Camera in Inspector
Now as an experiment, let’s remove the Audio Listener here, and move it
directly onto our main character. Just placing it on the Character
GameObject will work just fine.
Now play the game, and move about and away from our sphere object, and
rotate around it. You’ll notice that the panning is all over the place! From
our perspective watching the character, it’s hard to tell where information is
coming from because we’re not in the shoes of our character; we have a
third-person perspective.
In a game like this, we could probably get away with just placing our Audio
Listener on the camera, but it would help quite a bit to have it on our
character model. But we can’t do that because the player isn’t locked by its
rotation.
But there’s a solution to this! In most games, we would have to add it as a
child GameObject to Main Camera inside of the MyvariWithCameraRig
GameObject. But here, we’ve already done most of the work, because the

root MyvariWithCameraRig transform is already lined up with the character
model!
All we must do is create a new GameObject inside of the root
MyvariWithCameraRig, rename it Listener, as seen in Figure 10.14, and
we can add our Audio Listener component to it.

Figure 10.14: New GameObject to place our Audio Listener onto
Next, we can take this Listener GameObject and move it up on the y axis
so it lines up right next to the ears of our character, seen by the transform
gizmo below in Figure 10.15.

Figure 10.15: Audio Listener GameObject lined up to head height on
Myvari
I moved it up by 1.5 units on the y axis. Now when we move around, the
transform of the Listener GameObject will move alongside the camera.

Our 3D sounds will now play relative to the character’s position instead of
the camera!

Adding 3D ambient sounds to the game
How often in your life do you experience absolute silence? You might think
that enjoying a quiet evening in your living room has absolute silence, but
you still can hear your air conditioning, the refrigerator running, sounds
outside your window, etc.
These sounds mentioned of course are very quiet, but the point is that we
never truly experience absolute silence!
So even in our video games, if our player is idle, not moving, and staying
completely still, it helps a lot to always have some sort of sound. This is
where ambient sounds come in.
Ambient sounds can be generally defined as “sounds that exist in a 3D
space but don’t move.” In our Holy Forest project, we can add sound for
trees rustling, the interior of the cave, the portal humming, magical energies
emitting from an object, rivers, and more!
To add an ambient sound is quite simple. We’ve technically already done
this! The sound we listened to in the 3D sound settings section can
technically be seen as ambient sound.
Let’s start with a very simple ambient sound of trees rustling in our scene.
Let’s take our Assets/Sounds/AMB_Trees3D.wav file and drop it into an
audio source component on a GameObject. Let’s set Volume Rolloff to
Linear Rolloff and set Spatial Blend to 1. Next, let’s keep our min
distance to 1 and our max distance to 5.
Once we’ve done this, we can place our GameObject’s transform values as
in the following image. The transform in the image reflects the ambient
sound GameObject seen in Figure 10.16, and is physically available in the
scene under Sound, in the hierarchy for the first AMB_Trees3D GameObject.

Figure 10.16: Ambient Tree 3D sound transform
We’re going to put it on the bigger tree to the left of where our player
spawns. In the following image, you can see our sound gizmo placed in the
scene.
You can see this in Figure 10.17 below as well as in the scene. Doubleclicking on the AMB_Trees3D GameObject in the hierarchy will bring you
physically to that location in the scene.

Figure 10.17: Gizmo for the ambient audio source
Lastly, we just want to make sure that Play On Awake is checked on so the
sound plays immediately when the scene starts, as shown below in Figure
10.18.

Figure 10.18: Ensuring Play On Awake is set to True
Now let’s press Play. And here we will see that the sound plays properly in
the game! It will work exactly as our previous sound did, where we can
hear it directionally, and the sound will eventually cut out when we leave
the radius of the tree!

Filling out our ambient sounds
For the remainder of the ambient sounds, it will be a rinse and repeat of
what we’ve just done. We’ll include the min/max ranges and the positions
of our ambient sounds as well as the audio files that we feel work for each
ambient item. In the scene we have the ambient sounds set up under
====AMB====, as seen in Figure 10.19 below. I strongly encourage you to
listen to the ambient sounds and see how they sound to you!

Figure 10.19: List of ambient sounds in the hierarchy

2D ambience
If you walk around our newly filled-out scene, you’ll notice that it feels
much more alive now! However, you’ll notice that in certain spots, you’ll
hear silence, and as we’ve learned, hearing absolute silence is not
something we ever want our players to experience in the game!
Let’s add an audio source to our ====SOUND==== parent GameObject and
throw in our General2D_Amb.wav.

Triggering sound through player
interaction
All the sounds we’ve created so far are sounds that will play as soon as you
enter a scene. This happens because we have Play On Awake checked in
the Audio Source component.
If we don’t have this checked, sounds will never play. But what’s cool is we
get to trigger sounds in other ways!

Triggering sound through Unity events
Let’s get a sound for our first stairs puzzle. This one will be quite easy. The
easiest way for us to add our sound will be to add an Audio Source
component directly to the trigger region GameObject. Let’s find
LeftStairsTrigger and scroll down in the Inspector until we find the
Interactio Trigger script, as shown in Figure 10.20.

Figure 10.20: Interaction Trigger script on the LeftStairsTrigger
GameObject
If you recall, we made a UnityEvent called OnInteract, which we can
utilize with our Audio Source component! Go ahead and click Add
Component at the bottom of the inspector and select Audio Source.
Next, drag and drop the StairsPuzzleSuccess.wav file into the Audio
Source component. We will leave the Audio Source as 2D since the sound
that we’re playing is a reward jingle.
Now, click the + in the OnInteract UnityEvent, and in the field that says
None (Object), drag and drop your Audio Source component, as shown in
Figure 10.21.

Figure 10.21: Sound added to Interaction Trigger
Next, you’ll see the dropdown that currently is labeled as No Function.
Let’s click this and go down to AudioSource and then to Play (), as in
Figure 10.22 below.

Figure 10.22: Adding the Play method to the sound object on interact
This will ensure that we play our audio file when we activate
LeftStairsTrigger. Go ahead and hit play and navigate to
LeftStairsTrigger. Once you do this, you’ll hear our sound! Let’s go
ahead and repeat the same exact process for RightStairsTrigger.

Rotating puzzle sounds
For the first time, we’ll be triggering sound directly in code. This will be a
fairly simple process of making our Audio Source variable publicly
available through code. Then we just trigger it.
We’ll be adding the following sounds:
A sound that plays when the puzzle is complete
A sound for when the spire starts moving
Let’s start with the simplest one, our “puzzle complete” sound. This will
play when all the spires are aligned, and the door opens. Go into our First
Puzzle prefab in our scene and open up the FirstPuzzle.cs script. This
script is where we will add our code, as in Figure 10.23. On line 173, go
ahead and type in:
public AudioSource puzzleCompleteSFX;

Figure 10.23: Public Audio Source added to the first puzzle script
Now go back to the First Puzzle prefab in our scene, open up the
inspector, and add an Audio Source component. On this Audio Source, we
will uncheck Play on Awake and drag FirstPuzzleJingle.wav into it.

Next, in the same way we dragged and dropped our audio component into
the UnityEvent, we will drag and drop the Audio Source into the new
serialized field labeled Puzzle Complete SFX on our FirstPuzzle script
component, seen in Figure 10.24.

Figure 10.24: Dragging and dropping an audio file into the Audio Source
component
Now our last step is to go to the CheckForVictory() function inside the
FirstPuzzle.cs script and go into the if statement on line 241. Right
before return true on line 245, in Figure 10.25, we are going to add the
following:

Figure 10.25: Adding Play to the Audio Source
Now let’s go into our game and see if it works. When we enter the game,
we should be able to activate our puzzle and hear sound when we
successfully rotate the spires!

Tree puzzle
Using the same method as before, let’s add a sound that plays when we put
the ball on the bridge, when we solve part of the puzzle, and when we

complete the final puzzle. We’ll open FinalPuzzle.cs and add:
IntroPuzzleSolved.wav on line 31
FinalPuzzlePartial.wav on line 38
FinalPuzzleSolved.wav on line 41

Summary
Congrats! We’ve just taken our first steps to understanding audio in video
games. We’ve gone over what makes up a sound effect, broken down the
five parts of sound design, learned about audio listeners and the differences
between music and sound, learned how to use 3D sound, and learned how
to trigger Audio Source components through code! This is a great start to
breathing life into our game through sound. In Chapter 12, Final Touches,
while polishing audio, we will go over some extra tips to make your audio
go that one step further.
In the next chapter, we’ll move on to building our project so you can share
it with others.

Build and Test
At this point in the development journey, we’ve gone through a great
amount of work together. We should now have a vertical slice of a game
that, so far, we’ve been able to play in the Unity Editor and it’s working.
This is wonderful, but are you going to expect your players to download
Unity and open the package up, then play it in the editor? I think not! This
is where we want to build the game project out into an executable. In this
chapter, we will go over how to build your game out so it can be published
and tested and ultimately get into the hands of players.
You will learn about:
Building from Unity
Testing—functional, performance, playtesting, soak, and localization
testing
User Experience (UX)

Building with Unity
We’ve worked very hard to put together an experience. We now need to be
able to get it out to people. To do this, we need to tell Unity a couple of
things. It needs to know what you are building for, such as which scenes
should be built within the application, which platform, and additional
options that affect the build output executable.
Where we are now in the vertical slice is a good place to build at. This may
not always be the case in every project. In most cases, the best way to work
with the build is this: build early, build often. In our case, we needed to wait
until we had some mechanics and a standard playthrough from our two
major puzzles before we decided to build.

In Figure 11.1 you can see the Build Settings menu, which is found under
File > Build Settings. Below the image, we will break down each of these
settings.

Figure 11.1: Build settings
The first block we see is Scenes In Build. As it is at the top, we should
have a feeling that it’s important. This automatically places the default
scene into the box, but there may be other scenes that you want. You may
have another scene for menu systems or another map that might be a
tutorial level. The key factor here is to have the scenes that you want in the
game in this box; you can just drag the scenes from the project window into
the Scenes In Build box.
Note
The top scene in this list will always be the first scene that is loaded.

Below the Scenes In Build block, the GUI is split into two sections,
Platform and then settings for that platform. On the left, we choose which
platform we want to build for. After that, the settings for that platform will
be on the right side. We will go over just the PC, Mac & Linux
Standalone options.

If you are building for any other platform, the Unity documentation will
help guide you through the building process. We will be describing most of
the parameters that are available below. Console and mobile choices will
have a few different available parameters specific to their target platform’s
needs.

Target platform
This option is simple enough: which platform would you like to target with
this build? The choices here are Windows, macOS, and Linux. We are
building for Windows with this vertical slice.

Architecture
We need to know what CPU architecture we should be planning on. A 32bit OS will require your game to use less than 4 GB of RAM. You can do
this, but you can use 64-bit for smaller games as well; it will not hurt your
game. In general, 64-bit should be the way to go.

Server Build
Unity can create a server for your game if you are working on a multiplayer
game. This will build the player settings with no visual elements. It will
also build managed scripts that are defined for multiplayer. We will not be
working with this, but know the option is there. We also will not be going
over multiplayer development with Unity as that would be a much different
project from the beginning.

Copy PDB files
This is a Windows-platform-only setting. It will allow you to build in the
Microsoft program database for debugging. We will not be using this either
in our build.

Create Visual Studio Solution
This is also a Windows-platform-only setting. Enabling this will allow you
to build from Visual Studio instead of only from Build Settings menu. If
you are targeting macOS, there would instead be a Create Xcode Project
checkbox.

Development Build
Enabling this will allow debugging, including the Profiler. The Profiler is an
analyzer to know what is being performed during runtime.
We will be going over this thoroughly in the Testing section of this chapter.
There are also defined settings that will be included. This is very good for
when you need to test your application and are worried about performance.
You especially need to keep it in mind if you have a tight visual budget.
There is a term that is used called “benchmarking.” This term refers to
testing your build on a target machine. If you choose a lower-end computer
to test on, note its specs and build the game in development mode so that
you can run the Profiler while it’s running. Once you have the benchmark,
you can make some educated guesses on how it will run on higher-end and
lower-end machines.

Autoconnect Profiler
If you have Development Build turned on, then you can enable this setting.
It will automatically connect the Profiler that we talked about above in the
Development Build section.

Deep Profiling Support
This also requires the development build to be enabled. This enables the
Unity Profiler to record more detailed data. This will not be the best option
for checking performance as there could be some slowing down of

executing scripts. The primary purpose of a deep profiling build is to get a
specific cause of managed applications by recording all function calls.
Since every method will be recorded individually, deep profiling provides a
very clear view of what is being called and when. Some bugs during
gameplay can be lured out and caught more easily with a deep profile.

Script Debugging
Enabling this also needs Development Build enabled and it adds
debugging symbols to the script code. This will allow the IDE (Integrated
Development Editor, such as Visual Studio) to be attached to the game
when it runs to debug it through your breakpoints and debugging systems.
When you select this, another option will pop up as shown below in Figure
11.2:

Figure 11.2: Wait For Managed Debugger build setting option
The Wait For Managed Debugger option, if enabled, will wait until the
IDE is looking for the build to ask for the connection. No scripts will be
executed until there is a connection with the debugger.

Scripts Only Build
There may come a time when you find some bugs and need to be able to
make some changes, but you don’t want to build everything. Data files can
get to be very large. We have talked previously in this book about how
iteration matters more than almost anything. This can significantly reduce
the time between iterations of debugging.
This option will only build the scripts and keep all the data files intact.

Compression Method
There are three options here: Default, LZ4, and LZ4HC. Default means no
compression. No compression will have a runnable file on Windows, Mac,
and Linux right away. On Android builds, it will build as a ZIP file.
LZ4 is useful for development builds as the data stored will be compressed
and unpacked or decompressed during runtime. Scene and asset loading
depend on disk read speeds. This is another option that can be used to help
iteration speeds as the build time is faster than the default. An interesting
note is that LZ4 decompression on Android is faster than the default ZIP.
LZ4HC is a high-compression version of LZ4, which will take longer to
build as it compresses the build further. This is a great option for release
builds after spending time debugging.
Starting with Default for quick tests in gameplay testing is a good idea.
After you get to the point where you need to development build and debug,
use LZ4. Then after you’re ready to make releases, build on LZ4HC.

Testing
Testing a game is a broad concept. There are large testing portions that are
more common and some smaller, more specific ones. The more common
testing patterns we see are:
Functional
Performance
Playtesting
Soak
Localization
If you research game QA or game testing, you will find several other names
for testing, and a studio may have their own specific testing that is their

form of best practice.
None of this is wrong. The testing we will explain from the list above is
seen in almost every studio. Let’s break down the first in the list, functional
testing.

Functional testing
Your testing started well before you got to this chapter. Every time you
pressed play to check if a script did what it was supposed to do, you tested
that script alongside the rest of the game. This is part of the iterative nature
of game development and is also called functional testing.
Functional testing has a very direct name! It’s testing for the game’s
functions. A few examples of the scope of the functions being tested are:
Animation – Looking for animations that don’t work together or
character rigs that are broken. This is carried out by testing mechanics
and movements where the character animation is being transitioned to
other animations.
Audio elements and quality – Listening intently for the purpose of
hearing imperfections at specific times. Examples of this might be
listening for footstep sounds that sound wrong, ambient noises for
objects that aren’t there, and anywhere sound is incorrectly placed.
Cinematics – Playing through the cinematics to find any out-of-place
sounds, visuals, animations, or timing of the entire cinematic.
Instructions or tutorials – There could be instructions on how to play
the game. These instructions should be written properly and make sense
to the controller scheme the player is using.
Mechanics interaction – Playing through all the mechanics to feel them
out, checking to see if they are working as intended and can be
completed if there is completion.
Sorting – This is a visual check dealing with transparency issues.
Layers on the screen need to know their layer on the screen. Some

effects and UI will have a hard time knowing what is on top to be sorted
properly. This takes testing with multiple scenarios to ensure that the
GameObjects with transparency are sorting properly.
Usability – Usability has its own thread of work that can be tested, but
in this case, we are looking for controller schemes that make sense and
work. An example is the A button being used for a jump; this is so
common that if something else is used, it would need to be explained
thoroughly as to why.
UI (menu structure, resolution, aspect ratio, font sizing) – The user
interface needs to be checked thoroughly for many parts. How does it
look when it’s scaled? Do the colors look correct? Can you understand
how the menu flows? Every small problem that pops up will be seen by
the majority of users. They need to be documented to be fixed.
As you can see, functional testing is thorough and needs to be iterated on to
make sure that the game’s functions all make sense to the player and work
properly. When you’re playing the game to test a single mechanic, this is a
great practice, but it is only checking out that mechanic in a bubble. The
rest of the game could potentially be affected by the changes you are
making. Strong functional testing done early and often will make your
project that much cleaner and more positive in the end.
While working through functional testing, you may encounter hitches in
rendering, making the framerate low. If this happens, take note and add it to
the list of performance testing that will be done as well. Since we’re on the
topic, let’s go into how to performance test in Unity.

Performance testing
Inside Unity, we have four sources of analysis:
Unity Profiler
Memory Profiler
Frame debugger

Physics debugger and Profiler
All four of these analysis tools have their own specific uses to help define
what might be causing an issue. We will go through them to a basic degree
to get familiar with each one. Starting off, we need to go over the most
commonly used one, Unity Profiler.

Unity profiler
To perform profiling, you will need to use Unity’s analyzing tool, the
Profiler, which looks as in Figure 11.3 below:

Figure 11.3: Unity’s Profiler window example
The profiling tool helps with identifying CPU use, memory usage, and
rendering time. When you open the Profiler by going to Window >
Analysis > Profiler, you will see four sections, as displayed in Figure 11.3
above. The four sections are:
(Red) Profiler modules – This section contains what profile modules
are in use and has colors to show what is taking place when the
recording of the Profiler starts.
(Orange) Profiler controls – These controls are for setting up what the
Profiler is doing. Here you can start recording and change modes or the
Profiler tool.
(Yellow) Frame charts – This shows the individual frames as a stacked
chart over time and curves for rendering passes.

(Green) Module details panels – The module details panels explain
every section of the selected frame broken down over a percentage of
use on the thread requested. Default is the main thread.
As an example, in the profile below in Figure 11.4, we have a frame
selected while playing our game; I recorded 7800 frames while moving
Myvari around. You can see that we’re currently running close to 60 frames
per second. I wanted to know what was taking the most CPU time from the
PlayerLoop — in this case, it was the game being played in the editor at
~80%. Scrolling down the PlayerLoop, we see that the forward renderer is
the heaviest task on the main thread. There is not a lot going on currently in
the scene, which is why we’re running an average of 60 FPS.

Figure 11.4: Profiler with frame selected
You can see how much information comes along with the Profiler. This is
fantastic information when you want to see what might be causing your
game to have a lower framerate.

Memory Profiler
This tool, as expected, profiles the memory of the editor. You can also run
the memory profiler on a standalone build if Development Build is selected
in the Build Settings menu. The limitation here is that you cannot run the
memory Profiler on a release build, just as with the Unity Profiler we saw

previously. The Memory Profiler also isn’t automatically added to the Unity
project. It is a package that can be added. To add it, follow along below.
To add the Memory Profiler, go to your Package Manager and add a
package by name. This can be done by selecting the options as shown in
Figure 11.5 and then adding com.unity.memoryProfiler to the Add
package by name field:

Figure 11.5: (Left) Add package by name, (right) Adding the Memory
Profiler
When it’s installed, you can access the Memory Profiler by going to
Windows > Analysis > Memory Profiler. When it first loads, you will see
a blank middle section with an option to create a snapshot. If you press play
and then take a snapshot, you will get a similar screen to what we have
here. There is a large amount of info to go over within this Profiler. The
primary use of this is if you have a low framerate and you want to check
memory usage or if during a soak test you are seeing crashes. You can see,
through multiple snapshots in time, what memory is being used.

Figure 11.6: Memory Profiler
While looking at a snapshot, the center area breaks down all the memory in
that snapshot. In the bottom area, there are blocks of everything used in
groups. You can select the groups to break them down even further. We did
this to the bottom mauve-colored block, which is used to display
Texture2D. We already knew that this would have? a large memory
footprint as it’s the texturing for all the architecture. It needed to be fairly
large.
If the memory looks as you expected, then it may be a good idea to look at
the frame debugger to check what could be loading in specific frames that
could cause issues. Let’s look into that tool next.

Frame debugger
Being able to see an individual frame and how the draw calls were
constructed to give you the rendering of that frame can be very helpful for
debugging visual artifacts. You may have used this when you were doing

functional testing and found sorting issues. You can now load the frame
debugger up and see when each item was rendered. From this point, you
will have the knowledge to be able to work through why it was rendered in
the wrong order.

Figure 11.7: Frame debugger
Another strong feature of the frame debugger is that you are able to see
what Shader properties were set on the item that was being rendered, as
shown in Figure 11.7 above. This is useful as when you are setting Shader
properties procedurally, you may have an expectation of the Shader
properties using certain textures of variables. If they aren’t as expected,
then it would be a great idea to check out the frame and see what it is set to.
This could lead to finding out that for one frame it was set to what you
expected but then overridden. This could help lead you to the right script
that is changing your Shader properties a frame or two after your expected
values are being set.

Physics debugger and Profiler module
For physics, we have both a debugger and a Profiler module. The physics
debugger is a visualization tool to know what physics collisions are in the
scene and what they should or should not be able to collide with. As you
saw in Chapter 7, Rigid Bodies and Physics Interaction, the Rigidbody is
complicated in its optimization settings for physics properties. Being able to
visualize what type of collider is on what and where is a great help to
knowing what objects are doing when and why. In Figure 11.8 below, you
can see in the scene which objects are physics objects.

Opening the Colors section of the physics debugger will allow you to
colorize them according to what you might need to debug:

Figure 11.8: Physics Debugger
After you have identified any physics issues from the GameObjects
visualized by the physics debugger we have another tool to gather more
information. Fortunately for us, we also have the physics Profiler module to
be able to help us with any physics issues that are being visualized so we
can look up the issue. The physics Profiler module is in the Unity Profiler
and will help find answers to the physics discrepancies you may see when
the debugger is on.
To see what the physics Profiler module looks like, see Figure 11.9 below:

Figure 11.9: Physics Profiler module
The use of this may not be understood at this point as we don’t have a case
with our physics mechanics to show a direct problem. We don’t have fastmoving items that can cause a lot of physics issues. If your game does have
fast-moving objects, when you are recording your Profiler and noticing
GameObjects clipping through other GameObjects when they shouldn’t,
this module would be good to see the total memory used. It’s possible that
the memory being used is not allowing for the physics to update fast enough
to get the active body information.
Physics debugging can take time to get to an answer as this needs to happen
while the physics work is taking place. Be patient with this debugging and
use as many tools as possible to get the answer you need.
Now that we’ve gone over all of the debugging tools, we need to test the
game with others outside of our team. This is called playtesting. Let’s get
the game into others’ hands.

Playtesting
This is a difficult problem to assess. At first, it may be a good idea to test
internally with you and your team, friends, and allies. You ask them to play
the game and see how they feel about it. This is not meant to build your
ego. You need to be there when they are playing and ask them to speak out
loud about how they feel about the experience. Do not prompt them on

anything. You want them to give you genuine feelings and if they speak to
the intended experience, you’re on the right track.
Even if the game’s art isn’t in place and the menu systems are blocky
objects with Arial font placeholding for later, none of that detracts from the
core game experience. One example is the visceral response when someone
enters the first emotional touchpoint you want to evoke. For our project, we
want to give a sense of wonder. This is close to confusion, so we need to be
deliberate in placement and light usage to encourage adventuring on the
player’s terms. If they say things such as, “I wonder what’s over there,” we
are leaning into that sense of wonder.
At the same time, they may say that same sentence, but you didn’t have
anything planned. Let them explore wherever they thought there might be
something and take note. It would be a good idea to put something there.
Allow that inherent wonderment to take your design further than you have
already gone. It almost doesn’t matter what would be there if there is a kind
of interaction. An example of this is an area that has nothing to do with the
narrative that’s off to the side just slightly, being available to move into.
When testers move into spots on the map that you don’t expect them to,
take that as an opportunity for engagement. You could build it up as a
scenic view. When you walk over there, the camera pans out a bit to take in
the view. This isn’t an addition to the story, but the sense of wonder was
fulfilled. Something happened when you explored.
Exploration may not be a large portion of your game; maybe your title is a
socially focused experience. The need for interaction is high for any player
that is inside a multiplayer game. In what ways can you interact with your
friends when playing together? An extremely good example of this is
FromSoftware’s multiplayer interaction system. The social interaction in
FromSoftware’s game — for example Elden Ring — allows you to leave
short messages with specific words, but you can also use emotes and the
message will play your character as a ghost with your small message and
the emote. This allows interaction with the emotes that you may have
found. This is a very interesting way to allow interaction within a game that
is defined by its ability to make you feel alone and weak.

After they are done playing, take all your notes and thank them for their
time. You do not need to implement everything you wrote down from their
test, but after you have five people test it, there will be trends. Take care of
those trends first.

Soak testing
Soak testing isn’t an intuitive name. We aren’t going to dunk our computers
into a bath; we will just let the game run for 24 hours idly. Your character is
in the game, live, just sitting by itself while the game plays out. The reason
for this is to attempt to bring out any possible memory leaks in the game.
A memory leak is when there is some memory that isn’t being taken care of
somewhere. Let’s say we have a particle that is falling from a tree for some
nice ambiance. The particle is set to die, but an accidental couple of extra 0s
were added so now instead of lasting for 10 seconds, it’s lasting for 1000
seconds. This might not be a problem when you are running around in the
game as when you leave, the particles will get culled. But if you let the
game idle, all the particle systems making leaves will pile up and several
thousand leaves on the ground might cause performance to tank hard. This
would need fixing, and wouldn’t have been possible without soak testing.

Localization testing
Localization is the act of translating the game to be experienced in another
language. This test can take longer than expected and you need to be
patient. Every menu item, dialogue line, and description needs to be
considered for this testing portion. Translation also isn’t just a word-forword explanation. Some languages require more context for their
descriptions, which can lead to very confusing translations if not paid close
attention to.
When localizing a game, take care not to rush this process. It can
completely throw off another culture’s experience, which would be a
shame!

User experience, or UX
UX can be defined as the sum of the parts within branding, design, and
usability. For our part, we will briefly cover how branding plays its part in
the UX role. We will then speak about design only a little bit as we’ve
covered design for the fundamental parts of this project already. After we
cover those quickly, we can then move into usability. Let’s go for it!

Branding
To cover this broadly, branding through a UX lens is about how the overall
experience the user will take through the journey of the game will need to
also be reflected in the branding. For an overly contrasted example, think
about if a horror game ‘s branding used soft tones and pastels with flowers
and happy music as their marketing material. This obviously doesn’t fit the
branding of the game and will cause dissonance in the user’s experience.
The purpose and point of UX as a defined part of development is that
deliberate cohesive actions are paid attention to. The time spent on UX
should ensure that all the designed parts, including the logo, marketing
material, and the game parts, are part of a whole, unified experience.

Design
We’ve covered a lot of design in this book so far. Interestingly, we’ve
covered all of our design in a bit of a siloed manner. Sometimes this can
cause an issue, but luckily for our project we really focused this game on
the character design. The rest of the design was built around the past of her
race, which provided answers to questions for visual cues.
The pacing of the game is dealt with through the style of gameplay and
mechanics being focused on environmental narratives. With those three
parts combined, it turned out to be a cohesive project already. This does a
good job of validating the time we spent on design within every part. Good
job sticking with it!

Usability
After you’ve hooked a user through your exquisite branding and intelligent
and cohesive design, they should be able to use the product. For games,
usability is all focused on interactions. This shouldn’t be much surprise as
we’ve defined this as a pillar for experience in Chapter 6, Interactions and
Mechanics. We’ve worked through overall interaction with the player;
however, there is no defined affordance. We need to work through how the
player knows they can perform the interactions.
We will go over the major portions of the vertical slice here, starting with
the initial problem of getting to the first puzzle, then moving on to the first
puzzle itself. After that, we need to bring about how the next mechanic,
telekinesis, will be introduced, and then lastly the final puzzle.

Initial problem
Within the starting cave section, we have a blocked stairway where the
player needs to interact with two objects to unlock. There are several things
we will use to give affordance to the player, so they know how to perform
the needed task:
Light pooling
Worldspace UI
Satisfy the action
Light pooling is a small part of environment or level design that allows the
player to feel as though they should be heading in that direction. If a tunnel
is dark and there is a light at the end, the player will tend to head toward
that light. We can use this method to have glowing objects or lights near a
button that needs to be pressed.
Now that they are near it, when they mouse near enough, we will pop up a
worldspace UI for interaction. This button should be the same as every

other interaction of this type. For this game, our interaction is the E key on
the keyboard.
After you use the interactive button, there needs to be something that
satisfies the use of that action. In this case, it’s a button in a rock. It will
animate to set itself in place, glow from being used, and trigger a sound to
fully indicate that the user used their affordance.

First puzzle
When you first come up to the first puzzle, it may not be immediately
understood that the player’s purpose is to move the stones into a position.
We used one primary key usability feature, among others which will seem
similar. Let’s list them out again:
Light pooling
Hero art piece
Worldspace UI
Camera positioning (the key factor previously mentioned)
Satisfy the action
We previously went over light pooling as a concept for positioning. In this
case, we will be using light pooling to draw visual attention to a place to
move to. The thing to look at is the door as it has the answer to the puzzle
laid out in front of you.
The art piece we are light pooling to is the answer to the puzzle. It’s directly
placed at the next position you are headed and right in front of you when
you exit the stairs, and it’s lit up. There is no barrier to entry on what you
should be looking at when you get to the top of the stairs. That is what we
like to do for our players. Let them get a feel for exploration but know they
are looking at the right place when they do.

Our worldspace UI is the same as before, but we are using it to let the
player know they can interact with the puzzle piece when they get close to
the moveable pieces.
The key factor to moving in the next section is the camera movement.
When you enter the space of the puzzle, the camera will gently move up to
a position that will represent the successful movement of the pillars in
coordination with the art piece on the door when you first entered.
After the player moves the pillars into position, there are loud sounds of
rocks being put into place and connections of what might sound like a large
lock tumbler falling into place. When the final pillar is in place, the entire
piece moves into the finalized complete position and the camera moves
back to their shoulder while a pillar rises in the middle to allow the player
to press the “door open” button.

Introduction to a secondary mechanic
We’ve been explaining players’ affordances and how to get them to do the
actions. You can add new mechanics without breaking the experience as
long as you take care to introduce them in a deliberate manner. So far,
Myvari has only been an explorer. We want her to have slight telekinesis
powers from her ancient blood. We could just have them active and put
something in her way, but that isn’t very fun, and the experience isn’t as
strong.
To get ourselves a new mechanic and hopefully draw the player into caring
about our main character, what we will do is give two actions that at first
don’t directly involve the player, but they do involve Myvari. The first thing
that we will do is, while walking out in a thin area on the side of the
mountain, we will have a large rock come tumbling down the mountain.
There will be a cinematic that will happen where she will be alarmed, and
she will defend herself by putting up her arm, which triggers her telekinesis
just slightly, and she will maneuver the rock to the side slightly so that is
crashes down the mountain instead of on top of Myvari herself.

Next, after some small exploration, the player will come across an area
where they cannot enter the next area, but can see it. There is a pillar that
looks like the one that opened the first door from the first puzzle, but it’s
separated. We will use a new form of worldspace UI and when you hover
over the broken piece, it will be outlined and the interact button will pop up.
This outline will have a similar color to what was used when the telekinesis
happened with the rock and when you interact with it, you will put your
hand out and pick it up. It will, when close enough to the pillar,
automatically fix itself, which triggers many visual changes to the area you
are in.
In conclusion, we are using small examples of telekinesis to introduce this
slowly and in a way that befits the character. This is a good use of usability
as the player gets to grow with the character. We can now take what we
learned here and push it into the final puzzle, which uses this telekinesis as
a primary mechanic.

Final puzzle
It’s interesting how much effort it takes to make an experience strong!
Those lead-up efforts for describing a mechanic are the glue that makes the
experience a matter of immersion instead of just another button to press to
make the character do something.
We now enter the final puzzle and there are similar means for player
affordances that you’ve seen previously. We will use slightly different
means as the items used in the mechanic are different, but the overall
concept is driven by the environment. You will see these UX usability
functions in the final puzzle area:
Light pooling
Connection to the hero art piece
Worldspace UI
Satisfy the action

As always, we use lighting to help our players understand the next move
subtly. There is a large light coming from behind our hero piece (main
focus) tree, meaning it has narrative implications and needed more authored
treatment, which shows a glow coming from each of the cables attached to
the architecture. If you follow the cables, they flow through large pillars.
Those pillars are connected to the hero art piece, which is the central tree.
The thing is that the pillars themselves are missing something. That
something is on the ground in multiple locations around the tree’s area.
Moving your mouse to look at these larger spherical objects shows you can
interact with them.
The interaction, in this case, is the worldspace UI. This is the outline that
we already saw previously coming across the water bridge when we picked
up the piece to complete the pillar. Picking up the object and moving it near
the empty location with the same shape lights up the cables, which needs to
be done in a certain order to get power to the tree. This is only slowed down
by the character’s ability to notice some cabling is broken or not connected
properly.
Satisfying the action comes from the nice energy flowing from the cables
toward the tree with each placement of the object. By the end, the tree will
light up in a cinematic and open a section that reveals a tiara. Myvari grabs
the tiara and places it on her head to unlock her place as the final princess
of her ancient race.
This ends the vertical slice when the portal turns on from the completion of
the puzzle and she walks through it, excited for the next step of the
adventure.

Summary
You might be thinking, “what’s next?” This is a great question. You have a
game that is built and has gone through some testing with some bug fixes.
It’s a playable item in this case and could provide plenty of context to
investors to continue the journey of getting a game funded or published.

What we will go over next are polishing techniques to try for beauty and
UX to take the front seat. We’re calling these finishing touches as we know
that the vertical slice is in a good state to add final touches to it only. Take
some time in the next chapter to see all the tasks we can do to push our
brand and quality into the game.

Finishing Touches
Welcome to the Finishing Touches chapter! There is a misconception about
how long games take to make and the overall difficulty of game
development. This chapter will act as a toolbox to guide you in finishing
your projects. This isn’t a straightforward next step, but rather an open box
for you to see what we’re using to polish up our vertical slice. An
interesting feature of the polishing process is that it covers a good 80% of
game development. This might sound unintuitive; however, if you’ve been
paying attention to the screenshots during the development, you will have
noticed that we don’t have a complete game by any stretch of the
imagination at this point from a consumer’s point of view. The mechanics
work and the game is an experience by now, just not a complete one.
This chapter will go over:
Overview
Asset finalization
Lighting
Sound polish

Overview
Finishing touches are extremely important to a complete experience. We
need to take what we have and tighten up all the stitches. This is done in
several ways.
Lighting and sound are very difficult to finalize prior to this point. There
can be research and development (R&D), but unless the game’s focus is
one of those two topics, you won’t be getting finalized lighting or sound
until there are finalized assets in the game, as seen in the list in the

following section. You’re correct in wondering why we had a chapter on
sound before this. We wanted to go over the basics of sound in general and
get you familiar with the concept of sound design and its implementation
within Unity.
Lighting could be worked on early to set a mood but will need to be
finalized after environments and light pools are well defined and firm in
place. Again, if lighting and mood are going to be in the experience, then
heavy lighting R&D will need to take place even in the blocking-in stages
of development. All the conversations here about lighting will guide you
during that stage too if it’s needed.
The way this will work is that there will be specific actions that we will
cover in all three of the major sections in this chapter. These actions are
specific to our project but could help you with your future projects all the
same. Think of them as tools instead of a tutorial. Some of them may need
programming, and some of them may not.
As most of the mechanics have been programmed to a certain degree, we
will focus first on asset finalization. Remember, as we said, it’s hard to get
lighting and sound if the assets aren’t done. Let’s start there!

Asset finalization
This section will be awesome. There are so many great art assets and
finishing touches that we can go over. Here is a list of tools we used that
may help you in your projects in the future:
Stylized pass on assets
Detail normals
Architecture cleanup
Texture blending
Environment clutter
Detail meshes

Effects
Cinematics
Secondary animation
The way we will go through these sections is that we will have an
explanation of why we will be doing this for our project, which may help
you decide if you need to perform these polishing touches on your own
projects in the future. After that, we will cover the literal steps that we took
so that you can see how they are done. Interestingly, the actual steps we are
taking may not be the only way to achieve these finishing touches. The best
way to take these actions is as a concept or a starting point as the needs will
be different for your project. We will begin our finishing touches with a
stylized pass on our assets.

Stylized pass on assets
When defining an art style, we begin with broad strokes. Even if you take
the time to outline the art direction, once you get to the polishing phase, you
will need to make a pass on it to get the finishing touches in place. In our
case, we found that our assets didn’t have enough of a stylized look to them
to fit our art direction. The word stylized is used very often and it has the
right to be used often for games as it means to just not look realistic. In our
case, we want the stylizing to make everything feel more illustrative in
nature. This means we need to push all our contrasting silhouettes and
colors into the textures. We also need broader line weights in our textures.
A good example within our project is Myvari’s necklace. This art piece
needs to stand out as it is the primary focus of Myvari’s telekinesis. We also
know that we will be seeing it up close during cinematics, so we need to
ensure that we put time into designing this piece.

Figure 12.1: Stylized passes for Myvari’s necklace
This needs to happen throughout all the art pieces to have as much
consistency as possible within the character and the world. Once the
stylized pass is completed, some models may need to have small details
added. We call them “detail normals.” Let’s go over them now!

Detail normals
A detail normal can sometimes be considered part of the stylized pass. In
our case, we wanted this to be a standout part of the art direction overall, so
we pulled it out of the stylized pass. We want to drive home the stylized
nature of the silhouettes in the models; however, we want to give the
materials themselves a sense of realism. Leather will need to look like
leather, and bark should look like bark. Below in Figure 12.2, we have a
detail normal on the mushroom to give a bit of extra nuance to it. The left
image has base normals and texture. The right image has detail normals
layered on top.

Figure 12.2: Left, no detail normal; Right, detail normal added
Detail textures are also interesting as they are generally smaller details from
a tileable texture that won’t fit nicely on the texture itself due to the sizing
of the model’s texture. To gain the small details, we layered them in the
shader.

Figure 12.3: Detail normals
Above is the shader we are using for our detail normal in Figure 12.3. The
way we will break this down is by following the data connection points and
explaining the reasoning per node. To start off, we begin with a UV node.
UV node – This node sets the UV space you will be manipulating. The
dropdown allows you to choose which UV map to manipulate. Since we are
using the main UV channel, we will keep it at UV0. We will take the output
of the UV node and input it into a Swizzle node.

Swizzle node – The Swizzle node allows users to take an input and mix the
channels to create an output with the data amount that is needed. You’ll
notice that we have set xy as the output. Our input is a pin line, which refers
to a Vector4, which is shown in the input of the Swizzle as well. We only
need the red and green channels in this case, so we just request the xy or rg
channel and we get a Vector2 output green line. Unity’s Shader Graph
already culls the rest of the channels, so we do not specifically need this,
but it’s a good habit to only use the channels that you need to work with.
We take this output into a Multiply node.
Multiply node – We use a float parameter here for the customizability of
the UVs down the line alongside the Swizzle input. The Detail Normal
Scale parameter is exposed so we can make a change in the inspector later
on, tweaking it to our needs. The output of this will go into the UV channel
of a Sample Texture 2D node.
Sample Texture 2D node – Another input to this node is our texture 2D
parameter detail normal. We need to make sure that the Space option is set
to Tangent as we will be affecting the tangents to reconstruct the normal
later on. We will be taking the output and getting to a Vector2 once again,
but with a different method than Swizzle. We will be using a Combine node
from the individual channels on the Sample Texture 2D node.
Combine node – Taking in the R and G from the Sample Texture 2D node
output, we combine it to make a Vector2 that is sampling the texture we
want and following the UVs we’re setting. Now we need to take this
Vector2 into a scale and bias it into a different range.
Scale and Bias nodes (using multiply and subtract) – The next two nodes
are a basic math function to transform the (0 to 1) range to a (-1 to 1)
range. We do this by multiplying by 2 and then subtracting 1 on both the X
and Y vectors. This is important to us as we may want the normal to appear
as concave, or going into the model. After we finish this function, we will
take the output into a Normal Reconstruct Z node.
Normal Reconstruct Z node – This node’s purpose is to derive the correct
Z values for the input of R and G from the normal map we chose in the
Sample Texture 2D node.

After this there are three more steps. We will be following individual
figures for these next steps. We will take the output of this node and move it
into a Normal Strength node.
Normal Strength node – Plugging into the Normal Strength node are the
normals we had as an output from the Normal Reconstruct Z node. There is
also a float value for which we created a parameter named Detail Normal
Strength. This can be seen below in Figure 12.4. We’re using this node so
that if the normal map seems like it might have too much detail or is not
visually appealing, we can tone it down a little. The parameter we set in the
Strength input allows us to dynamically set the Detail Normal Strength per
material.

Figure 12.4: Normal Strength node
We take the output of this and put it into a Normal Blend node.
Normal Blend node – We ultimately want these detail normals to be
layered with the normal of the mesh itself. This is the node that we will be
doing this with.

Figure 12.5: Normal Blend node
It will output a normal map with both normals inside the data. We will then
place the output into a Boolean keyword parameter, which we named
Detail Normal?.
Boolean keyword – This Boolean keyword is designed in a way to allow us
to either use a detail normal or not. Since this shader is being used across
many materials, we need a way to exclude a detail normal from being
needed if a mesh may not have one. We’ve done this by having the input for
On be the blended normals of the mesh and the detail normal. If it’s set to
Off then just the mesh normal will be accepted.

Figure 12.6: Detail normal Boolean keyword
The output of this will then go into the Master Stack Normal input. When
you create a material, if you want to have a detail normal, all you need to do
is select On with the checkbox of the Detail Normal? parameter.

Next, we will work through cleaning up the architecture.

Architecture cleanup
The silhouettes of the current buildings may look good, but does the
architecture make sense? This is an interesting design issue with building
shapes. We need to ensure that the architecture looks like something that
might be built by a living creature. This is a difficult task to get right as the
creatures we’re looking to emulate don’t exist! They are fictional creatures,
which means we need to be very clear on the path we take when
architecting for them.
We know that they are focused on celestial bodies and time concepts. The
shapes of space, planets, and the concept of time need to take part in the
silhouettes of the buildings and materials. This may not mean an entire
remodel of the pieces but more pushing the shapes so the language stands
out enough to fit the culture we’re designing for.
We also need to get rid of some geometry that won’t ever be seen. This is in
order to optimize the game and is important. In games, if you cannot see it,
then it doesn’t need to render. Therefore, we do something called backface
culling. This means that if you were to look at the back half of a sphere
from the inside it would be invisible.
The backside of an object isn’t rendered as it’s not seen. If you didn’t do
that then the sphere would have to render all the inside faces, which would
be a waste of precious computer time; we need to render everything else.

Texture blending
When building terrain or larger objects that need to connect, there is always
a bit of a line that shows that the objects are 3D meshes. This is a common
problem, and it can hurt immersion or break the experience if not worked
with closely. There are several ways to make this better. You may add
another mesh on top of the split. You could also layer or overlap the meshes

to make a break in the model to let the player think that it was meant to be
slightly broken. You could also perform something called texture blending.
One way that we have done this is through Y-up materials. They may have
other names as well, but I call them that due to using the Y-up axis to blend
in materials. What we do is ask the shader to blend in positive Y of the
world normal values. We use this value at the Lerp value in our shader
where the base texture is on the A channel and B is the moss or snow
texture. Let’s look at Figures 12.7 through 12.9 below for screenshots of the
Shadergraph imagery. In Figure 12.7, we’re showing some rocks that have
a single UV set with a rock texture. These rocks are exactly the same except
we’ve duplicated them and rotated them to show the shader that we put
together that places the texture on the world normals.

Figure 12.7: Rocks with our Y-up shader applied
The textures applied to this aren’t final moss textures, but they are designed
to be contrasted to the rock to show the textures separately. This allows us
to work through the differences easily with visuals. You’ll notice that the
rocks are the same, but scaled and rotated. This is a strong way to provide

reuse within your meshes in your scene so you don’t have to model so many
rocks! Let’s look at the Shadergraph on how this works next.

Figure 12.8: World normal Y-up for T value of Lerp
We need to plan out how we will split the rendering of the texture on the
mesh. The interesting thing is that we need to make the texture always
appear on the top of the mesh regardless of how it’s rotated. We decided to
take the normal vector of the world space and then multiply it by a Vector3
that we named Offset. We want the positive Y, so the default value of our
Offset parameter will be (0, 1, 0). We have two more blending
parameters. They are Blend and Level and they are both floats. The Blend
parameter is a hard value from 0 to 1. With 0 there is no blending and the
rock is the only texture, and with 1 there is no blending where the other
texture has a hard line. This is complemented with the Level parameter.
The Level parameter should be set to Slider with the min value set to 0 and
the max to 100, and the Default set to 1; these can be set in the Node
Settings in the Graph Inspector. We added it in this shader to show that
you can add more tools for your artists per material. At the end of this line
of data is a saturate.
This ensures that the data sticks to the 0-1 range, which is what we need to
be the T value of the Lerp, which we will go over next.

Figure 12.9: Texture lookups and Lerp
Above in Figure 12.9 is our Lerp. Value is the base texture, and B is the Yup texture. T is the output of our saturate in Figure 12.8. The output of the
Lerp is going into our base color. This is only the beginning and you can
bolster this by using normal maps and height maps to help mix the channels
to make them even more seamless. We currently aren’t using extra maps in
this shader, but the concept uses the exact same nodes, just with the
additional maps as inputs.

Environment clutter
This is a job all on its own. Those who work with environment clutter are
known in the industry as clutter artists. Their job is to place items to make
the environment feel lived in. Currently, we have an environment that is
mechanically designed. We know where Myvari needs to be to trigger

cinematics. We know how she will work with the physics puzzles. What we
don’t know is how the people lived in this space previously.
What were these spaces used for before there were puzzles to open the
doors? Should there be broken things around or did it all break down a long
time ago? Should there be spiderwebs or plants growing over some pieces?
The clutter artists will have a set of small items to place around to make it
feel like there was something going on here at one point in time. This is
where we have an opportunity to tell small stories in every section.

Detail meshes
Unity terrain can house detail meshes to place simple meshes, such as grass
or small rocks. We explained this in Chapter 5, Environment, in the
Painting details section briefly. The primary reason it’s in this chapter is to
explain that there is more work to be done with the details. This is very
similar to the clutter artist’s work; however, this isn’t specific to how the
space was lived in but to develop the nature. In our case, we are using it for
grass and rocks. We need to make sure that the grass and rocks are in a spot
that makes sense.
This is primarily working through the finer details of cleaning up the scene
in regard to the detail meshes.

Effects
Polishing effects are similar to polishing animations. They need to be
finessed to ensure that it is stimulating the correct emotions of the viewer.
Most of the effects in this vertical slice are meant to be ambient. We will be
covering two effects. The first one will be the blocker to the stairs in the
first portion of the cave. The second one will be Myvari’s telekinesis. We
chose these two effects to cover in the book as they are quite unique from
each other.

Stair blocker

The stair blocker is there to create an obstacle for the player in going up the
stairs. They need to find a way to disable this so they can progress. We
decided to go with arcane energy moving upward in front of the stairs. This
will be done purely through a shader, which means we will cover some
simple techniques in the Shader Graph.
The image shown here, in Figure 12.10, of the effect is static, so jump into
the project and look at the first puzzle area in front of the stairs.

Figure 12.10: Stair blocking effect
This effect is made by utilizing a channel-packed texture with three unique
cloud textures. The cloud textures are a grayscale perlin noise in Adobe
Photoshop. We took each layer and placed it in the Red, Green, and Blue
channels to have three textures in one image. This allows us to use multiple
different clouds to build our own noise pattern when animating its UVs. To
make this effect work, we needed a way to animate these UVs in multiple
ways. We chose an A set and a B set, which we created in our parameters.
Let’s go through all of our parameters to make sure we are on the same

page. We will explain why we have each parameter as we grow out of this
effect as seen in Figure 12.11 below.
We have Color, which will be setting the overall color of the arcane magic.
Cloud Tex will be the texture you can use for this shader. We then have
Offset and Tiling with both an A and B version. We will cover the two
parameters soon. Then we have two edges that are used for a Smoothstep
node.
We need to first figure out how to make our texture animate. We will be
using Tiling, Offset, and Cloud Tex to perform this initial section of the
shader.

Figure 12.11: StairShield parameters from Blackboard
Looking at Figure 12.12 below, we’ve previously seen the Sample Texture
2D and Multiply nodes. Let’s go over the Time node. This node gives you
access to the game time, the sin and cos of the game time, the delta time,
and a smoothed delta. We will be using game time and multiplying it by a
constant value for our speed. The next node that is new is the Tiling And
Offset node. This node is a utility node to help deal with tiling and
offsetting the UVs on a mesh that the material will be applied to. We assign
the offset Vector2 to the multiplication of time. This will provide a moving

value for our offset. This will animate the UVs in the direction you want
them to move.
The last part is to plug the Tiling And Offset node into the UV input of the
Sample Texture 2D node. You aren’t seeing the Offset and Tiling B set in
this image as it’s the same nodes with different parameters. The reason we
want to have multiple sets is that we want to have independent textures with
different speeds and UV tiling scales. This makes a dynamic texture in the
output.

Figure 12.12: Offset and Tiling for our cloud texture
We need to put together a seemingly never-ending tiling pattern. All of
these noise patterns are tiling in both horizontal and vertical directions.
Sometimes this is called a four-way tiling texture. We had planned to move
Offset A up in the Y axis by a faster amount and then Offset B a bit slower.
We would also tile the B set somewhere between .5 and .75. This would
give us a totally different set of noise to layer on top of the other.

Figure 12.13: Crossing the channels
In Figure 12.13 above we are making three dynamic images to put together.
Both Sample Texture 2D nodes have different tiling settings and different
offsets moving in time. Putting them together with a multiply will
inevitably create a living cloud structure as they cross paths. We’re doing
that with all three channels (R, G, B). Next, we will multiply each of these
by 5 to force the entire image channels higher than their original. Then we
add together the three channels into one output by adding the first two
multiplied nodes, then adding the third one to that, as seen below in Figure
12.14.

Figure 12.14: Multiply and Add
Now that we have a single data stream with movement, we can push values
to make a more interesting effect. We like to smoothstep data to push
anything that is close to 0 to 0 and what is close to 1 to 1. This makes the
layered data make interesting shapes as seen in Figure 12.15 below. The
problem with this is the overall cloudiness is lost in that process, so we
want to add in the previous Add and then saturate it to make sure it’s within
the range 0-1 and then multiply it by a color parameter so we change the
color in the inspector.

Figure 12.15: Smoothstep and color
The output of the color node will go into the base color. We then make a
material that uses the SH_StairShield shader, then apply it to a plane in the
scene where we wanted to show there is something blocking the stairs.

Shuriken system – stair blocker particles
layer
We like the way the stair block feels, but the effects need layers to feel like
well-made art. We also needed to spend a bit of time going over Shuriken
itself. This effect will go over some basic portions of Shuriken for
producing simple effects to layer into your world. What we will be creating
is a stretched sprite moving upward to give more energy to the stair blocker.
To begin, we wanted to make something with a default item to show the
power of particle systems. We are using the ParticlesUnlit material,
which is a simple radial gradient from the center. We sometimes call these
“math dots” as they can be created without a texture. We want to spawn
particles that have a lot of energy upward but get slowed down near the end
of their life and fade out. We will go through the settings below to make this
happen; however, we encourage you to look in the project at the particle
system and play with the settings. Make some changes to see if you can
make something you feel looks better. Share it on Discord!

The Shuriken system has a large number of parameters inside the modules.
We will only be going over the ones we modified and needed to enable for
this simple system. We implore you to look through the Unity
documentation for an explanation of all the parameters and modules. Let’s
look at the main module first, below in Figure 12.16.

Figure 12.16: Shuriken main module
The only parameters we made changes to here were Start Lifetime,
changing it to 1.4, and Start Speed, setting it to 0. We made the lifetime
change after making all of the other changes as we didn’t know exactly how
long we wanted this particle system to live. The Start Speed we put to 0
because we knew we wanted to control the velocity. We also modified the
color but we’ll override the color in the Color Over Life module later on.
The next module we will go over is Emission.

Figure 12.17: Emission module
As seen above in Figure 12.17, this is the Emission module. We changed
Rate over Time to 30 to make sure we have plenty of particles spawning.
The emission of your particles is highly dependent on what you need to
convey. For us, we wanted to have enough to add to the stair barrier shader,
but not too much that we overpower it.
We now have a bunch of particles spawning, but we know we want it to be
spawning near the bottom of the stair blocker. We will use the Shape
module to restrict the spawning to a location that makes sense to the
purpose of the effect.

Figure 12.18: Shape module and shape placed in game
We chose the shape to be a box as we wanted the particles to spawn from
the bottom of the stair blocker and move up from there to follow the flow of
the movement. We then needed to get these particles moving. We know we
wanted them moving upward quickly, thus setting 100 in Linear Z, shown
in Figure 12.19 below. This blasts them off to space, but we want to add a
drag component to our velocity to slow them down near the top. This comes
from the limit Velocity over Lifetime.

Figure 12.19: Velocity over Lifetime module
Figure 12.20 below shows where we will add drag to our particles. We’re
keeping the drag at a constant value and setting it to 5. This value gave it a
nice drag. This value wasn’t known beforehand; we just play around with it
until it feels like what we’re looking for.

Figure 12.20: Limit Velocity over Lifetime module
Next, we need to colorize these particles as they are just white math dots
going upward. Enabling the Color over Lifetime module, seen below in
Figure 12.21, allows you to define a gradient where the left side is the
beginning of the particle’s life, and the right side is the end of the particle’s
life, including the alpha of the particle if your material is set up to accept
alpha.

Figure 12.21: Color over Lifetime
Clicking on the gradient will pop up a gradient editor, which is seen below
in Figure 12.22. The top of the gradient is the alpha and the bottom is for
the color. Try to change the color on them to see it change the particles!

Figure 12.22: Gradient Editor

Now we set the render mode from the Renderer module. Since we knew
that we wanted the particles from the beginning to be stretched from the
velocity, we changed this setting to Stretched Billboard very early. If you
decided to follow along with this particle creation, your particles would
look like colored dots instead of streaks.
Changing the Render Mode to Stretched Billboard will fix that, as shown
below in Figure 12.23. We also set Speed Scale to 0.1 as they are moving
very fast, which makes them stretch very far if you go much higher than
0.1.

Figure 12.23: Renderer module
By going through these, we have just shown a simple example of a
stretched particle to show some of the systems available. The power comes
into play when you add shaders to the particles. A well-designed visual
effect can trigger the emotion of an action happening. Though this may
seem daunting at first, if you break down what you need, it becomes more
of a fun time playing with the settings to get the right feel for your need.
You will see other Shuriken effects around the level when you get into the
project. Feel free to break them apart and put them back together to learn
about the differences in the settings and how they play a part in the role of
the visual effect.
We will be going over VFX Graph in the next section. This is another
particle system creator that allows us to create GPU particles. This is a

different way of working as it has its own system design and UI outside of
the inspector. Let’s get into an example we are using in the project.

VFX Graph – Myvari’s telekinesis
Telekinesis can look like anything. We want it to seem as though Myvari is
harnessing celestial energy that is flowing from her toward the object she is
controlling. For this portion, we will cover how we set up the entire VFX
Graph, shader, and a bit of code for implementation.
We will assume that you have the VFX Graph package installed already and
have opened up the FX_BeamSetup Visual Effect Asset.
The Spawn context starts out by default with a constant spawn rate block in
this context. We want to just burst one time with 32 particles that we want
to manipulate as long as the strip is up. We deleted the constant spawn and
put in place a Single Burst block instead, as seen in Figure 12.24 below.

Figure 12.24: Spawn context

The number 32 wasn’t a special number from the beginning. We weren’t
sure how many we would need, but it’s easy enough to add more during the
process of creating the strip. Below in Figure 12.25 is our Initialize
context. We need to set Particle Per Strip Count to the same number as
the spawn in the burst above. We want a Set Size block and a Set Custom
Attribute block. This attribute block will be a float data type and we called
it InterpolatedPosition.
The reason we called it this is that we want to have an index of every
particle so we can individually place them where we want them.

Figure 12.25: Initialize context
We can see in Figure 12.26 below that we are getting the particle index and
then dividing it by one less than the total amount. The index starts at 0, so

we need to start from one below the number we spawned. This gives us a
value that we can work with and is stored in the float custom attribute we
made.

Figure 12.26: Particle Index nodes
Now we have a particle strip that needs to have a position to go to. We will
make two transform parameters in the blackboard just like we do in the
Shader Graph. We named them BeamStart and BeamEnd. We will Lerp the
particles’ positions from the beam start to the beam end according to the
interpolated position float we initialized with. Looking at Figure 12.27
below, you can see how we connect them together. The output of the Lerp
will go to the Update Context.

Figure 12.27: Positioning the beam
In the update context we have two blocks as seen below in Figure 12.28:
Set Position and Add Position. We will be adding the output of the Lerp
for their position into this block. There is one trick that will make some
strange movement happen. On the Set Position block there is a small w in
the middle. If it is an L, then that means it’s moving the local position. This
will cause double transforms when moving around the GameObjects. If you
click on the L it will change to w, which stands for world space. It is fine to
leave Add Position in local space.

Figure 12.28: Update context

Currently we have a straight beam from start to end. This is fine for testing,
but we need something a bit more fun. Let’s add some turbulence so it isn’t
so rigid. We will use the Add Position block and the input for that will be
some manipulations of 3D noise. This has a few more nodes to make the
right data for nice turbulence, but we will walk through them.
Looking at Figure 12.29 below, these five nodes are all we need. We want
to get our current position, then add that to time. We have a Multiply node
in between there so we could speed up or slow down the time value. This
could be a variable that’s tunable as well. After Add is a Perlin Noise 3D.
The values here are purely subjective. Place your coordinates in the
Coordinate slot and then place the output derivates into the Add Position
block input in the Update context. From there, play around with the values
until it gives you the nice turbulence you want. There is a problem with this
approach. This will update every particle, including the beam start and
beam end. This feels odd as we wanted it to come from our character’s
hand.

Figure 12.29: 3D Perlin Noise for turbulence
To ensure that the beam start and end are independent of this, we went with
a simple gradient to tell the position whether or not it should be using the
turbulence. Looking at Figure 12.30, we see that we take the interpolated
position value and sample it across that interpolation with time. The
gradient now acts as a transfer to which particle will be affected. The 0
value at the beginning and end of the strip will make 0 values multiplied

with the derivatives from the noise generator. Now we plug this into the
Add Position block.

Figure 12.30: Mask for the turbulence
We’re in the home stretch for setting up the VFX Graph portion. The
Output context is shown in Figure 12.31. By default this will be an Output
Particle Quad. This won’t do us any good, so delete it if you have it on
your VFX Graph and press the spacebar to make a new node. Then type
particlestrip. You’re looking for the Output ParticleStrip Quad. The
one below has unlit in the name; this is due to the material being used.

Figure 12.31: Output ParticleStrip Quad context
The shader is a duplicate of SH_StairShield with one change. In the
Graph inspector, the Support VFX Graph Boolean is set to true. This
shader has enough versatility to get the job done for now. We may change
the texture before its final use, but for now it has what we need to get it
going. We then assign it to the Shadergraph attribute in the output context.
This will expose the parameters in the shader.
There are two more steps to finalize this effect. We need to create the
GameObject’s beam start and beam end, and then implement this effect by
placing the locations of the GameObjects during gameplay.
To start, let’s make our prefab. Below in Figure 12.32 we made an empty
GameObject and named it Telekinesis. Then we placed the beam setup
object as a child and set its position at 0, 0, 0. Then we created two more
empty GameObjects and named them BeamStart and BeamEnd. We also set
these positions at 0, 0, 0.

Figure 12.32: Telekinesis prefab
There is a component you can add to VFX Graph assets called VFX
Property Binder. Add this component to the FX_BeamSetup GameObject.
We then create two bound properties to the transform and name them the
same as the properties in the VFX Graph (BeamStart and BeamEnd). Drag
the GameObject into the Target slot to reference the GameObject’s
transform. Do the same for BeamEnd. This will look like Figure 12.33
below.

Figure 12.33: VFX Property Binder component
We now need to go over the implementation. The considerations here are
that the start of the beam needed to come from our character’s left hand. We
also know we need the end to be attached to the item we are controlling
with physics. We also need to turn on and off the visual effect only when
the interact button is interacting with a physics puzzle item. We will be
working with DragRigidBody.cs.
This script takes the center of the screen as a point of reference and if you
are within range of the physics item that you can interact with, it will give
Myvari control of that Rigidbody from the use of the physics puzzle pieces
scripts we went over in Chapter 6, Interactions and Mechanics.
Fields to add:
public VisualEffect telekinesis;
public Transform leftWristLoc;
public Transform beamStart;
public Transform beamEnd;

These will be assigned in the editor and should be self-explanatory except
possibly the leftWristLoc. This transform is from Myvari’s joints in her
hierarchy. Expand her hierarchy and drag the left wrist onto this slot in the
inspector.

In the update, we want to turn off the beam if the interact button is released.
if (control.wasReleasedThisFrame)
{
//Release selected Rigidbody if there any
selectedRigidbody = null;
telekinesis.enabled = false;
}

After this we need to work with the FixedUpdate. We are working with
physics, so we need to ask the program to check if we have a Rigidbody,
and on the FixedUpdate, we will turn on the beam if true and set the
positions of the beamStart and beamEnd at every FixedUpdate loop with
the physics.
if (selectedRigidbody)
{
telekinesis.enabled = true;
…
beamStart.position = leftWristLoc.position;
beamEnd.position =
selectedRigidbody.gameObject.transform.position;
}

This is it! Save your files, get back in the editor, and assign the transforms
and visual effects to the script. This script is located in Main Camera. Figure
12.34 below shows the selected object with the script.

Figure 12.34: Main Camera location for telekinesis scripting
Particle effects and shader work are always interesting problems to be
handled with care. Too much of a good thing ends up not feeling good.
When working through a level, take a moment to think about the tiny
details and see if it makes sense to add small movements to sell the
experience.
From the above two effects, there is quite a bit of thought put into each
visual effect no matter the size of the effect. Take your time going through
each effect in the game to break down the parts.

Cinematics
In our project, we’re using cinematics for three purposes. The first one is to
explain that the area has been around a long time, so the areas are fragile.

The second one is showing the player that Myvari has innate powers by her
defending herself against a falling boulder. The third cinematic is the
ending scene when she puts on her tiara and goes through the portal after
finishing the final puzzle.
The way that we work through cinematics is we export the models while
they are in place in the environment. This allows us to make sure that our
cinematics match with the environment with as much precision as possible.

Secondary animation
Sometimes there needs to be additional animation that is easier to simulate
than it is to rig and hand-key. Hair is a good example of this. The actions
that hair takes are a secondary animation after momentum is gained. Handkeying this is possible but takes a lot of patience and can be done instead
with physics. We will be using Unity’s Spring Joint component for this.
There are also several assets in Unity’s Asset Store that have been made to
make this process more robust. If you need just simple physics for your
secondary animation, it can be done through the Unity physics Rigidbody
component, the Spring Joint component, and capsule colliders.

Lighting
We’ve decided to put lighting in the finishing touches, but this could have
had its own book. This is one of those topics that are a massive rabbit hole.
We wanted to go over some basics of lighting here and the reason why it’s
important to pay attention to lighting, as well as highlighting a few
polishing tools and how to use lighting in Unity.
First, we need to explain that lighting is an art. The purpose of lighting
includes defining 3D form, providing mood, and designing methods for
gameplay. After we go through a few design thoughts on lighting, we will
take a tour of the Unity mixed lighting, lightmaps, reflection, and light
probes.

3D form
Without lighting, a 3D form is flat. In fact, we use unlit shaders for most
effects. One reason is that we don’t need to add shadowing and lighting for
small shiny effects that will only be on screen for a short time. They are flat
and don’t need lighting to help define them; their texture shape does that
work for it.

Providing mood
This goes along with the design of the areas but is focused specifically on
the lighting. Is the alleyway getting darker as you walk down it? This could
push a sense of danger or nervousness in your player. Do you want
unnatural lighting colors around certain areas to give an arcane feeling
inside a mage’s house? Completely possible! All of these decisions should
be thought about when placing lighting. In the same vein as mood, we could
want our lights to define the gameplay.

Gameplay design
Gameplay can be defined through light in many ways. In fact, your entire
game could be designed around light.
Horror games often use light sources as a way to push away enemies, but
it’s limited to a small timer as your batteries are inevitably running out!
Taking a unique route, an older game named Boktai used a light sensor
peripheral for the Game Boy to charge up your weapons, and if you played
it in the dark the game was more difficult.
These concepts are a bit on the edge of gameplay elements. We could just
use light to give the player an idea of where to go, or where to stay away
from. We probably have a good idea now about general concepts of lighting
design and how it can influence the player’s experience. Let’s dig into
Unity lighting.

Unity lighting
To get to a polished state we need to go over the basics first. This will be an
overview of what you are capable of doing in Unity for lighting, and then
we will be going over what settings and uses we have for our project. Builtin renderer, URP, and HDRP lighting are all different from each other. We
will be talking about URP lighting specifically. We will also be pushing for
a certain feel and explaining features that helped us achieve the desired look
that we aimed for in our vertical slice. Each lighting asset can be configured
in different ways, which means that these steps will only give as much help
as needed to get your feet wet with lighting. After you go through this and
play around with what we explain, we highly recommend reading the
documentation for other lighting objects for different rendering pipelines
depending on the needs of your project. Now that we’ve gone over the
construct of lighting here, we will begin by talking about mixed lighting.

Mixed lighting
We’re taking a slight shortcut here by going into mixed lighting from the
start. To utilize mixed lighting properly, you need to be using indirect baked
lighting and dynamic lighting. We will touch on both right now, then get
back to mixed lighting.

Indirect baked lighting
Real-time lights, that are casting light rays onto static GameObjects
bouncing off geometry in the world, will be baked onto a lightmap. Those
terms are new! Static game objects are defined by selecting the Static
checkbox in the inspector, as seen in Figure 12.35 below.

Figure 12.35: Static checkbox
hen this is selected, when the game is baking its lightmaps into the
Lightmap UVs, it will know to add this to the items to bake. You would
only choose this to be static if you know for certain you will never move the
GameObject that you would make static. We are fairly certain this concrete
fence will remain solid the entire game, so we selected it as static. The next
term is lightmap. This is a secondary set of UVs that are not allowed to
overlap with the object that you want to bake the lighting onto. When you
import a model, you can let Unity generate the lightmap UVs for you, and it
does a decent job at taking care of this. You can do this by selecting the
FBX for the 3D model and choosing Generate Lightmap UVs, as in
Figure 12.36 below.
When you select the checkbox, Lightmap UV settings will show up. These
values are the average per object you have in your scene. These settings
will do a decent job of setting up the basics but you may need to look into
each attribute to make sure each object receives light the way you would
expect it to.

Figure 12.36: Generate Lightmap UVs option
That is for the objects that receive light. As for the lights, you can set any
available light to be a baked light. Directional, spot, point, and area light are
all available to be added to lightmaps when generating or baking lighting.

Dynamic lighting
This is also referred to as real-time lighting. Real-time lighting has to deal
with real-time shadows and many settings involved with this. Real-time
lighting is applied to any item that wasn’t chosen as static. Skeletal meshes
are always real time as they cannot be static. Their nature is to move!
In our URP asset we can see that in the Shadows settings, we can set the
distance to where the quality of shadows goes down. Below in Figure 12.37
you can see this range in the Shadows section.

Figure 12.37: URP Shadows settings
Each real-time light will use these settings for the shadows. Cascades are
how many times the light quality goes down. It’s set in meters by default.
This can help us design the limits as we know how tall our characters
should be in general. 1 Unity unit is by default 1 meter. You could set up a
test scene to see what the shadows would look like for the distance of each
cascade to help make these decisions.
Something that’s unique to real-time lights is the four lights that are
available.
The directional, point, and spot lights are available for real-time lighting
information. Area lights cannot create real-time shadows.

Now that we’ve gone over the basics of real-time and indirect lighting, we
need to get back into mixed lighting mode. First, we need to let you know
how to put lights on the scene. In Figure 12.38 below you can see the list of
lights. You can access this menu just as you create any GameObject, by
right-clicking in the hierarchy or going to the GameObject menu and
hovering over the Light option to get the submenu seen in Figure 12.38.

Figure 12.38: Light options
Now we need to get back to mixed lighting. We’ve talked about both
lighting modes. Some games may only use baked lighting while some
games might only use real-time lighting. The majority will use both in URP.
When you select any light that you make, the inspector has an option to
choose real-time, mixed, or baked. Remember, baked means baked indirect
light. The best part of mixed is that it allows the light to be baked where it
is, but acts as dynamic when introduced to a non-static GameObject. This is
useful for the directional light. This light acts like the sun, so we want it to
bake for the static items, but be dynamic for the character or anything nonstatic. You can see this selected within the inspector in Figure 12.39 below.

Figure 12.39: Directional light set to mixed
Even after you’ve set all the meshes to static that you need to, and placed
lights and set them to either real-time, baked, or mixed, you still need to set
up your lighting settings within the lighting window. To get there, use the
screenshot below, in Figure 12.40.

Figure 12.40: Path to the lighting window
Within the window that pops up, you will have several tunable settings.
These settings are going to be unique for every project. We know that we
want some nice shadow fidelity. This means we need more samples and
higher resolution for our lightmaps. We’re also going to be fairly close to
the character in the game and during cinematics, which is still real time.
These factors need to be considered when thinking about your settings. You
could potentially crank up the settings and have nice shadows with a huge
light bake, but then your real-time shadows might not be able to handle it
and will be blocky, which will cause the game to have a strange feel to it.
It’s good to consider the system your game will be played on and
thoroughly test the performance again after adding more lights and
lightmaps.
There is another tool to use to gain more accurate real-time lighting
information inside Unity without needing to have a lot of real-time lights. It
is called light probes. Let’s take a look at that tool.

Light probes
Creating light probes is as easy as going to your Light GameObject group
and selecting Light Probe Group.
You can see this in the options three figures above in Figure 12.38. What
this tool does is sample the lighting information at points in 3D which are
shown in Figure 12.42. That information is then used in real time even if
the lighting is baked information only. This is very helpful if you want to
use the coloration from an area light (which is only baked) and add it to a
character. Think about a light on a wall where you don’t need to cast a
shadow or for it to be real time. Instead of being resource-intensive, you can
just use light probes around that area and it will help pick up on non-static
geometry in real time.
To set this up though, you need to place light probes by hand. There are
assets on the Asset Store to automatically place them but keep in mind that

anything automated in the entertainment industry needs to have an artist’s
input to achieve what the experience needs.
Light Probe Group when editing the group looks like Figure 12.41 below
in the inspector.

Figure 12.41: Light Probe Group component in inspector
You can add, delete, select all, and duplicate selected. When you’re placing
Light Probes, just know that they are averages of multiple color locations.
These aren’t a perfect representation of the light in one area, but more of an
approximation to give a bit of extra boost to ensure the mood is kept for the
real-time actors in the game. With that being said, add probes until they
form a nice lattice. The more you have, the more computational power it
will take. For each project, as usual, it will depend on the system to know
how many light probes will be allowed for performance.
After you’ve placed them, you can either press play and walk around, or
just drag your non-static GameObjects around the scene to see the lighting
shift slightly.
Here is an example of the initial hallway of our vertical slice’s light probe
lattice in Figure 12.42.

Figure 12.42: Light Probe lattice
This can take some time and will be done after placing your lights. If you
change up your lighting configuration, make sure to rethink your light
probes as well afterward. There is just one last thing before we get to
polishing sound. We want to go over reflections.

Reflection probe
There are materials in the world that reflect the color of the environment.
These are metallic and/or glossy materials. The problem is, what do they
reflect? I’m happy you asked that because Unity initially will create a
reflection map of just the skybox so there is something reflected in those
materials. There is another tool you can add to your scene, which is a
reflection probe that will allow you to designate a volume that has the
reflection data in that area. You can also have overlapping volumes.
This is an interesting issue as it’s not a perfect representation as the probe’s
reflection position is from the center of the position of that probe. If you
have a large area, and you need to be very close to the reflections while also
needing that reflection to be accurate, you will need multiple reflection
probes, with each probe’s volumes only as large as you need them. The
smaller the volume, the crisper the reflection image. These types of things
won’t be very clear until you have run around the world and looked for this

or worked through the cinematics of your game and seen a strange-looking
reflection. There is a small caveat here; you can create real-time reflections,
but they are very expensive. These should be used with caution. That is
until we all have quantum computers in our houses.
To create a reflection probe, the option is in the same place as all the rest of
the lighting, in the GameObject menu under Lighting.
When you create the probe and place it in the location you want to reflect
around, you will have to then use the inspector to edit the volume, which
looks like the below Figure 12.43.

Figure 12.43: Reflection Probe component in the inspector
The top-center two icons are for editing and moving the volume. Selecting
the points icon gives you access to the volume’s shape to shrink and grow it
to your needs. The type can be Baked, Real-time, or Custom. Baked will
only be baked once and cannot change during runtime. Real-time changes
as the game is running every frame. Custom allows you to place your own
custom cubemap instead of sampling the environment. This could be useful
if you want to distort the environment in the reflections! The cubemap

settings are to tweak the cubemap’s scale and parameters to increase the
needed fidelity at a performance cost.
One of the most important settings is the Importance setting! This setting
is an integer that you set to tell the game which reflection probe is being
displayed when there are overlapping reflection volumes.
The way this works is that the higher the number, the higher the importance.
If you have two overlapping volumes, such as inside the entrance to a cave
versus right outside of it, you would then set the hallway to importance
level 2. This way when you enter the volume that is of higher importance,
the reflection probe will switch to it. This can cause some popping on very
close reflection surfaces. Play through your game and pay attention to
reflections when they transition.
Adding lighting overall is a fun task. It can greatly improve the graphical
quality of your game and there are some great tricks to set that up. Next up
is sound polish.

Sound polish
We have a few things we can do to make sounds in our game more
believable. Sound polish comes down to tweaking the volume of sounds,
changing the minimum and maximum attenuation distances, and even
replacing sounds that you feel don’t sound good.
These are all things we’ve adjusted throughout the project already. For
example, on one of our first ambiences, we can adjust the volume or pitch
to see what feels right. Or we can change the minimum or maximum
distances on the attenuation, add sounds that we may have missed, make
sure that certain sounds that are more important are louder than others, etc.
Overall, mixing and sound polish is a very iterative process of just
manipulating the values and replacing sounds with other sounds to get a
feel for what’s best. You never know how a sound will fit with the rest of
the sounds until you place it in the game.

Triggering sound through animation
events
We wanted to show you how to add sound to an animation event. It’s quite
an easy process as we already know how to add animation events, and how
to trigger sounds using AudioSource components. We’ll be adding footstep
sounds to our character walking.
First let’s select our character, the MyvariWithCameraRig:

Figure 12.44: MyvariWithCameraRig
Then let’s drop down into its child objects to find the SM_Myvari
GameObject. Here you will see the animator component! We only need a
few things here.
First, let’s create a new script and call it AnimationSounds, then we’ll put
this right below our Animator Component. After this, we’ll add our
AudioSource component. It should all look something like Figure 12.45
below:

Figure 12.45: SM_Myvari inspector window
Before we continue forward, let’s add a function to our AnimationSounds
script. Remove the Start and Update functions and add a new one called
PlaySound(). Above this new function, declare a new public variable called
public AudioSource AnimSound.

Figure 12.46: Our new AnimationSounds.cs
Now, inside of our PlaySound() function, let’s add AnimSound.Play().
Next, in the inspector, we can add the AudioSource component to the
serialized field in the AnimationSounds.cs component and add a footstep
sound effect!

Figure 12.47: AnimationSounds.cs script in the inspector
Awesome! Now we can move on to tagging our animation with events.

Tagging animations with events for
sound
One big problem that we have with adding animation events is that we can’t
add events directly through the animation window, so we’ll have to open up
the FBX file inside of Unity.
The best way to do this is to go into Assets > Animations and select the
Myvari_Walk_Basic FBX.

Figure 12.48: The project explorer in Unity in the Assets > Animations
folder
Next we’ll scroll down on the inspector until we reach the Events
dropdown.

Figure 12.49: Animation clip inspector window
Open up that Events dropdown, and also open up the Preview window at
the bottom of the inspector.
It might be hidden at the bottom of the inspector, but you can click and drag
from the bottom to bring it up! It should look something like Figure 12.50:

Figure 12.50: Animation Clip inspector window preview
Next, using the timeline above the preview, we can cycle to different parts
of the animation. In particular, we are trying to find places for footsteps, so
we’ll want to find spots like this, where the foot is meeting the ground:

Figure 12.51: Animation Clip inspector window preview
Once your timeline is lined up, go ahead and add an animation event. And
in the spot that says Function, type in PlaySound — do not include the
parentheses you’ve seen previously (in PlaySound())! For some reason,
including the parentheses won’t trigger our function properly.
Here is where we placed our events.

Figure 12.52: Animation Clip inspector window timeline with events
Now, when you go into the game and walk around, you’ll hear sound!
Congrats! We now have footstep sounds!

Randomized sounds

You’ll probably notice that our footstep sound is fairly repetitive. This is
why we often like to add randomized sounds to a game!
This is a process of randomly playing from a pool of sound effects so that
sounds will be less repetitive! In this instance, we have five different
footstep sound effects to choose from, which can be found in
/Assets/Sounds:
MainFS_01.wav – MainFS_05.wav

Next, let’s open up our AnimationSounds.cs script and check out how we
can add randomized sounds. So in this instance, we’re going to use a list of
AudioClips, like this:

Figure 12.53: Animation.cs public list soundPool
Then, inside of PlaySound we’re going to select a random clip from this,
and load it into our AudioSource component. We’ll use Random.Range to
accomplish this:

Figure 12.54: Animation.cs PlaySound() function
Next, let’s open up the inspector where our AnimationSounds.cs script lies,
highlight all of our MainFS.wav sounds, and click and drag them directly
into our sound pool serialized field:

Figure 12.55: Animation.cs in the inspector
And that’s all! We now are playing from a pool of random sounds!

Randomized pitch
Sometimes adding even more variation can be accomplished through
randomizing the pitch. This is a very simple process as well. The first thing
we have to do is define the range of pitch that we will affect.
I like to just play the sound and play around with the pitch to see where it
sounds good. Open up the AudioSource component that holds our footstep
sound and toggle the Pitch slider! This will update in real time.

Figure 12.56: AudioSource component

You’ll hear that going too high or too low makes a fairly unrealistic sound.
So I like to stick to a range of 0.3 and -0.3. In our code, let’s just add a
simple Random.Range() while targeting the pitch of our AudioSource
component.

Figure 12.57: AudioSource component showing how random pitch is
achieved
This is all we need! One of the most important ways to create depth in the
soundscape of our game is to add as many sources as possible. And adding
things like random variation, sound to small details in animations, and
dynamic audio can go a long way! Go ahead and play the game to hear your
changes.

Summary
This chapter went over many different tools that we have worked through
within our project. We took some time to go over our process for finalizing
the art and assets. We focused not only on the models and textures but also
on checking in on the design to make sure that each asset fits within the
world as expected. Within this, we also went over adding effects from the
Shuriken and VFX Graph particle systems. This included the
implementation of effects to show telekinesis.
We then went over the lighting design. We broke down Unity lighting with
lightmaps, reflection, light probes, and baking. Lighting can add so much to
a game, so this part shouldn’t be taken lightly!
Then to round up our game polish we went through sound polishing to
trigger sounds through animations and add randomness to the sounds to
bring more life to the gameplay.
This is it for the book! Thank you so much for reading all the way through
and we hope it provided you with lots of knowledge. Please consider

joining the Discord server, where we will be able to answer questions and
go over the project in more detail.
There is a bonus chapter after this that goes over some more Unity tools
that can be used for different projects as well as some products that Unity
has to offer for multiplayer, XR, and visual scripting. Let us know if you
would like a book on those topics as well!

Bonus: Other Unity Tools!
Across this book, we have gone through a third-person environmental
puzzle vertical slice. This is a specific genre of game with its own unique
problems in development, and this does mean that a lot of Unity’s great
tools weren’t mentioned, so we wanted to take a small section and write
about what other offerings Unity could provide for your next project. We
will cover an introductory-level understanding of the following:
Multiplayer
XR
Machine Learning Agents
Bolt visual scripting

Unity Gaming Services
We’ve explored a group of tools named Unity Gaming Services, or UGS.
These tools are designed to provide solutions that would take a significant
amount of time to develop and can be integrated into your project in much
less time. These tools can help directly with setting up multiplayer, XR
(which is a mixture of virtual reality and augmented reality), visual
scripting (known as Bolt), and finally a group of creative workflow tools.
Let’s first look into the multiplayer tools available.

Multiplayer tools
Unity provides a surplus of services, ranging from pivotal tools and
education to successfully implementing that multiplayer factor into your
project. Breaking down the category of multiplayer, Unity divides the focus
into three pillars: Creation, Connection, and Communication.

Creation
Unity considers this the foundation of your game and introduces the options
of Netcode for GameObjects and Netcode for Entities. Netcode for
GameObjects is a new networking library built for the Unity game engine
that contains libraries, tutorials, and samples that are customizable and
extensible to meet the needs of your next multiplayer project.
Netcode for Entities takes advantage of Unity’s new Data-Oriented
Technology Stack (DOTS). This new, high-performance, multithreaded
DOTS allows you to take full advantage of multicore processors to create
richer user experiences and iterate faster with C# code that’s easier to read
and reuse across other projects. DOTS provides an intuitive sandbox for
programmers to create safe, multithreaded code for an array of multiplayer
development advantages.
Focusing on streamable data, DOTS allows for the flexibility of reusing
code, helps others to understand it, and improves collaboration. Having
these various capabilities, DOTS transforms pre-existing workflows into the
conversion workflow. This workflow converts your GameObjects to entities
with a single click. At runtime, the Entity Preview Inspector visualizes how
DOTS transforms your GameObjects into entities. In tandem, using the
Unity Live Link feature will allow you to iterate instantly in Play Mode
without creating a new build every time. Harnessing a faster iteration
without having to create a new build every time allows you and your team
to test game experiences on target devices in real time.
Unity has created DOTS packages for use with their stack of usable assets.
They highly recommend that you use preview packages for testing and preproduction phases of your projects at this time as they verify packages to
become production-ready.

Connection
User experiences in multiplayer gameplay are often associated with
matchmaking, pre-and post-game lobbies, and queue times. Unity has

developed services to complement these cooperative engagements through
Lobby, Relay, Multiplay, and Matchmaker.
Unity Lobby grants players the ability to connect before or during a game
session. Public lobbies can be created by the players using simple game
attributes. These lobbies can be searched, discovered, and joined by other
players. Private lobbies can allow players to create exclusive spaces for
invite-only guests.
Relay is a service-to-service tool offered by Unity that pairs well with
Lobby. When a player disconnects from a game, Relay will automatically
remove the disconnected players and will notify you of the unexpected
disconnects. In addition, you can access a reliable foundation for your
cooperative game with Netcode for GameObjects.
Multiplay offers a resilient, multi-cloud hybrid game server through Unity.
This service allows you to access server hosting and matching without
having to build and maintain your own backend infrastructure. Focused on
delivering smoother player experiences, Unity has invested in the creation
of over 190 data centers that are designed for resilience and performance at
scale. These servers operate across the globe, upholding a standard of
Quality of Service (QoS). The QoS locates the optimum region for match
connectivity, giving your players the most stable connection wherever
they’re playing from, thereby maximizing player engagement, reducing
downtime, and delivering new content to your players regardless of
platform.
Matchmaker is created through an open source collaboration with Google
called Open Match. Matchmaker is also part of Unity’s dedicated game
server hosting solution, Multiplay, offering out-of-the-box integration for
Unity’s Enterprise customers that can scale to various player base
capacities. Matchmaker contains developer-configured match logic, a
customizable evaluator, and a matchmaking loop with scheduled match
function execution as its hosting solutions to match your players in the right
place, at the right time.

Communication

Player engagement and retention happens when experiences are healthy,
immersive, and have a solid quality of interaction with each other. Unity
offers player engagement tools to support positive social experiences
through Vivox and Community and Safety.
Vivox is an easy-to-implement and dependable feature that supports a
feature-rich voice and text chat service for your game. Trusted by industryleading titles such as Valorant, League of Legends, Rainbow Six Siege, and
PUBG, Vivox delivers the best comms service to their players. Operational
with any platform, around the globe, and on any game engine, Vivox can be
integrated in less than two days and scaled to millions of players.
Coming soon is Unity’s latest addition to its communication arsenal,
Community and Safety. Unity’s focus with this platform is player safety
analysis and game management.

XR plugin
XR is an umbrella term that encompasses the following applications:
Virtual Reality (VR) and Augmented Reality (AR). VR creates a unique
environment completely around its user. AR overlays digital content over
the real world through the lenses of technical devices. XR applies a
combination of both environments of the user’s real world and the digital
world to interact with one another.
Unity has developed a new plugin framework called XR SDK. This
framework enables XR providers to successfully integrate with the Unity
engine and all its features for optimization of each application mentioned
previously.
Unity supports these platforms for XR:
ARKit
ARCore
Microsoft HoloLens

Windows Mixed Reality
Magic Leap
Oculus
OpenXR
PlayStation VR
Unity does not currently support XR on WebGL.
This plugin-based approach allows Unity to adapt with quick bug fixes,
distribute SDK updates from platform partners, and support new XR
devices without having to modify the core engine.

Machine Learning Agents
Unity understands that the advancement of Artificial Intelligence (AI)
research depends on resolving tough problems in existing environments
using current benchmarks for training AI models. When a game becomes
complex, developers will need to create intelligent behaviors, which may
lead to writing tons of code with highly specialized tools.
Unity has created a Machine Learning Agents (ML-Agents) toolkit that
means that you no longer need to “code” emergent behaviors, but instead
teach intelligent agents to “learn” through a combination of deep
reinforcement and imitation learning.
Therefore, this allows developers to create AI environments that are more
physically, visually, and cognitively rich, along with more compelling
gameplay and enhanced game experiences.

Bolt visual scripting
Develop gameplay mechanics with interaction logic visually. Bolt allows
you to create visual, graph-based systems, instead of writing out traditional
lines of code. Through visual scripting, Bolt promotes seamless

collaboration between teams of designers, artists, and programmers for
faster prototyping and iteration.
More technical team members can empower non-programmers with custom
nodes to encourage productivity regardless of the level of programming
knowledge. Bolt offers Flow Graphs, State Graphs, Live Editing,
Debugging and Analysis, Codebase Compatibility, and Ease of Use, which
we will describe below.

Flow Graphs
Flow Graphs will be the main tool for interaction in your projects. Using
node-based actions and values, these graphs will let you dictate logic in any
order you specify.

State Graphs
State Graphs allow you to create self-contained behaviors that command
objects what actions to execute when they achieve a particular state. State
Graphs are compatible with high-level logic such as AI behaviors, scene or
level structure, or any behaviors to transition between states.

Live Editing
Live Editing can be done in real time to graphs in Play Mode. Quickly
iterate and test ideas without needing to recompile project changes.

Debugging and Analysis
Debugging and Analysis can be found during Play Mode across the visual
scripted graph. Bolt will highlight which nodes are being executed and then,
if an error is to occur, the node will be easily identifiable.

Codebase Compatibility
Codebase Compatibility allows for any third-party plugin or custom
scripts to be used within your graphs. Visual scripting accesses your code
base directly via reflection and is always up to date, irrespective of whether
it is a method, field, property, or event from Unity.
Ease of Use
Ease of Use visual scripting is designed to be accessible by less technical
creators through user-friendly features, commenting, and searchable
capabilities.

Summary
This chapter’s purpose was to show some of the capabilities that Unity can
offer you on your next game design ventures. They weren’t used in our
project, which is why we left them to a bonus chapter. The multiplayer tools
are an incredible source to have for making multiplayer games. By bringing
together the plugins from AR and VR into an XR plugin, we now have a
nice, centralized plugin for all of the altered realities regardless of the
hardware you are using. Then, to conclude this book, we talked about Bolt’s
visual scripting. If programming isn’t easy for you to work with, consider
checking that out.
We hope you learned some things from this book and had a good time while
doing so. We mentioned at the beginning and throughout the book that the
community on Discord is a good place to be if you want to engage with
others who have purchased this book or other Packt-published, Unitycentric books. We would love to see you there and help with your next great
idea.

Other Books You May Enjoy
If you enjoyed this book, you may be interested in these other books by
Packt:

Coding Roblox Games Made Easy, Second Edition
Zander Brumbaugh
ISBN: 9781803234670
Use Roblox Studio and other free resources
Learn coding in Luau: basics, game systems, physics manipulation, etc
Test, evaluate, and redesign to create bug-free and engaging games
Use Roblox programming and rewards to make your first game
Move from lobby to battleground, build avatars, locate weapons to
fight
Character selection, countdown timers, locate escape items, assign
rewards
Master the 3 Ms: Mechanics, Monetization, Marketing (and
Metaverse)

50 cool things to do in Roblox

Game Development Patterns with Unity 2021, Second Edition
David Baron
ISBN: 9781800200814
Structure professional Unity code using industry-standard
development patterns
Identify the right patterns for implementing specific game mechanics
or features
Develop configurable core game mechanics and ingredients that can be
modified without writing a single line of code
Review practical object-oriented programming (OOP) techniques and
learn how they’re used in the context of a Unity project
Build unique game development systems such as a level editor
Explore ways to adapt traditional design patterns for use with the
Unity API

101 UX Principles, Second Edition
Will Grant
ISBN: 9781803234885
Work with user expectations, not against them
Make interactive elements obvious and discoverable
Optimize your interface for mobile
Streamline creating and entering passwords
Use animation with care in user interfaces
How to handle destructive user actions

Packt is searching for authors like you
If you’re interested in becoming an author for Packt, please visit
authors.packtpub.com and apply today. We have worked with thousands of
developers and tech professionals, just like you, to help them share their
insight with the global tech community. You can make a general

application, apply for a specific hot topic that we are recruiting an author
for, or submit your own idea.

Share your thoughts
Now you’ve finished Unity 3D Game Development, we’d love to hear your
thoughts! Scan the QR code below to go straight to the Amazon review
page for this book and share your feedback or leave a review on the site that
you purchased it from.

https://packt.link/r/1801076146
Your review is important to us and the tech community and will help us
make sure we’re delivering excellent quality content.

Index
Symbols
2D sounds 241, 242
3D game development, components
cameras 6
collision detection 10
coordinate systems 4
edges 6
faces 6
local space versus world space 5, 6
materials 7-9
meshes 6
rigid body physics 9, 10
shaders 7-9
textures 7-9
vectors 6
vertices 6
3D Geometry 104
3D puzzle adventure game

game loop 125
interaction 126
interactive volumes 142
rings 132
stairs interaction 126
tight spaces 140
3D sounds 242
2D ambience 251
ambient sounds, adding to game 249, 250
ambient sounds, filling out 251
audio listener part I 243
audio listener part II 246-249
settings 243-245
using 242
A
Action Maps 74
Add node 218
Alpha version 28
Ambient Occlusion (AO) 213
analysis tools

Frame debugger 267
Memory profiler 265, 266
Physics debugger 267-269
Profiler module 267
Unity profiler 264, 265
Andrewvscott
reference link 233
Angular Drag 146
animation
tagging, with events for sound 316-319
animation events
sound, triggering through 314-316
asset 18
asset finalization 278, 279
architecture cleanup 283
cinematics 304
detail meshes 287
detail normal 280-282
environment clutter 286, 287
polishing effects 287

secondary animation 305
stylized pass on assets 279
texture blending 284-286
B
backface culling 283
Beat Saber 151
Beta version 28
Blackboard 213, 214
Blipsounds
reference link 233
blocking-out phase 90
bolt visual scripting 327
Codebase Compatibility 327
Debugging and Analysis 327
Ease of Use 328
Flow Graphs 327
Live Editing 327
State Graphs 327
broken pedestal 153
design 154

implementation 154
Build settings 258
architecture 259
autoconnect profiler 260
compression method 261
create Visual Studio solution 259
deep profiling support 260
development build 259
Scenes In Build block 258, 259
script debugging 260
scripts only build 261
server build 259
target platform 259
built-in rendering 30
C
cameras 6
canvas component 182
Additional Shader Channel 184
Render Mode options 184
render modes 183

Canvas Scaler 185
Constant Pixel Size 185-187
Scale With Screen Size 185, 186
center attribute 72
channel packing 221
character
concept 54-58
designing 54
movement, scripting 68
need for 54
character controllers 67
built-in 68
Rigidbody 68
character rigging 58
animation 66, 67
animation-first thinking 58
bones and joints 61
constraints 62, 63
controls 64
deformation 59

deformers 64
Forward Kinematics (FK) 62
hierarchy 60, 61
Human Inverse Kinematics (HIK) system 66
Inverse Kinematics (IK) 62
physics-based animation 66
character script, for movement and rotations 68
code entry point 77
code, updating 78-80
idling 75, 76
methods 80-82
RequireComponent 78
Unity, initial setup 69-75
cinematics 304
Codebase Compatibility 327
collection 123
collision detection 10, 149
Continuous 150
Continuous Dynamic 150
Continuous Speculative 151

Discrete 149, 150
Color node 218
compression method, Build settings
default 261
LZ4 261
LZ4HC 261
constraints, character rigging 62, 63
Constraints, Rigidbody component 151
control rig 61
controls, character 64
D
data types 41
bool 42
float 43
GameObject 44
integer/int 42
strings 43
Dead Space 170
Debugging and Analysis visual scripting 327
debug log 47

decrementer 47
deformers 64
detail normal 280, 281
Boolean keyword 283
Combine node 281
Multiply node 281
Normal Reconstruct Z node 281
Normal Strength node 282
Sample Texture 2D node 281
Scale and Bias nodes 281
Swizzle node 281
UV node 281
Diegetic UI form 169, 170
Digital Content Creation (DCC) 58, 220
doom-style controller 68
Drag, Rigidbody component 146
dynamic lighting 308-310
E
Ease of Use visual scripting 328
edge flow 59

edges 6
elements, sound design
envelope 233, 234
frequency 236, 237
layering 238
pitch 235
source 232, 233
emissive map 210
envelope, sound design elements 233
attack sound 234
release sound 235
escape menu 177, 178
events for sound
used, for tagging animation 316-319
Extrude tool 113
extrusions 114
F
faces 6
facial deformation 59
final puzzle 154

coroutine 161, 162
design 155
execution order 155-157
implementation 155
project code 162-165
static method 158
UnityActions 159, 160
first-person shooters (FPSs) 124
Flow Graphs 327
for loop 47
versus while loop 48
Forward Kinematics (FK) 62
four-way tiling texture 290
Fragment Nodes 206
frame debugger 267
frequency, sound design elements 236, 237
functional testing 262
examples 262, 263
G
game design document 22, 23

game design fundamentals 21
concepting 26-28
deliberate decisions 23, 24
iterative production 24-26
game loop 119-121
game mechanics 121
collection 123
design and implementation 124, 125
limitations 123
research 123
resource management 122
risk versus reward 122
spatial awareness 122
GameObject (GO) 18, 44
game view 15, 16
generic type 136
gimbal locking 82
Graphic Raycaster Component 187, 188
Graph Inspector 214, 215
grayboxing 32

H
heads-up display (HUD) 171
heuristic design 22
hierarchy 11, 12
High-Definition Rendering Pipeline (HDRP) 29-31
High-Level Shader Language (HLSL) 201
Human Inverse Kinematics (HIK) system 66
I
idle break animation 54
if statements 45
indirect baked lighting 306, 307
infinite loop 46
Info block, Rigidbody component 151, 152
insets 114
inspector 13, 14
Integrated Development Environment (IDE) 37
interaction 121
design and implementation 124, 125
interaction UI implementation 195-197
interactive Unity UI Objects 188

interactive volumes 142
design 142
implementation 142, 143
Internal UI 168
Interpolate 148
inventory systems 174
Inverse Kinematics (IK) 62
Is Kinematic boolean 147
item interaction system 175
iteration 116
iterative design or production 24
J
journal implementation 194, 195
L
Label 189
layering, sound design elements 238
Lerp node 219
lighting 305
overview 278
lighting, purpose

3D form 305
gameplay design 305
mood, providing 305
Unity lighting 306
light probes 310-312
Lit Shader Graph 203
Live Editing 327
localization testing 270
local space
versus world space 5, 6
Long-Term Support (LTS) release 28, 29
low barrier of entry 174
M
Machine Learning Agents (ML-Agents) 326
main menu 174-176
implementation 192-194
Main Preview 215
Mass property, Rigidbody 146
Master Stack 205-208
Ambient Occlusion (AO) 213

base color 208
emissive 210-213
metallic 209
normal 209
smoothness 210
Master Stack sections
Fragment 205
Vertex 205
Matchmaker 325
materials 7-9
memory leak 270
Memory profiler 265, 266
meshes 6
meta-progression 120
meta UI 172, 173
method 48-50
Minecraft
game loop 120
Minimum Viable Product (MVP) 24, 34
mood board 88

examples 88, 89
movement-related scripts 69
multiplayer tools 323
multiplayer tools pillars
communication 325
connection 324, 325
creation 324
Multiply node 219, 220
N
Narrative 168
nodes 216, 217
Add node 218
Color node 218
Lerp node 219
Multiply node 219, 220
Sample Texture 2D node 220
Saturate node 221
Split node 221
UV node 222
Vector node 222, 223

non-diegetic UI form 171
null 45, 163
O
Object Oriented Programing 41
official release version 28
order of execution, for event functions
reference link 155
P
package manager 16, 17
packages 20
paint holes tool 95
painting
details 104
Paint Terrain tool 94
paint textures tool 97-99
Paint Trees tool 102, 103
parenting 63
Particle Systems 223
Shuriken 223, 224
VFX Graph 224-228

performance testing 263
Physically Based Rendering (PBR) 203
physics-based animation 66
physics debugger 267-269
physics interaction 152
pitch, sound design elements 235
plane 7
PlayerInput 72
playtesting 269, 270
polishing effects 287
Shuriken system 292-296
stair blocker 287-292
VFX Graph 296-304
Positional anchoring 182
Prefab 20, 71
premade shapes 115
ProBuilder 105, 106
installing 106
Object mode 108
shapes, creating 109, 110

shapes, editing 111
tools 112-115
Window path 107
Profiler module 267
programming logic 44
project window 14, 15
Proof of Concept (PoC) 33, 34
prototyping 31
grayboxing 32
Minimum Viable Product (MVP) 34
vertical slice 34
wireframing or paper creation 31
puzzle sound
adding 254, 255
tree puzzle sound 255
R
Raising or Lowering Terrain brush 95
randomized pitch 321
randomized sounds
adding 319

real-time lighting 308
real-time strategy (RTS) games 122
Rect transform 180-182
refactoring 137
render mode options
Pixel Perfect 184
Sort Order 184
Target Display 184
render modes 183
Screen Space, camera option 183
Screen Space, overlay option 183
World Space canvas 184
research 123
resource management 122
ribbon rig 64
Rigidbody
design and implementation considerations 152
Rigidbody component 145, 146
Angular Drag 146
Collision Detection 149

Constraints 151
Drag 146
Info 151, 152
Interpolate 148
Is Kinematic boolean 147
Mass 146
Use Gravity boolean 147
Rigidbody physics 9, 10
Rings puzzle 133
control 139, 140
design 133, 134
implementation 134
puzzle pieces 135-139
puzzle trigger volumes 134, 135
risk
versus reward 122
rocks falling 153
design 153
implementation 153
S

Sample Texture 2D node 220
Saturate node 221
scale 57
scenes 18
scene view 11, 12
scriptable rendering pipeline (SRP) 30
built-in rendering 30
culling 30
High-Definition Rendering Pipeline (HDRP) 31
post-processing 30
rendering 30
Universal Rendering Pipeline (URP) 30
scroll view 190
sculpting tool 56
Shader Graph 201
creating 202, 203
Lit Shader Graph 203
setup 201, 202
Sprite Lit Shader Graph 204
Sprite Unlit Shader Graph 204

Unlit Shader Graph 204
Shader Graph interface 204
Blackboard 213
Graph Inspector 214, 215
Main Preview 215
Master Stack 205-208
node 216, 217
shaders 7-9
Shuriken system 223, 224, 292-296
sketches
examples 87, 88
sketching 86
SKYES Audio
reference link 233
smoothing 100, 101
soak testing 270
sound 231
designing, for scale 238
making, for game 239
overview 278

puzzle sound, rotating 254, 255
tree puzzle sound, adding 255
triggering, through player interaction 251
triggering, through Unity events 252, 253
sound design 232
elements 232
implementing, for project 239
sound design, for project
2D sound 241, 242
3D sounds 242
music 240, 241
organizing 240
sound, playing 239
sound polish 314
animation, tagging with events 316-319
sound, triggering through animation events 314-316
source, sound design elements 232, 233
spatial awareness 122
spatial tooltip 178
spatial UI 171

Split node 221
Sprite Lit Shader Graph 204
Sprite Unlit Shader Graph 204
staging 89
stair blocker 287-292
stairs interaction 126
design 126-128
implementation 128
interaction block 128-131
interaction manager 131, 132
stair blocker 131
stamp tool 101
State Graphs 327
static objects 150
Stretched anchoring 182
string interpolation 47
T
telekinesis 152
ternary function 80
terrain

creating 91
height, setting 99, 100
height, smoothing 100, 101
lowering 95
painting 94
raising 95
settings 92, 93
stamping 101
testing
functional testing 262, 263
game testing 261
localization testing 270
performance testing 263
playtesting 269, 270
soak testing 270
text 189
texture blending 284-286
textures 7-9
tight spaces 140
design 140

implementation 141
Tiling And Offset node 289
Time node 289
transform 4
Transform component 18
U
UI elements 173
health representation 175
inventory systems 174
item interaction system 175
main menu 174
Unity
building with 257
fundamentals 40, 41
initial setup 69-75
Unity canvas system 179, 180
canvas component 182
Canvas Scaler 185
Graphic Raycaster component 187, 188
Rect transform 180-182

Unity concepts 18
asset 18
components 18, 19
GameObject (GO) 18
packages 20
prefabs 20
scenes 18
script 19
Unity environment 38-40
setting up 37
Unity events
sound, triggering through 252, 253
Unity Gaming Services (UGS)
bolt visual scripting 327
Machine Learning Agents (ML-Agents) 326
multiplayer tools 323
XR plugin 326
Unity Hub 28
Unity interface 11
game view 15, 16

inspector 13, 14
package manager 16, 17
Project window 14, 15
scene view and hierarchy 11, 12
Unity lighting 306
light probes 310-312
mixed lighting 306
reflection probe 312, 313
Unity profiler 264, 265
Unity project 28
scriptable rendering pipeline (SRP) 30
template, selecting 29
Unity Hub 28
version, selecting 28, 29
Unity Terrain 90
Unity UI 179
implementation 192
Unity UI objects 188-191
Universal Rendering Pipeline (URP) 7, 29, 30
Unlit Shader Graph 204

Use Gravity boolean 147
user experience (UX) 271
branding 271
design 271
final puzzle 274, 275
first puzzle 272, 273
initial problem 272
secondary mechanic 273, 274
usability 271
user guidance 56
user interface 168, 169
Diegetic 169, 170
in project 175
meta 172, 173
non-diegetic 171
spatial 171
using directive 40
UV node 222
V
variables 41

Vector node 222, 223
vectors 6
vertical slice 34
vertices 6
VFX Graph 224-228, 296-304
nodes 229
visual effects
overview 200
visual elements 188
visual Unity UI Objects 188
W
while loop
debug log 47
decrementer 47
string interpolation 47
versus while loop 48
while loops 46, 47
world space 5
versus local space 5, 6
X

XR plugin 326

