Volume Profile
Market Profile
Order Flow
Next Generation of Daytrading

​

​J o h a n n e s F o r t h m a n n

Impressum
Author: Johannes Forthmann
1. Edition

Copyright 2020, All Rights Reserved
Published by Forthmann Book Publishing, Vana-Veerenni tn4, 10135
Tallinn, Estonia
Email: j.forthmann@futuretrade.ch
This work is copyrighted. All rights of exploitation, also in extracts, are
reserved.

About the author
Johannes Forthmann is a German economist with more than 20 years
of experience in the Futures markets. He worked for a Swiss
commodity and asset management company.

RISK DISCLOSURE
FUTURES AND FOREX TRADING CONTAINS SUBSTANTIAL RISK AND IS NOT FOR
EVERY INVESTOR. AN INVESTOR COULD POTENTIALLY LOSE ALL OR MORE THAN
THE INITIAL INVESTMENT. RISK CAPITAL IS MONEY THAT CAN BE LOST WITHOUT
JEOPARDIZING ONES FINANCIAL SECURITY OR LIFE STYLE. ONLY RISK CAPITAL
SHOULD BE USED FOR TRADING AND ONLY THOSE WITH SUFFICIENT RISK CAPITAL
SHOULD CONSIDER TRADING. PAST PERFORMANCE IS NOT NECESSARILY
INDICATIVE OF FUTURE RESULTS.
HYPOTHETICAL PERFORMANCE DISCLOSURE CFTC RULE 4.41
HYPOTHETICAL OR SIMULATED PERFORMANCE RESULTS HAVE CERTAIN
LIMITATIONS. UNLIKE AN ACTUAL PERFORMANCE RECORD, SIMULATED RESULTS
DO NOT REPRESENT ACTUAL TRADING. ALSO, SINCE THE TRADES HAVE NOT BEEN
EXECUTED, THE RESULTS MAY HAVE UNDER-OR-OVER COMPENSATED FOR THE
IMPACT, IF ANY, OF CERTAIN MARKET FACTORS, SUCH AS LACK OF LIQUIDITY.
SIMULATED TRADING PROGRAMS IN GENERAL ARE ALSO SUBJECT TO THE FACT
THAT THEY ARE DESIGNED WITH THE BENEFIT OF HINDSIGHT. NO REPRESENTATION
IS BEING MADE THAT ANY ACCOUNT WILL OR IS LIKELY TO ACHIEVE PROFIT OR
LOSSES SIMILAR TO THOSE SHOWN. THE TRADING IDEAS AND TRADING METHODS
SHOWN IN THIS BOOK MAY HAVE WORKED IN THE PAST. PAST RESULTS ARE NOT
NECESSARILY INDICATIVE OF FUTURE RESULTS. WHILE THERE IS A POTENTIAL FOR
PROFITS THERE IS ALSO A HUGE RISK OF LOSS. THEREFORE IT IS ADVISED TO
CONSIDER CAREFULLY WHETHER SUCH TRADING IS SUITABLE FOR YOU WITH
REGARD TO YOUR FINANCIAL SITUATION. ALL INFORMATION IN THIS BOOK SERVES
FOR EDUCATIONAL PURPOSES ONLY. IT DOES NOT CONSTITUTE AN INSTRUCTION
OR A RECOMMENDATION TO TRADE FUTURES CONTRACTS OR FOREX.
PROFESSIONAL ADVICE SHOULD BE SOUGHT WHERE APPROPRIATE. NEITHER THE
AUTHOR NOR THE PUBLISHER IS RESPONSIBLE FOR LOSSES ARISING FROM THE
USE OF THE CONTENT OF THIS BOOK.

Table of Contents
1 . Intro duction
2. The Advantages of Futures
3. The Market Participants
4. Market Profile - A Brief Overview
5. What is a Volume Profile?
6. Value Area
7. Forms and Shapes of Profiles
8. How to display the Profiles?
8.1 Fixed profiles
8.2 Flexible profiles
9. Bounce Backs
10. General Set ups
10.1 Accumulation and Follow-up
10.2 Reversals
11. Hardware, Software and Data Feed
12. Order Flow Analysis
12.1 Order book - DOM
12.2 Footprints - Inside the Chart
12.3 Delta
12.3.1 Absorption
12.3.2 Variants
12.3.3 Delta Numbers and Profiles
13. The Preparation
14. Liquidity and Volatility - An Important Pair
15. Characteristics of Individual Trading Instruments
16. More on Market Profile
17. Filtering the Ledge

18. Broadening Tops - a Warning Signal
19. Complete Examples
19.1 Yen
19.2 E-Mini S&P
19.3 Fdax
19.4 Bund Future
19.5 A Day with Crude Oil
19.6 Gold
19.7 Broadening Top and Ledge Filter
19.8 EURUSD
19.9 Weekly Profiles
20. Summary
21. Questions that could be asked
22. Fake Moves
22.1 Backfire Pattern
22.2 SHS Fakes
22.3 Bottom- and Top squeeze
22.4 Natural Support and Resistance Fakes
22.5 Trend line Fakes
22.6. Fake Breakouts
23. What is a Trend?
24. Trade- and Risk Management
25. Short Term Trading - A Trade Example

1.

Introduction

The year 2020 has called into question the validity of medium and longterm forecasts. If a hundred experts were to be asked where the
journey in the financial markets is heading, the answers would probably
be equally controversial. This year, situations could be observed there
that had not occurred together in a whole century before.
In view of this, many may be interested in thinking more short-term
and acting independently. No doubt it is easier to predict whether it will
rain today than in three weeks' time. In the "short range" you can find
two forms of trading, day trading and swing trading. Both are
independent of the respective market direction. A day trader holds his
position for a few minutes or until the end of the day.
A swing trader works with a larger time window. His expectation
horizon is several days, weeks or months. However, he has to pay for
the advantage of an "overarching view" by being exposed to
significantly more future imponderables. He is a prisoner of his longer
time horizon.
This book was written for day traders searching for new ways.
However, it is also suitable for beginners with basic knowledge.
Countless promises on the internet make it difficult for especially
beginning, ambitious traders to find their way through a maze of
courses. These often leave the impression that all you have to do to
succeed is to follow a crossover of two lines, a few chart patterns,
indicators and money management rules.
For some time now, market and volume profiles as well as order flow
analysis have been the talk of the town. In my opinion, these belong
together logically and in terms of content. I was all the more surprised
that until today there is no book available in either the German or
English-speaking world that combines these useful forms of analysis
and also explains how to use them effectively in day trading.
Classical Technical Analysis, as taught in hundreds of books has
proved to be unprofitable for retail traders in most cases. Otherwise,
the loss rate of technically oriented traders would not be so extremely
high. One first reason is the fact that Technical Analysis was developed
many decades ago under market conditions that have ceased to exist

long ago. Initially developed as a pseudo-science and successfully
used by a few advanced traders, it has become increasingly popular as
a science that makes the dubious claim of predicting future price
movements based on historical series of numbers or simple geometric
shapes and lines.
However, a look at today's globally networked markets shows that
many things have changed fundamentally. Probably the most important
change is the dominance of a few large market participants, who
handle about 80% of the total global trading volume. Their decisions
are based only to a small extent on technical chart criteria. They spend
a great deal of time and effort on fundamental research, which private
traders can never compete with. However, as they have very large
resources at their disposal, they cannot easily build or reduce their
positions in a single process. In many cases they first have to create
"space" and prepare their operations undetected.
This leads to movements that do not fit into the picture of technically
oriented traders. Whereas in earlier times we had to deal more with
breakouts from known chart formations or trading ranges, today we see
a multitude of false breakouts. These mostly take place in so-called
liquidity zones. These are areas where either pending orders of small
traders are located or are placed more frequently.
If a false outbreak then occurs, many positions are stopped or
closed and thus fall into the hands of strong market participants who
pursue other objectives. In the eyes of Technical Analysis, this is an
upside down world. Being extremely well known by the trading public
makes it easy for market makers to deceive. If you look at the whole
thing a little more realistically, you may well ask yourself
Why should large market participants who invest hundreds of
millions in fundamental research in the 21st century be guided by the
figures of an Italian mathematician who lived in the 13th century
(Fibonacci)? And which every trader knows.

What is different about Profile and Order Flow Analysis?
The main difference to other forms of analysis is that there is no
guessing involved. Instead, the activities of major market participants

are observed in the here and now. In this sense, we are by no means
dealing with the false gods of Technical Analysis.
The market profile related to the volume profile has been known for
over 40 years. The market profile is based on the thesis that significant
price shifts are only possible if large market participants with a higher
investment horizon become active. It also determines the price level at
which prices have spent both the longest and the shortest time in a
given period.
Some of the principles of market profile analysis from that time have
lost their validity as the markets have changed. However, the
progressive development of chart software has led to a renaissance of
two central principles of this form of analysis in particular. By integrating
them into a chart, market profile analysis can give traders a quick
overview of who is in control of the market. A further current aspect is
that the largest liquidity zones can be identified more clearly and
precisely. Given that today's markets are characterized by a myriad of
false outbreaks, this can offer significant advantages to a day trader.
Volume profile analysis follows a similar pattern, but focuses on the
price level at which the largest turnover took place in a given period. It
can thus provide important information about the price zones in which
major market participants have built positions. However, there is no
need for these to be identical to classic support and resistance zones.
In my view, it makes sense to combine market and volume profiles
because they complement each other with two essential pieces of
information. You can also project them next to each other and thus
have all the important information at a glance.
In a way, you can compare the volume profile to a search system that
locates zones where institutional traders were active. In many cases
they resume their activities where they started out. However, only order
flow analysis can provide final confirmation of this. It can be used for
fine-tuning and allows a chart to be "flipped open" to provide
information on the activities of the market forces that set the direction.
This cannot be provided by a normal chart.

So how was this book written?
Since more than 20 years I am dedicated to the topic of day trading.
From 2003 -2006 I completed an apprenticeship with a well-known US
Futures Trader (Joe Ross). During that time I learned a few things that I
had seen differently as an economist. Price actions on markets do not
necessarily correspond to an efficient market theory. At some point I
had read all trading books under the sun and realized that what former
super traders wrote in books only reflected past periods of time.
I refrained from indicators. Instead, I integrated real existing short term
interrelationships of individual trading instruments into my charts.
These provide approximations even today and clearly reduce the loser
rate, but the limitations of charting techniques remain omnipresent.
A few years ago, I noticed new chart software programs that displayed
executed orders horizontally on a corresponding price level. I had the
impression that the volume and also market profiles of certain zones
provided more precise information than classic support and resistance
lines.
After that I started looking for material for day traders, but all I found
was the market profile classic "Mind over Markets" with profiles from
the 80 ies and a book about volume profiles for Forex Swing trading
(see appendix). These books provide some basic information, but are
not suitable for the time levels I work with intraday. Day trading and
swing trading are completely different worlds. Finally I followed a few
presentations from US Prop traders. These came closer to my
perspectives, because they also talked about order flow on small time
scales. A normal chart for them was just the outer garment for
something that was hidden behind it.
After trying out some order flow software I started to develop strategies
that complemented my existing methods for E-minis, Euro, Dax, Bunds,
Crude oil and Gold. From 2018 on I also tested them on the Asian
futures Mini Hang Seng and Mini Nikkei. I found out that these futures
react similarly, sometimes even better. A few recorded examples from
this time can be found in this book.

A large part of Technical Analysis is heavily overrated by traders.
Perhaps that is precisely why it is significant, albeit in a completely
different sense. Many false outbreaks and stuffing maneuvers take
place at key charting points. Moreover, considering that the markets
tend to move sideways for around 70%, it is very beneficial to mark
trading ranges as precisely as possible. By combining these aspects
with profile and order flow analysis, you are often able to look a little
further into the fog of the future than a normal chart trader who blindly
trades formations known to everyone.
As there is still no special literature about profile and order flow analysis
for day traders, I finally decided to write my own book. When I started
writing it, I had no idea that the year 2020 would usher in a new era of
volatility. Fluctuations that used to occur in a week can now happen
within a day. This requires day traders not only to take a more flexible
view than in previous years, but also to use analysis tools that look
behind the scenes. More than 40 current examples will demonstrate
this in detail.
The approaches shown here are not a system which is used like an
indicator. Accordingly, they cannot guarantee success. Combined with
basic charting knowledge and contextual thinking, however, they can
provide traders with highly effective tools to navigate the markets with
much greater confidence and less stress.
This book has been produced with great care. Chart Software used
was Atas, Sierrachart and Tradeview. Nevertheless, the book can only
provide a limited insight into the many possibilities offered by these
forms of analysis.
Thanks to Markus Amstutz, CEO Future Trade AG, Switzerland, who
took the trouble to review this book?
I wish you an interesting read. Perhaps you will see markets with
slightly different eyes afterwards.
November 2020

2. The Advantages of Futures
Futures markets (futures exchanges) are among the oldest markets in
the western world. In Amsterdam already in the 17th century in the form
of option trading, futures exchanges were founded in a regulated form
in the pioneering days of the United States. They gave farmers the
opportunity to sell their future harvests in advance at a fixed price and
thus secure their income. This was then taken over by other sectors as
industrialization developed. Mining companies, which secured income
from their future production. International producers of goods who
needed to protect themselves against exchange rate fluctuations.
Airlines that need to protect themselves against rising paraffin prices,
etc. Who bears the risk? Speculators, who take over the other side of
the trade until the contract terms expire, thus guaranteeing companies
a fixed purchase price of products.
In the USA day trading with individual shares seems to be a big
topic. This requires an initial capital of at least 25 - 30k USD. A day
trader who buys or sells a single share must use a substantial part of it
to achieve a daily profit. In the futures a day trader only needs to
deposit a margin, which is fixed per contract. Day trading margins
range from $40 for micro contracts to around $2300 for a contract of
crude oil. A day trader can therefore operate leveraged on the largest
regulated futures exchanges in Europe, the USA or Asia with a lower
capital outlay. He is dealing with guaranteed liquidity, gets fair
executions and can limit his risk with stop-loss orders.
This cannot be said of other non-transparent products, which are not
subject to uniform control, especially in Europe, and are offered in an
unmanageable number of substitute products. Nevertheless, there is
also a residual risk when trading in futures. If there are strong
distortions, this can lead to delayed execution (slippage) or trading
stops. For this reason, a market that is in an extreme situation should
not be entered at all. In contrast to trading with shares, a futures or
forex trader does not need a stock scanner and does not have to deal
with earnings, analyses, rankings, comments, balance sheets, key
figures, takeover rumors and other company reports. He has "his"
market, which he scrutinizes. However, he has to pay attention to
important news concerning this market: Central bank decisions,

economic data such as NFP, CPI, GDP, oil stocks, key speeches, and
geopolitical events. Upcoming economic data can be found on many
financial sites and is marked with 1-3 symbols according to the
expected impact. A day trader has no opinion of his own. He cares less
about the content of news, which is mostly priced in anyway (old news).
His task is rather to analyze and use the reaction of the market.

Trading Instruments
For a day trader only the absolutely most liquid stock index, interest
rate, commodity and currency markets are considered. Only these can
guarantee good order execution and thus keep losses as low as
possible. The huge Forex interbank market is priced exactly according
to the futures exchanges, but it is a deregulated market without exact
volume data.
While futures only trade in standardized contracts, forex trading is
possible with high leverage in any size. A day trader with very small
initial capital can, for example, can trade instruments such as EURUSD
or gold, use the real volume data of the futures exchange for analysis
and then act through a forex broker in any trading size. CFD's of stock
indices are also a reasonable option if you are not a scalper. Futures
can also be traded in very small sizes. Since about 2 years micro
contracts of stock indices, Forex Majors and Gold have been offered
here.
The most important trading instruments for day traders are
- Mini contracts S&P 500, Dow Jones, Nasdaq 100, Dax, Hang Seng,
Nikkei 225
- EURUSD
- JPYUSD Future (=USDJPY forex pair inverse)
- German Bund
- Crude Oil
- Gold
- 10 y T - Notes

More on the characteristics of individual trading instruments can be found
in Chapter 15

3. The Market Participants
In order to better understand the profile and order flow analysis, it is
advisable to first take a closer look at the participating groups in the
markets

The Institutional Sector
It is estimated that institutional trading is responsible for 70 to 90% of
the total volume of markets. These include a dozen investment banks
with well-known names and a few pension and hedge funds operating
in any time frame. Throughout this book, institutional traders are
referred to as "other time frame traders" (OTF traders) because their
expectation horizon is at a higher time level than day trading. This
ranges from a few days to several weeks. OTF's can have different
reasons to act on the market. Short or long-term investments, hedging
of commodity prices and security portfolios, implementation of interest
rate and currency policy decisions, etc.
The large market participants addressed here dispose of massive
financial resources, which they constantly use in the markets for
specific purposes. They are largely guided by fundamental analysis and
spend large sums on research. If they were to act in isolation, prices
would shoot to the moon or fall like a stone. In order to build up their
positions piece by piece, they work as undetected as possible, mostly
in intraday trading ranges. Once they have built up their positions and
are "ready to go", they act aggressively and move the market as quickly
as possible in the direction they want.
The behavior of OTF's seldom matches the expectations of retail
traders. Their strategies require them to take a long position when the
price has fallen sharply and is now below value. Similarly, they will
usually take a short position when they feel the price is too high (above
value).
Other time frame traders are also behind sudden movements that
many traders find difficult to assess. These are short-term actions in
which positions are reduced for various reasons without aiming for a
change of trend. This is called "short covering" or "long liquidation". So
much for the group of institutional market participants.

Retail Trader
On the other side of the market, there are countless small traders
who trade electronically via the brokers' trading platforms. Their
decisions are largely based on technical analysis. These are called
Retail Brokers and Retail Traders in this book. Retail means as much
as retail trade, but in this context it probably sounds a bit strange in
German. Retail traders are made up of day traders, swing traders,
hybrids or individual position traders whose view is based on a daily
basis. They will never have the fundamental information of OTF traders.
There are two groups in the day trading sector. The first group
consists of so-called scalpers. Their goal is to execute as many trades
as possible during a trading day, with the shortest possible duration
and small profits. They are fighting against the algorithms of the market
makers at second intervals day in, day out. This puts them on a level
somewhere in no man's land between OTF buyers and sellers. This
book does not deal with this type of day trading.
The strategies described in this book deal less with this type of day
trading. They focus more on locating the start of clear intraday price
segments exactly and then following the tracks of large market
participants for as long as possible. Although such a procedure
requires a little more patience and contextual thinking, it is much less
stressful than scalping and in many cases more successful in the long
run.
While volatility has been at record lows for most of the last decade, a
new era is looming in 2020. Important intraday reversals are now taking
place much faster. This does not necessarily mean that the target
group of this book should take the perspective of a scalper. But the new
situation requires in some cases an entry in minimal time frames to
avoid increased risks.
On the other hand, under certain circumstances it can also make
sense to turn a day trade into a position trade rather than following a
stereotypical pigeonhole thinking, once you have exactly located the
beginning of a trend. Such an example can be found in the bonus
chapter.
Every major trend begins with micro inflection points.

The Role of the Day Trader

Institutional traders are undoubtedly the determining forces in any
significant price action. Accordingly, changes always take place when
they perceive the current price to be too high or too low. In order to
implement their plans, OTF traders inevitably need to enter the market
temporarily at intraday level. This turns them into day traders.
The role of a day trader is somewhat different. While an OTF trader
follows a predetermined opinion and market direction, a day trader
must first try to interpret it at the macro level. He must ask himself:
Where is the market heading? Who is in control? Are there large
buyers or sellers?
The next task of a day trader is to determine when exactly OTF
traders become active at the micro level. This is where more detailed
analysis at a smaller time level comes into play. These combine market
and volume profiles, important chart points and order flow. Only a
combination of these components enables a day trader to execute a
preferably low-risk trade
In general it is said that you always have to follow the trend. This is
taught in hundreds of books. However, if you look at the reality of an
extremely high loser rate of retail traders mentioned at the beginning,
then doubts arise. For a day trader the best opportunities always arise
when the mass of traders is wrong, the price reverses and dramatic
movements take place in the opposite direction. The larger the number
of market participants of all time frames acting at important reference
zones, the stronger the movement that results.
Accordingly, a day trader's attention should always be primarily
focused on these liquidity zones, because in case of rejection, a chain
reaction occurs here, which can be very profitable. On the one hand, a
large number of retail traders are stopped out or cover their positions
as soon as they realize that no follow through is taking place. On the
other hand, a great deal of momentum is generated by OTFs, which
now move the market in the opposite direction.
If you integrate volume and market profiles into your analyses, there
is no "one" method. In this book many different starting situations are
presented. Another important concept consists in putting yourself in the
mindset of other retail traders. To follow a herd blindly is not a good
idea, not only in day trading.

4. Market Profile - A Brief Overview
The market profile is also known as TPO and combines time, volume
and price. TPO is an abbreviation for Time Price Opportunity. It has a
bell-shaped structure. The traditional approach extends over one
trading day. 30 minute time periods are shown here in letter form on a
vertical plane. Its external appearance is similar to the volume profile
but there is a significant difference.
The market profile determines the length of time a trading instrument
remains at a certain level. The longer the price stays at a particular
level, the more support and resistance is formed. But these are also
zones that are susceptible to stop-running maneuvers, as liquidity has
accumulated there. Horizontal support and resistance lines can be
drawn at different levels but in conventional chart technique it is always
left to the individual assessment of the observer to determine which
zone is of the greatest importance. This problem does not apply to the
market profile, as there is only one fixed maximum level. In the course
of the book, it becomes evident that the maximum zones determined by
the market profile can provide precise reference points which can then
be checked with a view to a trading decision on the further direction of
the market.
Momentum and Follow through are the engines of any significant
price action. In this process he time factor plays a decisive role. Here,
the market profile can provide useful information as well. In the first
chapters the structure of the market was described. Only large market
participants can move the market. The less time the price stays at a
level, the greater the activity of large market participants. Due to the
simple visual structure of the market profile, it is possible to determine
at a glance in which zones large market participants have operated
aggressively. Accordingly, you can consider which group of OTFs has
control over the market.
The market profile theoretically distinguishes between different daily
structures. The most important of these will be incorporated in the
course of the book coupled with typical examples. According to theory,
the market profile is used to determine the course of the day after the
first hour of trading. However, this older approach should not be taken

too closely, especially today. But there are a few constellations that
allow conclusions to be drawn. I prefer to plot the market profile using a
simple block system. For the sake of overall understanding, however, I
will briefly explain how the market profile works.
Figure 1: TPO (Market profile) in the course of a day

The letters A and B represent the first two first 30 minute periods of the
institutional trading day. This period is also known as the initial balance.
The start of trading is indicated by a zero and the end by a hash. The
duration of the Initial Balance is not set in stone. Depending on the
general market situation, it may be shorter.
Any extension of the Initial Balance up or down is called Range
Extension. In this case the price left the Initial Balance first upwards (C),
then downwards (D). Then there was a stagnation (E, F, G, H, I, J, K)
before the price moved down and formed a tail (L). This is a singlecolumn row and indicates the presence of large market participants
(other time frame traders). They bought because they perceived the
price as "below value".

To speak of a tail, you should see at least two single-column rows at
the edges of a market profile. In this case you see a "buying tail" with
three single-column rows, which led to an upward movement in the last
trading phase. At the end of the Main Session the price is again "in
balance" (#). It is the widest point of the profile. This is where the price
had spent the longest time.
As followed a few aspects
- The closer the Initial Balance (AB) at the beginning of a day compared
to previous days, the higher the probability of an intraday trend.
- Trend days should never have more than four parallel rows or blocks
of letters during the course of the day. They have a narrow and long
(high) day profile. There are multiple range extensions in the same
direction
- Single-column rows show an increased activity of OTFs. If they
appear in the middle part of a market profile, they are called "single
prints.
More on the market profile will be found in the course of the book.

5. What is a Volume Profile?
Figure 2: Volume Profile

On the time axis in the sub chart, the x-axis shows the conventional
time-based representation of the volume in vertical form. This only
contains a totalized turnover figure (contracts) for a specific time
period. However, it is not known at what price the largest volume was
traded.
The price level at which the largest number of transactions took
place is called Point of Control (VPOC). This price is considered to be
fair. Otherwise, most transactions would not take place there. Prices
tend to return to the point of control after testing higher or lower levels.
A rising or falling Point of Control (VPOC), on the other hand, reflects a

change in the market situation. If it changes, a higher or lower price is
accepted.
The following chart is intended to clarify why heavily traded volume
zones of the past can help to make the most accurate trading
decisions.
Figure 3: EURUSD June 2020 (30 min. chart MEZ, CET)

In the run-up to an ECB meeting (right), the volume profile of the
previous day's institutional trading signaled strong buying activity by
major market participants. These buying zones can be seen on a
distinct bell-shaped volume cluster on the left side of the chart. This is
the point of control (POC). In the right window I have marked the
beginning of the new (European) trading day of EUR/USD. Based on
my criteria, it starts at 8.00 CET.

With the publication of the session result EURUSD rose strongly.
Afterwards a pullback took place, which lasted for about 60 minutes.
This pullback exactly reached the strongest buy zone (POC) of the
previous day. This can be seen here by the extended dotted line.
Institutional traders defended their position exactly where they had
extended it the day before. On this chart we are dealing with a 30
minute chart, which gave a day trader the big picture. An entry would
be on a smaller time level with more filters
It does not necessarily have to be the POC from which the course
bounces. Other pronounced volume zones and their peripheral parts
are also good support or resistance zones.
- The horizontal representation of volume by means of a histogram in
the main chart is called a volume profile.
- The point of control of the volume profile is also called VPOC. This is
the price zone in which the most transactions have taken place.
- Pronounced volume clusters are called high volume areas. These
indicate price zones in which large market participants were active.
- If prices return to these zones, the probability that they will be
defended increases
- The strongest zones are always formed when classic support and
resistance zones and volume profiles match
The following chart situation should further illustrate this

Figure 4: FDAX June 2020 (15 min. chart, CET, CET)

Here the price bounces back at the beginning of the new trading day
from a strong volume cluster formed during the previous day's
institutional trading hours. The chaotic movement in the low volume offhours time has no meaning.

Naked POC
The most important point of a past period is the so-called Naked POC.
This is a point of control that was not touched the following day. This
point attracts particular attention. If it is reached again the day after
next or afterwards, very promising trading situations can arise

Figure 5: EURUSD June 2020, (60 min. chart CET, CET)

This is only an hourly chart, but even this one shows exactly the level of
reversal. This would have been difficult to see from resistance lines on a
normal chart as well. All these are not coincidences. A day trader would
switch back to a small time frame when this point is reached and look
for a short trade with a low initial risk. After reversing at this important
point, EURUSD fell about 100 pips over the course of the day.

More terms
Thin Profiles are zones where the price is proceeding particularly
fast. These always occur when OTF buyers or sellers are operating
aggressively. Strong indentations are called low volume nodes.
These are often located on the edge of high volume areas and can be
starting points for reversals. In the case of high volume areas, these are
often located on the edge of high volume areas and can be starting
points for reversals. In the market profile chapter, these zones were
named "single prints" . In volume profiles, the term imbalance has
become commonplace.
The memory function of prices to pass through these zones fast can
be a good support for a day trader when planning a trade. If prices
have left thin profiles in an elapsed period of time, they will progress
more quickly if this zone is reached again. Accordingly, it is not
advisable to have the high volume areas of the previous day in front of
you. Trades have the best chance of winning when the path of least
resistance lies ahead.

6. Value Area
Figure 6 : Value Area

The Value Area is the centerpiece of the volume profile. It characterizes
the area in which 70% of the total trading activities of a selected period
have taken place. Value Area High and Value Area Low can be
represented by lines or also by a color differentiation within the volume
profile as in this graph. At the beginning of the new trading day the
Value Area of the previous day can help to answer some basic
questions.
These are:
- Did the market open above/below yesterday's Value Area today?

- Did it stay there after the opening phase or did it fall back into the
value area of the previous day?
The following example shows a situation where the value area of the
previous day was left at the beginning of the new trading day.
Figure 7: E-Mini S&P July 2020 (15 min. chart, CET)

In the opening phase of the Main US Session, E-Mini left the range of
the previous trading day upwards. This was followed by a retest of the
previous day's Value Area High (arrow). At this point it was decided
whether the market was ready to accept higher prices. With the
appearance of the candle marked with the arrow, a daytrader would
have considered a long position after further examination

A trendless day is characterised by the fact that the price does not
manage to leave the value area of the previous day during the
important opening phase. In this case, a daytrader can trade on a
smaller intraday time frame after further analytical steps, even without
considering the superior market direction. Value Area High and Low as
well as further extreme points of the previous day can serve as
reference points. A first target point would be to regain the POC of the
previous day.
Older theories say that in such a situation there is an 80%
probability that the value area high or low of the other side will be
reached again. However, like all theories, this should be treated with
caution and weighed up on a case-by-case basis.

7. Forms and Shapes of Profiles
In terms of volume and market profile, a distinction is made between
various shapes, which visually correspond approximately to the letters
p, b and D. So much for the theory. In practice, however, mixed profiles
are often found and it is more appropriate to try to evaluate the
respective context.
P profiles are theoretically associated with a bullish scenario. This
view is understandable, because if prices are rejected and a strong
increase in the form of fast imbalance zones has occurred, the
momentum will weaken. There will be a sideways movement as a
volume cluster before a new trend phase can begin.
However, if the market has already gone through a long upward
phase, P profiles can signal a reversal. As a result, P profiles have their
greatest significance when they appear at the beginning of a trend.
P profiles can also be formed when the market is in an established
downtrend and then a quick reversal takes place.
But also short interruptions within a strong downward trend can
produce P Profiles on a smaller time scale. A special setup of P Profiles
can be found in chapter 17. The following diagram shows a market and
volume profile in P form

Figure 8: P Profile

On the left side you can see the market profile, next to it the volume
profile of the same time period. Profiles are similar, but have different
points of control. The dynamics of the price action is shown in the
market profile by a buying tail. The white spots in the lower area mark
single print zones. This is where rapid price advances occurred. You
can also see deviating points of control.
It should not be difficult to imagine the opposite case when a b
profile appears. A b profile is therefore bearish especially at the
beginning of a downtrend, bullish at the beginning of a bottom
formation. On a smaller time scale it can signal a short interruption of a
strong uptrend (long liquidation).
From a chart technical point of view, a D profile is a sideways day,
in many cases also an "inside day", whose entire price range lies within
the fluctuation range of the previous day. The market is "in balance".
Buyer and seller have found a balance. Neither side feels the need to
move the market aggressively. This is particularly evident in the now
more bell-shaped formation of the volume or market profile. The
market profile shown in figure 1 represents a D structure.
Double Distribution Profiles occur relatively frequently. Day
traders who specialize in these profiles have good chances of success.

This is a two-part profile. Initially the price spent some time in one zone.
Then there is a sudden rejection in form of an imbalance before a new
strongly traded price zone is formed. If such an event has taken place,
then a daytrader should check the development of the next day, but
also the further intraday course. Once such an event has taken place, a
daytrader should take a close look at the development of the next day
or the day after next, sometimes even the final phase of the same
day.
Figure 9: Market Profile Double Distribution Day

There are many mixed forms of profiles that can take on a meaning of
their own depending on the situation. In chapter 4 on the market profile
it was said that trend days have a narrow and high profile. There is no
question that trend days are the most profitable opportunities. In
practice, however, a trend rarely extends evenly throughout the day. It
is not uncommon for strong trends to begin when significant liquidity
zones are triggered in the first trading period and the price then
immediately moves in the opposite direction. This will also be illustrated
by many detailed examples in this book.

8. How to display the Profiles?
Market and volume profiles can be displayed in different ways. In this
chapter you will see a few useful ways how to display the profiles when
day trading. There are traders who display individual daily profiles over
a longer period of time and wait for certain zones to be reached again. I
do not follow this view, because I do not want to litter my screen with
horizontal lines from old zones. Especially today it is not advisable to
rely on large market players maintaining their intentions over a longer
period of time. I prefer to focus on the past 2-3 days and the current
day.

8.1 Fixed profiles
Graphs 3, 4, 5 and 7 show volume profiles of the institutional trading
time of the respective previous day. These can provide important
reference points for the newly commencing trading day. For stock index
futures such as E-Mini and Dax these are the Main Sessions. In my
EURUSD projections I start plotting the Volume profile at 8.00 CET.
This is when Asian banks evaluate their day. Institutional trading ends
at 18.00 CET when the London Banks close. The highest volume is
formed in the European afternoon, when European and US banks are
equally active. The crude oil market has its highest volume during the
traditional pit hours from 15.00 - 20.30 CET.
To get a basic overview you should also display market and volume
profiles of a 24 h period of the last 2 - 3 days. In my presentations,
however, these time periods are not simply categorized by calendar
days. They start with the opening of the previous day's Main
Session (or the time with the highest volume) and end with the
beginning of the Main Session of the current day.
1 trading day 24h = peak trading time plus off-hours
This way, each trading instrument is analyzed according to the
same criteria and no profiles of completed trading periods are mixed up
with the profile of a new Main Session. The following chart shows a 24
hour profile for the E-Mini S&P.
Figure 10: E-Mini S&P, September 2020, (30 min. chart CET )

The 24 h profiles of day 2 and 3 have been hidden on this chart for
better understanding. On the left you can see the 24h market profile,
next to it the volume profile. It starts at the beginning of the US Main
session and ends just before the beginning of the next Main session.
The market profile shows a buying tail (arrow), which indicates a bullish
overall situation. The point of control of both 24h profiles is identical. At
the beginning of main session of day 4 the E-Mini bounces off this
reference zone shortly after the US opening. A strong intraday trend
followed.
Volume profiles of this type are called fixed volume profiles. I use them
to get a basic overview of the last 3 days and possibly get some good
reference points for the current session. All further analysis is done with
flexible profiles. The following chart shows a 24 hour volume profile of
EURUSD.

Figure 11: EURUSD 24h profiles July 2020 (30 min. chart, CET)

It is not difficult to see that on day 3, significant price movements began
after important reference points of day 1 and 2 were reached. A day
trader would now try again to find low risk entry points in these zones
on a smaller time frame. The right profile would of course not have been
available at that time.
Another signal for a possible trade appeared on day 2 (bottom
centre chart). There the price bounced off a strong high volume area
from day 1. Day 1 was a double distribution day

Note:
Volume Profiles of main trading hours in some cases may differ
from 24 hour profiles. At the beginning of a new trading day, it is
advisable to always first look at the volume profiles of the last
peak trading hours, as this is where institutional market
participants are particularly active. Clusters that have formed in
the peak trading hours are the most meaningful.

The Weekly Profile
To take a further look into the past you can use a fixed feature which is
available in my software (Atas). There you can choose to display the
profiles of the past week or the past month. I have plotted an example
from July 2020, which offered a very great opportunity, which was not
difficult to spot. Consequently, it was clear that you had a strong
momentum behind you and that you were not just dealing with a
grasshopper. This would have given a day trader a completely different
motivation to stick with this trade till the end of the trading day

Figure 12: E-Mini S&P July 2020 (15 min. chart, GMT)

It can be very profitable to wait for such situations and then analyze the
market in a systematic order in a few minutes. In the section 19 with
complete examples you will find another trade of this kind.
Tip: Always analyze by expired trading periods or trading days,
never by calendar days

8.2 Flexible profiles
Flexible volume profiles have proven to be irreplaceable for the way I
work. Ultimately, this is about combining the large image with the small
one. For the current day I only use flexible volume profiles with the
beginning of the main trading hours.
The big advantage of flexible volume profiles is that you can use
them not only as an aid for current trading decisions. You can also use
them to take a closer look at individual situations of the past days in
isolation. Some basic knowledge of charts is required here, but I do not

mean this in the sense of individual candlestick patterns or other chart
technical formations. These change anyway in every time frame.
The following chart shows a situation where a 5 day flex profile of
EURUSD provided strong support. The strongest reference zones of a
continuous trading phase always occur when traditional support and
resistance zones complement each other with volume profiles.
Figure 13: EURUSD May 2020 (60 min. chart, CET)

On this chart a downswing was marked with a flexible VP over its entire
length. This downswing extended for a period of five days. Arrow 1
shows the start of trading in Tokyo about 2 days after the downward
movement was completed. Asian markets in some cases respond well
to important reference points in the volume profile. Arrow 2 shows an
upswing immediately after the release of some kind of economic news.
However, this was associated with increased risk. Arrow 3, on the other
hand, indicated an optimal day trade, as London banks open at 10.00
CET. A more than 100 pip intraday followed. A more than 100 pip trade
in intraday followed. It is sometimes worth waiting. Even as a day trader
you do not have to trade every da

Flexible Volume Profiles in Sideways Markets
Sideways markets are treated like a stepchild in the trading literature.
The term trend is a myth for many traders, as it associates home runs,
success and periods that require little activity. Many traders have the
illusion that you can only make money with trends.
However, there are realistic estimates that say that sideways phases
take up about 70% of the total daily movement. This is particularly
evident in the case of individual shares, where large gaps "all over the
place" can present themselves like a minefield on a daily chart. Not
much happens during current trading.
In the volume profile analysis it is important to focus on sideways
zones. One of the problems of trend traders, according to my
observations, is that they do not realize in time that they are in a
consolidation zone. They hope for too long that a trend will continue.
This inevitably develops from an increased trend based thinking.
The next chart is intended to demonstrate once again how useful it
can be to combine flexible profiles with some important chart technical
knowledge. First and foremost, it is important to localize trading ranges
correctly from the beginning.
To show the perhaps most important function of the market profile, I
have illustrated it next to the volume profile as a block. Both profiles
usually do not show any major external deviations. It is more the
different points of control that can sometimes provide essential
information.
These are based on the different view of both profiles. The volume
profile does not necessarily have to be identical with classic support
and resistance lines, because it only shows where the largest sales
have taken place. Significant price movements can also originate from
zones that offer little technical support or resistance. However, the
market profile shows the time a trading instrument remains at different
price levels.
Figure 14: E-Mini Nasdaq 100 Future July 2020 (30 min. chart,
CET)

In July 2020 a trading range developed here, which extended over 2
days. The Trading Range was drawn after 2 fixed points became
visible at the top and bottom (black rectangle) On the third day a
breakout occurred during the European trading period.
This breakout brought many European trend traders on board, who
hoped for an immediate continuation of the overall trend and took long
positions at the breakout. However, it was a false breakout, as the price
slumped sharply after the opening of US trading. A volume trader now
would be looking for support, as it was likely that a ricochet could be
imminent.
If you now look at the market and volume profile for the entire period
(full 24-hour profiles until the start of the new trading day), you will see
similar profiles that provided good support. However, the POC of the
market profile was considerably lower. I have extended this here.
There, all stops all stops of those traders were triggered who had taken
long positions the day before due to classic support lines. Only after
this zone was cleared by market makers the upward trend resumed. A

day trader who had displayed both profiles here thus had precise
information that would have made his trading decision regarding a long
position much easier.
Again, the following chart shows a situation where the market and
volume profiles complemented each other perfectly. Here you can see
a downward period that extended over a period of 5 trading days.
However, the course is very unsteady. You could also have mapped a
Trading Range. The entire period was captured with a flexible profile.
This ends immediately before the opening of the Main Session of day 6.

Figure 15: E-Mini S&P September 2020 (30 min. chart, CET)

During day 5 a bottom finally began to develop. How could you see
this? The S&P first broke out with a bottom squeeze upwards (Arrow)
Squeeze Patterns are explained chapter 22.4. On this day, both the
volume profile and the market profile formed a strong base. However,
the point of control of the market profile is located slightly below the
point of control of the volume profile.
A pullback occurred in Asian and European trading hours. Now we
are waiting for the opening of the US Main Session. After about 45
minutes of trading, the price fell below the point of control of the market
profile. Afterwards a quick reversal took place. A perfect complete
trend day started. The volume profile of this day is shown on the far
right. It is narrow and high.
A day trader who would have studied the overall situation long
before the US opening could calmly develop a trading plan and
implement it stress-free after opening. The E-Mini rose by 60 points

until the end of the trading session. There was no reason to close out
his long position too early. The small trend profile on the right shows
that continuous advances (range extensions) in the same direction took
place throughout the entire trading day.
I leave it to the reader to think about whether one tries to scalp a
highly volatile overall market day by day hoping to make a small profit
or to concentrate on really promising opportunities without stress. The
latter would not exactly increase the turnover of a broker.
Furthermore, something became clear here which I mentioned in the
chapter 7 about the shapes of profiles. b - Profiles are not always
bearish as in theory, but bullish when they appear at the end of a
downward movement.
Reversals are the best opportunities for a day trader. Every
trend begins with micro inflection points.

The small Time Frame
As you could see in the last example, profile and order flow trading
should not always be done according to the same scheme. It is always
a puzzle that you have to put together yourself. Chart technical
considerations can be of advantage.
But there are also market situations in which one does not get
enough indications from the big picture. For example, when a market is
in a strong upward or downward trend and you cannot find reference
points from previous periods. Or after a fast but very dominant intraday
price change has taken place. Here, the flexible volume profile can also
be used in small time frames to find important reference points that
were generated the same day in the main trading hours. The procedure
remains the same.
The next chart shows a situation in May 2020, where a large sell-off
took place in the first trading phase. This was mapped entirely with a
flexible volume profile and is shown on the following chart on the lefthand side.
Figure 16: Nasdaq Future May 2020 (1 min. chart, CET)

The final phase of the Main Session saw a re-test of the strongest
volume profile zones that had formed during the sell off in the first half of
trading. These re-tests opened up 2 opportunities for short entries.
Again, a simple 1 minute chart offered a good risk / return ratio.
With Intraday Flex VP's, bounce backs do not always have to
bounce exactly against reference zones. Frequently, it is also the outer
edges of these zones.

POC Shifts
In order to demonstrate the great advantage of Flex VP's in concrete
terms with further examples, I will now show a current example in
principle "before - after". The following method I have called POC Shift.
This combination of words is not too complicated and gets to the heart
of the matter.
First of all, a few basic remarks, which refer to both the market
profile and the volume profile. The POC reflects the fairest price. A
large market participant (OTF) will always try to buy at a fair price or

below. This leads to an increase in the POC. If he is still willing to make
further purchases after this, he must have a lot of conviction. He takes
the risk to buy "above value". If it is an OTF seller, then in the same
case you would say: sell short in the hole. A repeated buy/sell is
therefore an important event, because it underpins the intention of an
OTF.
Finally, the price that is considered fair also changes again.
However, all this must be assessed in context. For example, if the
market is in a general sideways movement on a daily basis and
somewhere within the previous day's price range, then a POC shift
should be considered less important. Even in the case of short covering
and long liquidation, there is no great market-determining conviction on
the part of the OTFs, as this is more of a temporary action.
However, if a POC shift takes place near important reference areas,
it should be given more attention. Another marginal factor is whether
the market has opened "out of balance" or not. An out of balance
opening is an opening of the main session above or below the value
area high or low of the previous day and is a particular challenge for a
day trader. In this case he has to deal with a new market situation. This
means higher chances with increased risk at the same time.
This brings us to the most important factor of every price action.
This will be addressed even more often in this book: Follow Through. If
a POC shift takes place, then day trader and OTF's have the same
interests for a day segment
- OTF's plan to move the market based on their fundamental
knowledge
- A day trader can only make a profit following the smart money as
quickly as possible
This is where the tires touch the ground. This is where another
important factor comes into play: time (timing). The purpose of VP and
order flow analysis is not guessing nor following any trends,
assumptions or "gut feelings", but to enter the market as soon as
possible after OTF's have done so.

Figure 17: Fdax June 2020 (15 min. chart, CET)

On this graph, you can see a clear downward movement of the Fdax on
the left side. Big players had built up short positions during the
institutional trading hours of the previous day. Hence, I extended the
POC of this zone into the next day. This is done automatically with my
software. The next day, the price bounced off exactly there and thus
gave a short signal on the 15 min chart level. Immediately afterwards,
the Fdax fell, but then made a pullback to the upside. This aroused the
suspicion that a trading range could now form, because the targeted
market direction of the big picture was short.
If one had missed this first rebound or had made a profit, one could
start to draw a flexible volume profile in order to follow the situation
more closely. There is not always a second rebound at the same level.
In the last chapter it was mentioned that basic knowledge of trading
ranges is an advantage. By this I also mean developing a feeling for
anticipating trading ranges. One way to do this is to draw a boundary
as soon as you see three parts of an M or W. A little trick is to look out

for overlong candles. These often announce a trading range. In this
case this was the long candle on the left side of the flexible profile.
Now you just wait and see if the right leg of an M is formed. In order
to better understand the situation that now follows, one can simply think
away from the following development on the right outside the window.
This Flex VP will now be further adapted to the current market situation
in every further development. Normally you simply set another empty
area for the flexible volume profile or move it back and forth for a
second every now and then to see changes. What happened shortly
afterwards?

Figure 18: FDAX June 2020 (15 min. chart, CET)

45 minutes later (3 candles of 15 minutes each) and 15 minutes after
the US opening, the POC suddenly moved down by about 70 points,
signaling that all trading activity had shifted downwards. This could only
happen because big players had become active and took further short
positions. Before that, however, they had faked a final rise to the upside
in order to take the stops from traders who had been right with their
assessment (short) but had placed their stops above the peak of the
bearish zigzag in the middle of the window. They were stopped now
after having been in profit for a short period of time.
Now that the POC shift down had taken place, you could look for an
entry in a small time frame to reduce your risk significantly. This would
have included order flow signals as further confirmation. Perhaps a final
observation on this situation can be made here. This replicates what
was said at the beginning about low volume
areas.

After the short entry signal was generated the flexible volume profile
of the current day and the last day indicated low volume areas in the
planned trading direction. There were no resistance zones to the south.
This should be noted as it provides facilitation for the important follow
through.
The small picture of the flexible volume profile was integrated into
the large picture of the previous day (fixed volume profile). The Value
Area shifted downwards in the following movement and confirmed that
the market was ready to accept low prices. When a trend begins, the
value area should follow the POC, not the POC of the value area as in
sideways phases. Different laws apply there.

The Flexible Volume Profile as a Trend Signal
Flexible volume profiles can also be used to find promising trades in
trend markets. Gold has been in a bull market for over a year. Every
trend takes a break. The following example shows a situation where the
profile analysis provided important clues for an imminent new trend
segment. The following chart shows that the price bounces off the
upper edge of a strong volume zone

Figure 19: Gold, June 2020 (60 min. chart, GMT - 1)

On the far left you can see the market profile of the overall upward
trend. It is narrow and high. This is typical for trends. Next to it I have
shown the volume profile. In this case, after an accumulation phase in
the middle part of the volume profile, aggressive additional buying was
carried out. Otherwise there would not have been a large imbalance
with a very thin volume profile. The extended line of this high volume
area represented a strong resistance, which pointed to a type 2 bounce
back (chapter 9).
Once you have located such points, further steps follow to find an
exact entry point in a small time frame. Here again I only want to show
how the flexible volume profile can be used.

9. Bounce Backs
With regard to the reaction of the price in important zones of volume
and market profile, a few basic situations should be distinguished.

Type 1
First of all, a simple principle comes into play, which is known from
the classical chart technique: support and resistance. However, these
zones are not always clearly defined.
Figure 20: EURUSD April 2020 (30 min. chart, CET)

On this chart you can see structures of support or resistance lines.
Around the volumetric profile, they could be seen as a kind of buffer
zone, where the momentum weakens once reached. Here the market
made an upward movement. , which is marked by the grey profile on
the left side.
Afterwards, downturns followed, which were absorbed by the
strongest volume zones of the entire upward movement. Near the
extended points of the high volume areas there are further smaller

support zones which are less precise. The arrows indicate possible
entry points in liquid trading hours.

Type 2
Figure 21: Nasdaq June 2020 (1 min. chart, CET)

Here we see a similar situation. In the first phase of the US Main
Session there was a big sell off. This can be seen on the far left. After
that, however, strong buyers (Group A) took action and now looked at
the price "below value", forcing an intraday trend reversal. The
subsequent upward movement was again captured here with a volume
profile (grey field). In the middle area you can see a high volume area.
During the upward movement, strong buying had taken place there,
which left a thin profile zone. This was called an imbalance zone. Here I
have filled it with a circle.
Afterwards the upward movement started to slow down. Now
another group (B) of large market participants felt that the price was too
high (above value) and began to sell. Finally the price came back near
the lower circle. The author of market profile classic "Mind over
Markets" compares this situation with a balloon inflated. When it is
squeezed, it bounces back quickly (2).

Group B has now made a partial profit by bringing the price back a
good distance. However, they do not want to risk a fight with group A
and liquidate their position just before reaching the starting point of the
Imbalance Zone. They realize that the resistance will be too strong.
This reaction seems to be the most likely and has been marked here
with a grey bar. For a day trader it would have made sense to look for a
long position in this zone, because he knew that strong buying had
started there and that group A would not simply give up. Sometimes
prices even reverse in the area of the thinnest profile zone. This
depends on the strength of the trend and can be narrowed down using
methods that are shown later in the book

Type 3
A fight ensues. Group A gives up. The balloon bursts. This can happen,
for example, if a starting situation has changed rapidly, an unexpected
message hits the market, etc. Now group B will try to defend the newly
won territory. The same game starts in reverse. However, it is relatively
uncertain whether the classic rules of a pullback to the "breakout zone"
will always apply. There are also situations in which former zones are
not reached again. Markets do not function according to the modular
principle

10. General Set ups
This chapter briefly explains the setups that occur with each type of
price movement. In principle, they remain the same, but can form
different variants. Afterwards the reader has a sound basis to better
understand and use the Order Flow Tools. Using order flow tools
without reference points is not recommended.

10.1 Accumulation and Follow-up
It has been said so far that significant movements always occur when
OTF’s act aggressively. Previously they "accumulate" positions either
on the short or long side. In normal stock trading, a sideways phase
with a subsequent downward movement would be called "distribution".
Accumulation occurs in sideways phases rotating around a POC similar
to trading ranges. Here the market is "in balance".
You should not think that the bounce backs mentioned in chapter 9
only consist of 2-3 candles. They were shown in the previous charts to
understand the big picture in larger time frames. Accumulation patterns
also form in small time frames. This is even very helpful, because it
gives a day trader enough time to develop his trading plan. This is
shown in detail in later chapters.
An accumulation setup occurs at the beginning of a significant
movement, but often it also appears in the middle of a trend. This can
be observed very often with the E-Mini S&P. An accumulation setup
typically shows at least 5 more or less parallel (single) swings. This
corresponds to approx. 3 rotations near the POC and is a good rule of
thumb to get an indication that an accumulation could possibly take
place here.
The following chart shows the two most important setups. If an
accumulation has taken place, then a follow up setup is likely.
Figure 22: Bund May 2020 (5 min. chart, CET)

This accumulation was a beginning SHS pattern that was not
completed. As soon as you see a rotation with more than 5 swings you
can display a flexible volume profile and wait for order flow signals. This
is especially useful if the higher-level analysis at the beginning of the
trading period has identified important reference zones.
The Follow up set-up is much shorter. Once OTF traders have
started to move the market aggressively, they often only take a short
break. This follow up setup is a bearish Zigzag pattern, which was not
completed downwards, just like the SHS pattern before during the
accumulation setup.
In this case, no pullbacks took place, which went back to the
patterns. The time of the setup also plays a role. Both setups took place
in the afternoon. Institutional traders therefore did not have much time
left, as institutional Eurex trading closes at 17.30 with a Eurex closing
auction.
It was both setups that aroused the suspicion that an immediate
aggression of smart money would take place, as they were well- known
patterns that caused many traders without context thinking to take short

positions. Big players therefore did not need to stage a false outbreak,
but only "serve" the positions of retail traders who went short.
The Bund Future is a good instrument for beginners who want to
gain experience. Although it gives fewer signals, it is far more
predictable than the capricious and illiquid Dax.

10.2 Reversals
In the case of reversals it is important to distinguish between weak and
strong reversals. Typical for aggressive reversals is first and foremost a
fast sequence. It should therefore not consist of too many candles. The
actual candle pattern does not matter, because this looks different in
every time frame.

Strong Highs and Lows
An aggressive reversal offers a day trader the best chances if it takes
place at important reference points. On the following chart you can see
a strong high and a strong low in the E-Mini. In my apprenticeship we
always practiced this on the E-mini. It was called "Take out early
morning stops" and I have simply kept this name. Today it is easier to
handle, because you can also use additional tools that you didn't know
at that time

Figure 23: E-Mini S&P 500, August 2020 (3 min. chart, CET)

20 minutes after the opening of the US Main Session there was once
again an opening phase with stop running. VP and Order flow Tools
can be used to look for additional confirmations that make a fake
breakout more likely. For a day trader who specializes in this field, this
can be a lucrative area, as there are far more fake breakouts today
than in the past. Not only during the opening phase. But to learn this
you should not start with the Dax.
Early morning stops take outs are increasingly seen on EURUSD,
as many Asian amateur traders trade this pair of forex during the
European night time.

Weak Highs
Figure 24: EURUSD March 2020 (15 min. chart, CET)

Weak highs are characterized by a mixture of inside and outside
candles, narrow bars (candles) and dojis. The arrangement or order is
irrelevant. These patterns indicate a half-hearted reversal. In my
experience, from a charting point of view, they also symbolize a
situation in which a market hesitates to continue on its present course.
Accordingly, such constellations are increasingly found at the end of
temporary highs or lows.
After the weak high had formed on this chart, there was a fake
breakout of a well-developed SHS pattern further to the right. OTF
traders took over enough contracts from the opposite side to produce a
strong up move. Once they have planned a direction, they want to have
as few companions around them as possible.

Another form of a weak high or low is called an unfinished auction
and looks similar or identical to the weak high shown here. In this
situation no clear high or low is formed because two extreme points are
at the same price level. This does not always have to be exactly the
same to a tick. If no clear buyer or seller can be determined at a price
auction, the probability increases that this stalemate situation will be
solved by crossing the highs or lows again. Weak highs and lows have
been observed more frequently in recent years, as the markets have
been characterized by very low volatility. But they do occur and I have
integrated them into two examples in this book. They can provide
important information ahead of a trading decision. An example of this is
given later.

11. Hardware, Software and Data Feed
Hardware
The trading strategies in this book do not require an armada of
screens, order books and charts. Great importance is put on a clear
presentation, which allows a simple and quick overview. A day trader
rarely observes more than two markets simultaneously, depending on
the market situation. For this reason a laptop should be sufficient. A
large screen or a second screen is an advantage if you use other useful
pre-filters such as chart overlays.

Software
Unfortunately, it is not possible to follow the tracks of large market
participants with a free-of-charge broker software. For a professional
charting software with profiles and order flow you have to calculate
between 50 and 80 E. per month depending on the agreed usage time.
This is kept within limits when you consider that about 15 years ago a
day trader had to spend ten times or more for a professional software,
data feed and fast internet connections.
After trying out some order flow software in the last few years I finally
stayed with Atas. The name means "Advanced Times and Sales".
Basically it has to be said that there is no perfect chart software for
everything. It's hard enough to find one that covers most of the key
aspects of my preferred way of working
The reasons that speak for Atas are
- Professional chart software with integrated MP, VP and Order Flow
features
- Relatively good user-friendliness
- Intelligent shortcuts
- Good Skype support in different languages
- Favorable price - performance ratio in comparison
Further information can be found at www.atas.net
Other order flow software includes Ninja Trader, Volfix, Sierrachart,
Multicharts, Jigsaw daytradr. Ninja Trader offers all kinds of technical

indicators. However, after I had pretty much the worst Indicator / Return
Ratio in the world in my early years, I basically do without 98% of all
indicators. The Order Flow Suite of Ninja is only available in the
Premium Version. This is only worth the price if you work with standard
indicators of technical analysis.
Volfix does not correspond to my analysis methods. Multicharts
advanced is a good software, but a bit cumbersome. Jigsaw Daytradr
is specialized in order book scalping and not an all in one software.
Traders use it as a plugin for other charting software. Sierrachart allows
you to trade the European and US markets as well as the Asian mini
futures. However, it is not easy to deal with the extensive manual in
technical English.
It is said that Volume Profile is available for MT4 Chart Software. I was
never interested in this because I only use original data from the
Futures exchanges and a real day trader cannot do without order flow
tools. They are essential timing instruments. If you want to be
successful in day trading, you should at least be technically on the
same level as professional traders.

Data Feed
Now to the data feed. For the VP and Order Flow analysis you need
either Level 2 or Level 1 Top of the Book Data - Feed from the original
futures exchanges in the USA, Europe or Asia. Forex trading is a
decentralized market. Forex brokers do offer volume data. However,
day traders need accurate data from the original futures exchanges.
What is the difference to the normal data feed?
Level 2 data feeds also include the market depth (limit order) and
the price at which each order was executed. Level 1 Top of the book
data provides all recently executed market orders with price and time.
They are sufficient for the examples shown in this book. Top of the
Book Data feed is available at very competitive prices from major US
brokers.
A bundle (all US futures markets) with high quality data feed (CQG,
Rhythmic, Continuum) costs only about 4 US dollars per month for the
US markets with my US broker, but for Europe and Asia you still need
Level 2 data feed.

Level 2 data feeds are also available from some US brokers. For all
important US Futures Exchanges together there is a bundle. As a
beginner, you will be quickly overrun by expensive data feed providers
or order individually what you can have in a bundle. Data feed for Eurex
or Asian futures exchanges are also available at low prices. Below are
a few monthly prices for data feeds for your orientation without
guarantee
- Level 1 US Bundle All CME Markets 4 USD
(Dow, S&P 500, Nasdaq, EURUSD, Yen, Gold, Oil, US Treasuries)
- Level 2 US Bundle All CME Markets 31 USD
- Level 2 Eurex (Bund, Dax) 20 Euro
- Level 2 Osaka Futures Exchange (Mini Nikkei) 29 USD
- Level 2 Hong Kong Futures Exchange (Mini Hang Seng) 15 US

12. Order Flow Analysis
The order flow analysis is an important enhancement of the volume
profile analysis. It provides more detailed information on the activities of
market participants. It can be sub-divided into three main areas
- DOM (= Depth of Market)
- Footprint Chart
- Delta

12.1 Order book - DOM
The order book is also known as the DOM. It includes all factors that
move the price. Limit orders represent the liquidity of a market, but
cannot move a market on their own. Price movements can never occur
without the appearance of market orders.
Figure 25: DOM Ladder E-Mini S&P

The limit orders of the sellers are shown here on the right in red, the
limit orders of the buyers on the left in blue (contract numbers for
futures, quantities for individual shares...) In the middle you can see the
most recently executed trades on the Bid (buyer) and Ask (seller) side.
The last traded price is shown in the outer columns.
How do price movements occur?

The price always increases when a market buy order meets the
closest sell limit order(right) and the number of contracts is
greater than the number of contracts offered there. In this case,
this is called "lift the ask".
The price always falls when a market sell order meets the
closest buy limit order (left) and the number of contracts to be
sold is greater than the limit order on the buyer's side (closest).
In this case, the term "hit the bid" is used.
There are Day traders who work exclusively with DOM ladders.
However, this can cause problems, as this is where manipulation takes
place. This is known as "spoofing". These are deceptive maneuvers
that take place on the DOM ladder itself. Large limit orders are placed
in the market to generate a magnetic attraction. This tempts retail
traders to stand in front of the market in the hope that the market will
turn up if, for example, a large buy limit order appears on the left side of
the ladder and the market has not yet reached it.
Shortly before reaching this level, however, the limit order suddenly
disappears. This is also where Algos come in. There are voices talking
about the "golden age of the order book", when there were "only real"
limit orders. By this they mean the time before 2010. I cannot judge this.
But I can remember conversations with professional Frankfurt traders
in 2006. Even then, they complained vehemently about fake limit
orders.
As a day trader you should decide for you if you want to follow the
constantly up and down flickering numbers of the DOM ladder or if you
prefer to concentrate on some other meaningful things. There are
voices talking about the "golden age of the order book", when there
were "only real" limit orders. By this they mean the time before 2010. I
cannot judge this. But I can remember conversations with professional
Frankfurt traders in 2006. Even then, they complained vehemently
about fake limit orders.
Atas software offers features to help decipher the limit order
confusion on the DOM board. There is a system called Smart tape.
This tries to break Limit into certain orders of magnitude to locate
iceberg order. This is a fragmented limit order, which is placed in the
market by OTF's to disguise their intentions. But even if these are
localized, you still do not know when a significant price movement will

occur. In addition, other soft wares have been introduced recently.
These show changes in limit orders. However, this does not change the
fact that limit orders can suddenly disappear. My method to locate
iceberg orders and their resolution can be found in chapter 12.3.1
There are also other functions. With the Order Flow Indicator you
can have colored balloons with the numbers of the executed market
orders flying over the screen, project the VWAP or have possible
support and resistance zones displayed automatically. However, these
are often located where I would not draw them.
I only use a few functions of the order flow tools that I consider
useful. These are shown and explained in the following graphics. Apart
from that I state clearly that it is not the number of tools that bring
success. It is impossible to concentrate on everything. Trading will not
get better by this. The only important thing is that you know a few tools
that have hand and foot and that you can master them.
A simple alternative is just integrating the limit order into the chart
window. As a further supplement, you can, for example, activate a "Big
Trade" function or optionally other features that indicate when larger
contract numbers are being traded.
The following chart is from my Trade Archive. Here you can see an
integrated DOM histogram and the order mask.
Figure 26: integrated DOM and order mask

On the right side you can see the order mask and the Buy and Sell
Limit Orders of the DOM board separated by color in form of a
histogram in my chart window. In this case they replaced the DOM
board. For this trade I had additionally switched on the Big Trade
function, which is explained in the next section. This flickered up at the
end of the first long downward candle as a red circle. It confirmed in this
case that immediately after my short entry, large sales came into the
market. Now I could immediately put the trade on break-even, because
I had enough downward momentum behind me.
In my opinion, the most important function of the DOM ladder is the
increased speed of the order flow when large market orders are given
by OTF traders who aggressively move the market. In this example my
short entry was given after a rebound on the horizontal line visible
above. This corresponded to the criteria shown several times in this

book. Only a few minutes later, DOM showed a sharp increase of
activity. The aggressiveness of the sellers can also be seen in the sub
chart. There the great predominance of sell market orders is visible as
a heavily falling delta. OTF traders had started to move the market
aggressively via market orders.
DOM ladders may be useful for scalpers. However, there are other
ways to determine whether the speed of a market is increasing if you
have problems seeing it on the chart itself.

Features - Big Trades and Speed of Tape
The Atas software contains extra features that are constantly being
expanded. In this section I would like to show the features I like. The
Big Trade feature is a useful help. It shows simultaneously when an
increased number of market orders are coming into the market.
The colors green and red represent buy and sell orders that have
been executed. It does not depend very much on individual colors.
Unless they start in the middle section of a swing or trade. In this case
the color should already indicate the correct "direction of travel" as you
may see in the last graph. There a red circle was flashing up, which
coincided with my trade direction. At the end of a swing, both colors
can be seen, because this is where many market participants come
together for a variety of reasons.
Figure 27: EURUSD Big Trades September 2020 (5 min. chart,
CET)

If these alerts occur more frequently towards the end of a swing, as
shown here at the bottom middle of the chart, then you should either
liquidate a position that is running in profit or look for a potentially
promising trend reversal.

Speed of Tape
The Speed of Tape function can measure order flow speed on the
DOM ladder. This can be a pre-warning when the market is
approaching a turning point. While the Big Trade function will display
circles, the Speed of Tape function will change the color of individual
candles as the order flow accelerates. In the following example I have
illustrated a typical situation. You can also use this function to get first
hints for stop running or the imminent end of swings.
Figure 28: E-Mini S&P September 2020, (1 min. chart, CET)

In this case there was a clear stop running setup of the E-Minis, which
was easy to locate on a 1 minute chart. The white bar showed a
considerable acceleration of the order flow. The volume chart in the
sub chart shows a spike. Once the Speed of Tape function is switched
on, there is no need to look at the DOM and you can immediately look
for further order flow confirmations. These will be presented in the next
chapters.

12.2 Footprints - Inside the Chart
Footprint Charts, as the name suggests, show the tracks of institutional
traders (OTF traders). With this order flow tool it is possible to
determine if and when these have actually entered the market and
when they switch. If this is not the case, then a trade should definitely
not be made from the very beginning, even if the chart looks promising.
Prices can rise temporarily even in illiquid market situations and
create the impression that there is a clear movement. Consequently,
looking at a single candle or indicator on the normal chart in isolation
cannot tell whether OTF traders are actually at work here and how
much overweight they have. Footprint charts allow you to "open" the

chart and take a look inside. Here you can see all traded contracts on
the Bid and Ask side in an orderly fashion.

Figure 29: E-Mini S&P May 2020 (5 min. chart, CET)

This footprint chart shows a reversal of the E Mini. The Bid side has
been "hit" more often. Footprint Charts can be read diagonally from top
right to bottom left in a falling market. In this case you can see a red
number on the next lower floor. This number is only displayed by the
Order Flow software if the number of sell market orders is at least twice
as high as the limit orders on the buyer's side (hit the bid).
Conversely, for aggressive buyers (lift the ask) a green number is
displayed on the right side. This is then read from the bottom left to the
top right until the next upper level. The amount of overweight can be
adjusted with a multiplier as you like. Here you should experiment a
little bit, depending on the market you choose. The number of market

orders should be about twice the value or
more.
Figure 30: Footprint E- Mini S&P July 2020 (5 min. chart, CET)

A "stacked imbalance" (stacked order) occurs when several
imbalances are lined up on one side. This can only happen if big
players act aggressively via market orders. Retail traders could never
trade the contract numbers visible here. Large market orders from
institutional investors can only be partially executed. This way blocks
are created. They reveal the presence of institutional traders. These

are then visible in the form of a green chain on the right side for OTF
buyers (lift the ask) and a red chain on the left side (hit the bid)
It is not so much individual numbers that you should pay attention to,
but rather the imbalance that becomes visible and the immediate
succession. This can also be interrupted once and it does not always
have to be three or more imbalances in a row. It makes little sense just
to look at Footprints and act as soon as you see a stacked imbalance.
OTF traders often work in several phases. In case of short covering,
long liquidation or stop running, the imbalances may occur in opposite
directions. This is explained in complete examples in the back part.
Footprint and Delta are timing tools that in some cases make it
possible to time an entry to the minute. This is very important because
the volatility of today's markets makes this necessary. If you haven't
done the groundwork, the Footprint can't guarantee an exact decision.
Beware of opening a position on suspicion just because a chart pattern
looks good and then wait for something to happen on the Footprint.
A day trader should always pay attention to Follow Through. He
should be aware that the longer he has been in the market without
profit, the higher the risk. We are no longer on slower markets of the
last decade, where a trade "eventually" finds its way back.
After you have received a hint via a stacked imbalance, you wait for
a pullback. This often leads to the exact area where OTF traders have
started to trade aggressively. This pullback does not need to be in
accordance with charting criteria. Each individual candle also has its
POC. This can be marked by a window. You can see this in the last
charts.
This way you get mini support zones, which you can use for
orientation. If large numbers of candles point in the expected direction
and the candles are not too long, then they are good zones for a first
entry. It is an advantage if you get a trade in the initial phase of a clear
movement and start from the right foot, because after that doubts will
come up. This is due to a situation known by the abbreviation FOMO:
- FOMO = Fear of missing out
This creates a feeling of having missed something and then
suddenly acting in haste. It leads to hesitation and is exploited by
market makers. When the market starts to move upwards, this pattern

is called "long up, long down". It can also be seen as a set-up and will
be briefly explained here.
A day trader misses an entry due to hesitation or other reasons. The
actually planned trade starts well. Now he enters too late. Immediately
after the entry the trade comes back with a big impulse, as if someone
had observed this. All traders who entered too late are taken out of the
market.
This is all about "market psychology", which a day trader needs to
know when planning an entry. This should be done either
immediately or on a pullback, but never too expensive.
Alternatively, one can immediately risk a partial position and then
expand it in case of a setback.
With day trading you have never missed the chance of a lifetime. In
my statistics, about 12 good setups in a 6-week period from
September to mid-October 2020 appeared in crude oil alone. By this I
do not mean scalp trades. Two of them even took place in one day and
can be found in chapter 19. If you add other instruments, with a little
patience you can find a promising opportunity almost every day.
Provided you want to trade every day. So what? Figure
31: German Bund Imbalance Zones (5 min. chart)

Here you can see a stacked negative market order on the left. A large
imbalance on the next lower level on the bid side (left) is also visible
here without any color difference (red-green). This indicates a strong
tendency to sell. The price comes back a little bit afterwards, but the
POC's of the next candles do not rise above the high of the first
Imbalance candle on the left. Then a second impulse occurs. The
POC's fall. Large sellers become visible (circle). Now you can think of a
short entry.
The higher the relative difference within an imbalance, the better
If you ask a normal thinking person why prices are rising, he will
answer: "If more is bought than sold, the price rises and vice versa". On
the futures markets, every long position is followed by a short position.
A large market player who appears as a seller does not necessarily
expect the price to fall. He can also do this to close a long position that
he had taken profitably (long liquidation).
For this reason, one should not overestimate individual large
numbers on the Footprint, unless they appear repeatedly in certain
areas. Sometimes, for example, OTF's start selling even before a top is

reached. This was also shown in the Big Trade feature chart. They are
warning signals.
In the case of an ongoing trade, you should always find sufficient
"color" confirmation on the Footprint Chart to encourage you to hold the
trade. This is another advantage of Footprint Charts. It can motivate a
day trader to hold a trade as long as possible. For example, once you
have started a short trade, you want to see as many imbalances or red
numbers as you see on the next chart. It is also important that the
POC's of the individual candles move in the desired direction.
It is not always stacked imbalances that can be important. If you
see one or more green numbers in the top of a mainstream high or up
leg that are wedged in and immediately countered by high red sell
orders, then these are trapped traders. In such a case more haste is
required.

Figure 32: E- Mini S&P September 2020 (1 min. chart, CET)

At the top of this Footprint Chart you can see a large sell order (618
contracts). Extremely large orders at the suspected end of a swing are
often a good signal if the speed of trading activity increases at the
same time. In all cases it is important that no new high or low is
reached. Of course, here again the context plays a decisive role. Is it a
reference zone or liquidity zone? I would not trade any reversal without
VP, MP or chart technical indications.
Some volume traders have problems to interpret imbalances. This is
understandable if you look for them in the wrong places or consider
them in isolation. Especially before reaching a liquidity zone,
imbalances often occur in the "reverse" direction to push through zones
and trigger stop orders. Then, if a rejection occurs, it is important to be
alert.

The construction of a candle of a footprint chart should always be
completed before considering a trading decision. This applies to all
chart constellations regardless of VP and order flow analysis. A typical
mistake is to trade outbreaks or reversals without knowing how a
candle closes. However, there are also borderline cases. These fall
more into the realm of an experienced day trader and will not be
explained further here.

Footprint Chart with Volume Profile
Footprint Charts can also be displayed with volume profile. This way, a
visual assessment of the nearer situation can be made quickly.
Figure 33: E- Mini S&P Oktober 2020 (3 min. chart, MEZ)

This situation occurred 20 minutes after the opening of the Main
Session. On the left you can see a profile pattern, which was explained
in chapter 7 as a double distribution. After the upper cluster of the DD
pattern had formed, seller tried to bring the price down. They were
stopped at the lower part of the double distribution pattern. . This way
E-Mini was not able to break through this zone. The right candle,
although red, closes higher. Everything took place in an important zone

on the chart. This situation marked the beginning of an intraday uptrend
that lasted until the end of trading.
It is much more informative to watch events like these on the
Footprint and Delta charts than to follow the order book.

12.3 Delta
Delta is in my opinion the most important order flow tool, because it can
provide information on whether accumulation is taking place in
conjunction with deception and much more. There is another reason
why I like to work with Delta. It is always market orders who move
the market.
Retail traders work mostly with market orders. OTF traders mostly
work with limit orders to build up their positions undetected. Then they
switch to market orders and move the market. This is not always
exactly the same, but an order flow day trader can often focus on this
transition phase, because that is where the sweet spot is. If he waits
too long, he will miss the movement or an important part. If he enters
the market too early, the risk of being on the wrong side increases. The
action cycle of a day trader should always be like this:

Delta represents the difference between contracts bought and sold
during a selected time period and can be displayed in an order flow
software in various ways
- In the main chart in the form of numbers, which lie inside the individual
candles like footprint charts.
- In the sub chart in the form of a histogram or in cumulative form
- As positive or negative number in a lower horizontal bar
Many traders see Delta primarily as a confirmation of their trading
decisions. Accordingly, it is expected that price and delta will move in
the same direction. This is only true to a certain extent, as it applies to
normal price movements. However, it is precisely these turning points

that become interesting for a day trader, because this is where
deception often takes place.
From this point of view, it is especially the deviations that should be
considered. On the following chart the Delta Histogram shows strong
positive deltas. The price should rise, but it falls. Such situations do not
occur continuously, but often at the beginning of decisive movements.
A day trader who looks at possible turning points in reference zones
on delta constellations is much better off than analyzing limit orders on
the DOM ladder. The actually executed order (market order) and the
actual reaction of the market are the best indicators for a future
movement.

Figure 34: E-Mini S&P September 2020 and Delta Bars (3 min.
chart)

Here you can see that the delta is making new highs in the sub chart.
However, the market is not able to create a new high despite high
buying activity by retail traders. It is held by strong participants.
12.3.1 Absorption
Absorption is the most common form of market manipulation. It often
takes place in connection with iceberg orders. Iceberg orders are split
OTF orders. As the name suggests, they are the tip of an iceberg. For
example, if an OTF wants to buy 2000 contracts, then it is not possible
to make this publicly visible in the order book. In this case it would
immediately attract the attention of other market participants. These
would
- recognize the intentions of the big players and take the same market
direction

- prices would immediately show a great imbalance resulting in
extremely poor course executions
Accordingly, Iceberg Orders are dormant in the market as limit
orders in smaller quantities. These are often placed in zones that are
preferred by market participants. If the limit orders are hit, they are
automatically converted into market orders. As a result are no price
changes will occur. All market orders of the opposing side are
"absorbed" by iceberg orders.
This can take place in any time frame. Absorption often is easier to
localize with a summed (cumulated) delta curve. The following graph
should clarify this.
Figure 35: E-Mini Nasdaq July 2020 (5 min. chart, CET)

Here, retail traders sold strongly in the expectation that the downward
trend that has now begun would continue. They started selling when a
new low was reached. This can be seen on the declining line in the

Delta sub chart. Delta reaches a record low. The number of contracts
sold is far higher than the number of contracts bought. But what
happened to the Nasdaq future on the main chart at the same time? It
clearly bucked this trend and even rose slightly. This was only possible
through OTF buy limit orders. Retail traders without order flow software
could not see that all their sell orders were running against a wall of buy
limit orders. OTF's had managed to keep the market up the market up
unnoticed. The market orders were absorbed as the OTF buy limit
orders crept into market orders. Shortly after a stacked imbalance
appeared on the Footprint and the upward movement began.
In my opinion this is the safest method. To make a trading decision I
prefer Delta Tools in conjunction with the Footprint Chart clearly to the
order book. To demonstrate that my VP and Order Flow setups work in
all liquid markets, I would like to show another trade from my archive,
which Asian readers of this book should take a good look at. Order flow
analysis is unknown in China. This opens up great opportunities for
advanced retail traders.

Figure 36: Mini Hang Seng March 2019 (3 min. chart, local Hong
Kong time)

30 minutes after the start of institutional trading, an accumulation setup
appeared here, which I had mapped out in a few minutes with a flexible
volume profile. In this normally highly active phase, accumulation
setups (rotations) have a special meaning. Why? They form a tight
initial balance. In chapter 4 it was explained that a tight initial balance
increases the probability of a significant price movement. In this case,
this was 20 points which is nothing compared to an index level of
28,000 points.
But even if such favorable conditions show up in the form of a tight
initial balance at the beginning of trading, a day trader still faces the
central question in which direction the market will go. There is nothing
worse than being on the wrong side of the market on a trend day. Delta
can help decisively in determining both the market direction and the
right time to enter the market.
The cumulative delta shown in the sub chart showed a falling trend.
This meant that retail traders had entered more sell market orders and

were targeting a downward movement. The price on the main chart did
not confirm this at all. All sell market orders from retail traders were
absorbed by buy limit orders from market makers! The price was held
despite an overhang of sell market orders. With the resolution of this
delta divergence, the Mini Hang Seng clearly crossed the VPOC
upwards and did not turn back afterwards.
The Mini Hang Seng is a top index for day traders who are based in
Asia and really only want to be active for about 90 minutes a day.
Profitable movements mostly take place in the first 60 minutes after the
opening of institutional trading. Another advantage is that it opens only
a few hours after the US market closes. Thus, especially in the opening
phase there are tendencies with regard to market direction.
The following chart shows what happened in the following 60 minutes.

Figure 37: Same chart ca. 60 min. later (plus 400 points)

As you can see from this example, there is no need to spend the whole
day in front of the computer. Furthermore, it is not always the most
complicated methods that bring the greatest success.
Tip: Concentrate on a few order flow methods, but master them.
12.3.2 Variants
There are also divergences that take a different form. In the next
example you can see a falling delta while the price is still rising. Delta
takes on a kind of leading function here. The difference to the last chart
is that OTF´s intervene in the market earlier and operate with sell
market orders while the price is still rising. This is especially the case
with fast reversals. But there are also mixed forms. This will perhaps
become clearer in the following chart

Figure 38: E-Mini S&P September 2020 (1 min. chart, CET)

This is the E-Mini at the beginning of a pitch black day in September.
The overall trend was short. The market had formed a trading range
after about 20 minutes. A flexible Intraday VP could be plotted. 15
minutes after the opening, however, Delta had already formed a new
high, which was not confirmed by the index. This can be seen in the
middle of the Flex VP window. Iceberg orders were placed here, which
absorbed all Buy Market orders. It was a first warning signal.
Now OTF sellers sold clearly into the still slightly rising market. This
can be seen from the Delta divergence. The penultimate candle in the
profile showed a stacked imbalance of sellers, the first candle outside
the profile as well. Then a POC shift down took place. But before that
the POC of this flexible volume profile had provided a very good

reference zone for a ricochet, as shown in the form of the extended
POC line (arrow). All in all a bundle of short signals
If you pay close attention to this delta divergence you will notice that
there was one more final deception. Before the strong downward
movement started Delta rose a little bit. But the price fell. That again
was absorption. There are also mixed forms that are particularly
interesting. Exactly here was the sweet spot for the whole following
movement. The price hurried Delta downwards. For a better
understanding, I will show this situation again in close-up.
Figure 39: E-mini at the time of the beginning of the trend

It is often the price that anticipates the start of decisive movements, not
Delta as many traders assume. If such rather complex delta situations
occur in the opening phase of a market, special attention should be
paid. Let us briefly summarize this example again.
- Approx. 20 min. after the opening, Delta made a new high, but the
price not. This means a clear absorption. The Opening high got
rejected!
- After that, Delta fell, but the price rose slightly (direct divergence)
- 30 min. after opening new absorption...a raid started

What has become of this situation can be seen on the following chart.
This is reminiscent of the dynamics of the Hong Kong Chart. A similar
constellation existed there at the start of trading. On the following chart
the discussed opening range is hardly visible.
Figure 40: E-Mini S&P 90 min. later (1 min. chart)

For this trade too, there was no need to look at the order book.
Besides, I doubt very much whether anything at all would have been
seen there in the midst of raging numbers during the opening phase.
There are many variations of absorption. They are part of everyday
market life. Delta can help to find them. In my online course I will
present other important Delta setups. One way to work effectively is to
focus on price action and cum delta curve when important zones are
reached or the structure of a trading range is established. This requires
a little practice. You should also remember what I said about
accumulation setups in chapter 10.1. They are usually created in 3
swings surrounding the POC. Observation is important here.
In the last example, first of all the superior situation and a flexible
Intraday VP gave a good idea for a possible short trade. Then a delta
divergence appeared. The next step was to unfold the chart and look
for OTF sellers on the footprint chart. This gives the final confirmation in

a three step analysis chain that a day trader can easily handle in a few
minutes. Speed of Tape and Big Trades can always be left switched on
as an early warning system. But they are actually not absolutely
necessary.
This example showed once again that one minute time frames on
charts in many of today's situations are not only useful for scalping.
- Pay attention to whether a market forms a range in the first half
hour
- Note delta divergences, where the price is leading
- Intraday movements are no coincidence. Every trend begins
with turning points at micro level.
Unfortunately there are also market phases in which cum delta takes a
completely inverse course to the trading instrument. This is especially
the case for currencies at times. I don't know exactly why this is the
case. Perhaps it is because large market participants are increasingly
operating a cyclically or because the trading crowd is sometimes really
completely wrong, as studies have shown. Nevertheless, delta
divergences or hybrids can provide very helpful information BEFORE
anything happens.
In chapter 11 I mentioned that there is no perfect software that
meets my analytical requirements. Unfortunately with Atas you cannot
always adjust the cum delta curve as precisely as with Sierra Chart.
Probably they do not fully recognize the great benefit of the view shown
here. But I hope they will be able to improve the software. It is not all
about constantly developing new features. Effective trading methods
are characterized by the fact that they are visually relatively easy to
implement.
Figure 41: EURUSD August 2020 (5 min. chart, CET)

This is another of my favorite setups. In this example you first saw an
absorption and delta divergence. Retail traders sold, but the price did
not confirm this. Then the price took control again in the main chart. In
both cases, it led the way. Reality prevailed over the expectations of
many market participants. Note the long momentum candle that
appeared afterwards. This formed exactly when the stop-loss orders of
all traders who had taken a short position were triggered.
This is known as a short squeeze. A day trader who has previously
taken a Long position in this case will get a perfect confirmation of the
correctness of his trading decision at this point.
12.3.3 Delta Numbers and Profiles

Figure 42: Delta chart E-Mini S&P June 2020 (5 min. chart)

In the lower bar of this chart you can see the summed delta difference
of a candle in the form of a colored positive or negative number. In the
main chart you can see again the black windows with POC's of the
single candles. They are very important, because rising or falling
POC's are the basic requirement of every trade. The candle with the
name "Same" shows strong negative characters for the second time.
Here a change has taken place. Afterwards a risk-free entry was only
possible on the following three candles.

Delta Profiles

Delta can also be displayed using a volume profile chart. On the
following chart the triggering of a daily high takes place. High positive
deltas indicate that many traders have been trapped here.
Figure 43: E-Mini S&P, November 2020 (1 min. chart)

At the top you can see an extremely high number of executed buy
market orders. But the price immediately closes significantly lower. This
is a rejection in combination with absorption. All breakout traders were
trapped here. Order Flow combined with an important chart technical
situation gave decisive indications. The situation occurred 70 minutes
before the end of trading. E-Mini fell by 12 points.
Some traders only use volume profiles to get information about
important potential entry zones. I have also handled this in the same
way after I started working with this form of analysis a few years ago.
However, if you really want to follow the tracks of smart money, a
combined order flow analysis is essential. For Asian traders, I enclose
here an example from my archive showing an open reverse trade of the
Mini Nikkei Future, which could be seen immediately with
Delta.

Figure 44: Mini Nikkei Future Osaka January 2019 (5 min. chart,
CET)

Many retail traders bought here immediately after the opening. This can
be seen on the positive delta in the sub chart. However, the price did
exactly the opposite. Only early morning stops were triggered. This was
followed by a profitable downward movement.

13. The Preparation
Preparing for a trading day is very important, although it does not take
too much time. It should begin with a brief overview of the last trading
day. Investing.com is a good example of this. This website can be set
up in different languages and time zones. If you click on News (most
popular) and "Top 5 Things to know in the Market", you will get all the
important news that are moving the markets. As a day trader should not
have a ready-made opinion, he is not primarily interested in that. But by
a few headlines he sometimes gets important hints on which markets
the interest of the financial world is currently directed to. The content of
the news is rather obstructive for day trading, because it is proven that
when something appears as a headline, the actual event has been
priced in for a long time. Often a headline signals the end of a trend.
Volatility Check
Secondly, the price board showing the CBOE Volatility Index (VIX) is
displayed. This index indicates the short-term fluctuation intensity
(implied volatility) expected by the market using option prices on the
S&P 500 in percentage points. A high value indicates an unsettled
market, low values indicate a development without strong price
fluctuations. The VIX is therefore also known as the "Fear Index" and
forms an inverse correlation to the S&P 500. This is also useful for day
trading. At investing.com you can also project the Intraday VIX Chart by
clicking on it. This can be important if turbulence occurs during the
trading day and volatility gets out of control.

Figure 45: Vix Index 2020

Figure 46: CBOE Volatility Index July 2020 (daily chart)

My experience in recent years shows that the probability of profitable
price movements on the stock markets increases considerably when
the Vix Index reaches values above 18. Above a limit of 36, one should
no longer enter the market because the Fear Factor becomes too large.
It is also striking that volatility can no longer be predicted with highly
popular indicators such as ATR. This indicator is not useful for day
traders as it is lagging like all indicators. The months from April 2020
onwards show that volatility levels can change dramatically not only
from day to day, but also within the intraday range. This opens up the
biggest chances for those day traders with good timing tools, as long as
you follow a few rules.
Economic Data
After the volatility check, you call up the economic calendar and note
down clock times, which are marked with three symbols. The economic
calendar can also be set in all languages and time zones. The following
is an example in Eastern Time. Here the oil inventories are marked with
3 stars. If you trade oil on this day, you should close your position at
least 5 minutes before the figures are published.

Figure 47: Economic Calendar (Eastern Time)

The pipelines of oil produced in the Gulf of Mexico end in Cushing,
Oklahoma. It is the main deposit. From there it is transported all over
the world.
With oil, there are often considerable movements ahead of the
inventories news. These take occur on the same day or the day before,
because insiders always have more information than retail traders.
Once the news has been published, there are often no more major
movements (old news) or very frantic movements. Children's traders
from Tokyo to New York like to shoot at anything that moves when
business news is published. Many of them believe that the faster you
press the button the better the result will be. Institutional traders, on the
other hand, often use this to unwind positions profitably.
I can remember a situation from 2016 or 2017. The highest
inventory levels which have ever been statistically determined were
reported. For the oil price this was the worst news you could have
imagined, but the price then made a huge spike upward. The
subsequent news said that the oil price had risen "because the market
had realized that such a negative situation was unlikely to recur". For a
day trader it is not the best idea trying to draw conclusions from news
and act.

Some economic data is published one hour before the start of
trading. This can give you the opportunity to see how the market is
reacting. When it comes to interest rate decisions, it is best to wait for
the end of the following press conference.
The Preparation of the Screen
After reviewing the economic calendar, we complete the volume profiles
and wait for the opening of the market.
What data should be entered and/or observed?
- Closing price last main session (not so important, more for the Asian
follow-up trade of a US Main Session)
- Day high and day low last main session
- Where are the early morning and non- institutional High/ Lows?
- POC Market and Volume Profile
- Extension of yesterday's Value Area Highs and Lows. (Automatic
option)
- Is a trend apparent? If so, how long has it been going on? Are there
reference zones?
- Where have major market participants been active during the last
three days? Strong high volume areas, imbalances, tails, single prints
can be identified quickly
- In which direction did the market go afterwards or last? (Main
session)
After the opening of the Institutional trading, you wait half 15 min. until
all resting orders are executed. Then you can make a first analysis. You
ask yourself the following questions
- Did the market open above or below yesterday's upper/lower value
area?
- If so, did he stay there?
- What was the fluctuation range of the first 15 minutes compared to the
previous days?

- Were there any imbalances (buying or selling tails) after the opening?
If you have done good groundwork and developed a trading plan, then
in a positive case you can consider a trade after half an hour. Several
examples presented so far show this.

Unscheduled News
Tracking news sources during trading is a great danger for day traders.
It is distracting and tempts you to be influenced unconsciously. If you
have worked out a trading plan, then you should implement it if it
becomes current. Many traders fail because of this. Nevertheless, there
are situations which should be paid attention to. If a market suddenly
becomes volatile beyond the expected news, you should turn on a
streaming news channel and see if anything unexpected has
happened. This is especially true if you are in a trade.

14. Liquidity and Volatility - An Important Pair
Figure 48: L and V Optimum

Many mistakes in day trading result from a wrong interpretation of
volatility. It can be assumed that there are many daytraders who have
had to pay an expensive price this year. They only know the sentence:
"Volatility is the trader's friend". Half-knowledge can be expensive if you
misinterpret situations.
If you talk about volatility, you should not forget the aspect of
liquidity. It is like a marriage. If it is harmoniously balanced, then
happiness and contentment prevail. If limits are crossed, then one
partner withdraws. If the volatility becomes too high, panic ensues. The
liquidity leaves the market.
Liquidity consists of limit orders that originate from large market
participants. They ensure an orderly execution of buy and sell orders
hitting the market. If big players leave the market, liquidity dries up.
Prices move totally chaotically and adventurous order executions occur.
Inexperienced day traders then run into a fire, because they do not
know the following sentence
"Never trade a scared market"
Many day traders have never experienced situations where liquidity
dries up completely. As a daytrader I experienced the financial crisis of
2008 first hand. The volatility of March/April 2020 exceeded it by far.

With stock indices one could easily get a bloody nose as a daytrader.
But the solution was to switch to other trading instruments like
EURUSD or Bund. At the same time, day traders had much better
trading opportunities than in previous years, when volatility was at its
lowest. I can still remember when the euro did not have a bandwidth of
more than 300 or so pips in 2 years!
Both extremes lead to an unfavourable situation for traders, but a
middle range as shown in the Vix chart above is optimal. Every trading
instrument has liquid and illiquid trading phases. Markets constantly
oscillate between order and chaos. It is relatively easy to check this. If
you look at a 15 minute chart like the following during peak trading
hours, you should not enter a market at all.

Figure 49: destructive chart structure (15 min. chart)

The characteristics of a chaotic market phase can easily be seen in the
chart and also in the structure of the candles. Long wicks (spider legs),
many dojis. In this case it was a mixture of high volatility and extremely
weak liquidity. There is no follow through. After a short time it became
clear that the market was in a trading range. Trading Ranges are
always characterized by declining volume. But it is not a trading range
comparable to the examples shown so far.
If this chart had been mapped to a smaller time frame, you would
have seen a non - directional chart structure with edgy (boxy) shapes
and a lot of overlapping during almost the entire main trading period. Of
course, every trading range dissolves at some point and forms a chart
structure with better filled candles. This was not foreseeable in this
market phase.
For this reason it is important to locate a Trading Range as soon as
possible. In this situation a day trader has no choice but to stand on the
sidelines and give preference to observing other trading instruments.

"When in doubt, stay
out."

The structure of the volume profile can also show whether it is
advisable to trade. The following volume profiles are taken from the
months April 2019 and April 2020. I presented them once for
comparison because they show completely different basic market
situations that are hardly recognizable based on the chart course alone.
They show the E-Mini S&P in a 5 minute time frame.
Figure 50: Volume Profile E-Mini S&P April 2019 and April 2019
(5 min. chart, CET)

On this graphs you can study two extremes. While volatility was at
record lows for many years (left), from mid-March 2020 it took on a
dimension never seen before. The profile on the left lingers longer at
each price level and forms significantly wider bars on the histogram. A
year later, it seems to be unstoppable in its activity. The countless
spikes reflect nervousness and lack of liquidity.
The difference becomes particularly clear when comparing the
strength of both POC's. Although the chart shows a certain structure on
a 5 minute time level in retrospect, all price action was characterized by
extreme fluctuations. Normal trading got out of control and was stopped
several times. The drying up of liquidity drove volatility like a bush fire
and brought it to ever new heights.

15. Characteristics of Individual Trading
Instruments
One may wonder why the list of trade instruments (chapter 3) does not
include the British pound, the Canadian dollar and the Australian dollar.
In my opinion, these markets are not as suitable for intraday trading as
the two major pairs EURUSD and JPYUSD. But there are also traders
who trade Cable (GBPUSD), Loonie (CADUSD) and Aussie
(AUDUSD) on a day trading basis.
Large markets like EURUSD or E-Mini S&P are not easy to move.
Substantial intraday movements are only possible if large institutional
market participants become really active. The more volume, the more
information can be expected from VP and Order flow.
Each instrument has its typical behavior. The Dax moves fast, but
capriciously. This is because this index has very low liquidity
compared to US futures. In the afternoon it has no life of its own and is
more or less dominated by the course of the US markets. Sometimes
conclusions can be drawn from this, especially in case of changes of
direction. If you are trading the Dax, you should read through the
chapter Fake Moves carefully, because here deception and stuffing is
taking place without end. But this also offers chances, if you are
prepared for it
The Bund Future moves less restlessly, but offers fewer set ups.
Mini Hang Seng is the favorite in the Far East. For Asian readers
another example of a China trade can be found in the bonus chapter.
JPYUSD sometimes moves more dynamically than EUR/USD and
can deliver fast rallies but can also be slippery. This is partly because
it is the most liquid pair after EUR/USD. On the other hand, this pair
reflects a very wide range of macroeconomic influences. It can even be
used as a filter for the stock market. Another advantage is that trading
in the Yen Future has three peak periods. On reversals we have been
seeing a second higher peak, or a second lower bottom for years.
Figure 51: Typical reversal USDJPY Forex

EURUSD offers opportunities in the morning as shown and is more
difficult to trade in the afternoon as forex options are settled daily (New
York Cut). Unlike in the past, EURUSD can also provide trends during
Asian trading hours, based on previous day's volume profile zones.
Gold rarely gives clear signals at small time levels because the
footprint chart is less informative. However, this seems to be slowly
improving. Gold occasionally gives very good bottom squeeze signals
as shown. In chapter 19 you can find another current example and
more information. Traders studying gold should know that the
December contract of the gold futures has been the most important and
liquid for years from the second half of the year. This is due to seasonal
reasons.
Besides the profile and order flow analysis, there are also basic
fundamental constellations which, when made visible on the chart, can
serve as a pre-filter for individual trading instruments. For example,
there are clear interrelationships between the euro and dollar index,
Dax and Nasdaq, S&P and yen futures, gold and T- Bonds, Hang Seng
and China 50 Future, oil and dollar etc.
If each of these interrelationships shows strong deviations over a 60minute time frame, then the probability of larger price moves or turning

points increases. This way, it is possible to obtain rough clues to keep
a particular instrument under special scrutiny. It is always
advantageous to have some basic fundamental relations behind you.
All this is explained in my online course and would go too far here.
A few years ago, I spent some time observing the positions of the
large institutional traders (commercials). These are announced once a
week with a three-day delay (COT = Commitment of Traders Report). I
found that they are very rarely helpful for day trading strategies. My
professional Swiss colleagues use COT reports on a long-term basis
for hedging purposes.
Crude oil is a very dynamic market that can move 10 - 20 ticks or
more in a few seconds (1 tick = $10, example 37.50, 37.51, 37.52...)
The dynamics of the crude oil market results from the fact that there are
fewer institutional traders. Banks only play a limited role here with long
only certificates. Many oil companies have their own trading
departments that hedge physical stocks. Beside you find large private
speculators.
If hedges are then liquidated, this can lead to rapid upward
movements. In general, you can say that crude oil has more to do with
"real" classic chart patterns than other futures markets. The next
difference with crude oil is that the futures contract expires each month
around the 20th. At least 4 days before this date, oil should no longer
be traded, because then the volume of the expiring contract will
decrease rapidly.
In the case of oil, only the full contract is generally suitable for day
trading. The Crude Oil Mini contract, unlike other popular minis, has
very little liquidity. You shouldn't be fooled into trading something like
this just because it requires half the margin. Beginners may not be told
this. Until last year this was similar with the micro contracts of gold,
S&P, Dow, Yen etc.
For a day trader with limited resources it is advisable to trade oil only
if the chart shows well filled candles even on a 1 minute time frame,
whose average intraday length at the beginning of a trade does not
exceed 10 ticks. A few examples can be found in the final chapter 19.
After appropriate training, Crude Oil is at times a good market for day
traders. This small overview is intended to help beginners to avoid a
few basic mistakes.

Every little mistake due to ignorance costs money and is
avoidable

16. More on Market Profile
This book has already explained what single print zones and
imbalances are. These are called buying and selling tails in the market
profile analysis. In the following I will give another example of a
combined presentation of volume and market profile. You can also
replace the representation of the letters of the market profile with a
block system.
A Market Profile Interpretation
Figure 52: Light Sweet Crude August 2020 (30 min. chart, CET)

Here you can see a buying tail on the left. OTF buyers entered the
market on day 1, because the sharp drop in price appeared "below

value" to them. Their intentions became even clearer when you
consider the length of the buying tail by which they brought the market
under control. On the following days they showed no intention to leave
the market. How do you see this? Day 2 was a balanced D profile day,
which is neutral.
Day 3 started again with OTF buying activity in shape of a buying
tail. At the upper end of the market profile there was no more selling
tail. It is an unfinished auction (chapter 10.2) This indicates that OTF
sellers no longer had the conviction to really move the price down. The
subsequent downward movement on day 3 only occurred during the
low volume off-exchange hours. You might remember that I said, that
you primarily should observe what happened in the last main session,
when analyzing a market at the beginning of a new main session. This
is something you should be aware of, especially with oil. This indicated
that OTF sellers were still in control of the overall situation.
The extended POC of the volume profile of day 1 (left) signalled a
possible entry zone for a long position in crude oil on day 4 (right) at the
start of trading. It is worth noting that the extended POC of the market
profile provided an additional signal that was more accurate than that of
the volume profile. Oil stop-running is almost normal before major price
moves. The correct entry point was just below the extended VPOC of
day 1 and was not marked here with a horizontal line.
With regard to the assessment of the market context, a review of the
last 3 days seems most important to me. I believe that the significance
of zones decreases the longer they are in the past, epecially today.
Your working screen should not look like a zebra crossing.
I hope that this example can show that the market profile can help to
give a realistic insight into whether OTF buyers or sellers are in control
of the whole process. A daytrader who would have included the
approach shown here in his considerations would not have been
surprised at all when the strong upward movement began at the
beginning of day 4. He would have been prepared for this situation.
When concrete indications of reference points from day 1 came, he
would have tried with conviction to find a low risk entry point on a small
time frame. And it is not only that. It would have given him the mental
strength to hold this trade as long as possible and not just scalp a few
pips (Are you with me?).

Opening Phases
Interpreting opening phases is a special topic. Here the experience and
knowledge of an instrument plays a role. In some cases they require
quick decisions. The market profile distinguishes between different
opening phases

Open Drive
The market opens above yesterday's range and immediately continues
in the same direction. The whole day is marked by continuous range
extensions in one direction. A trend day.

Open Drive with Re -Test
The same situation, but the market falls back briefly to an important
reference point. This can be the high/low or the value area high/low, the
upper/lower limit of the previous day's range or yesterday's high or low.
As the name suggests, in this case the initiators of the open drive test
whether important zones are holding.

Open Rejection Reverse
The market opens outside yesterday's range, is rejected and
immediately shoots in the opposite direction as shown several times in
this book. Such a situation offers day traders the best opportunities. But
he should know what he is doing, because this requires a quick mind.

Acceptance
The market opens outside yesterday's value area, but remains within
yesterday's range at higher or lower levels. A new price level is
accepted, but there is no big movement (Inside or D-Day). In this case
you can try to trade in both directions.

Rejection of Value area
The market opens within yesterday's value area, but soon leaves it in
one direction. Then it leaves the old daily range. If this takes place
about 30 minutes after opening, then one can assume that the market
situation has changed and should move in the same direction.
All this contains a lot of theory, but sometimes it can give you ideas if
you try to put these situations into the overall context. Of course, a

realistic way of thinking also helps here. For example, if the market is in
an excessive phase after several days of upward movement, an open
drive is less serious than after a consolidation phase.
Open rejection reverses open up better opportunities if, for example,
the overall context is bearish and the market appears temporarily
strong during the opening phase. If you are in an established
downtrend on a daily basis, then you should look for more profitable
set-ups. However, these are not the best method for traders who are
only fixed on one trend. Today, trend changes can happen faster than
you think. This is shown in chapter 19.5 for crude oil. There was a good
opportunity to trade with the trend during one day, but an even better
opportunity with the reversal.

Further Aspects of the Market Profile
- Market profiles are very suitable for creating a flexible profile of
several days, if the situation on the chart gives a first indication. If, for
example, you display a market profile of the last 3 days and the next
day you get an intraday entry signal somewhere in the middle, the OTF
is often missing. The probability is high that the price will not develop a
trend. The same applies to the volume profile
- If you plan a long position and see selling tails in at least two individual
market profiles of the last few days, then the starting position is not
optimal, because you know there have been OTFs active in the market
that are oriented in the opposite direction.
- The longer a tail, the stronger the presence of a higher time frame
trader (chart 74) However, you get similarly important information even
if you do not see any tails.In a generally rising trend market, this means
that OTF`s are less interested in turning the market around . This
again falls into the area of market logic.
- In case of an imminent breakout, VPOC and MPOC should be
identical. If they are not, then the probability increases that the POC of
the market profile will be targeted again by market makers to call stops.

Figure 53: Light sweet crude June 2020 (15 min. chart, CET)

A flexible market and volume profile was displayed on this chart after it
became apparent that it was a trading range (D profile). This profile
ends with the start of the Main US Session. You can see both the zone
with the highest turnover (VPOC) and the zone with the longest dwell
time (M POC). Both POC's differ from each other.
At the beginning of the Main US Session of the new day, the price
initially moved towards the zone where the prices had stayed the
longest (MPOC). There had been many small transactions, especially
during the Asian and European trading period. Before a large upward
trend began, as many traders as possible were brought in to cover their
long positions too early. On the right side of the chart you can see that
during Asian trading hours important reference zones are often
accepted. In this case it was the Value Area High of the flexible volume
profile that provided a second rebound as the market had shown a
bullish tendency towards the end of the US trading.

The Market Profile on a Small Time Frame
A day trader will not find a favorable starting situation if a large part of a
movement has already taken place. So it makes sense to use the
market profile on a smaller time frame to get information about a
changing market situation. As with the flexible volume profile, the focus
is always on determining as quickly as possible whether the situation
changes in favor of an OTF buyer or seller. This can also involve
market profiles of individual intraday segments. The assessment of the
initial phase plays a special role here.
To illustrate this, I am adding two more examples to this chapter on
market profile. The next example is again about identifying and
assessing a trading range as quickly as possible. Especially important
for a day trader is the opening phase. This should not be judged
according to the older views of market profile theory and initial balance.
Everything happens much faster today.
The following chart shows a trade that did not require a lot of
preliminary work, but arose from an intraday situation. The following
chart shows a trade that did not require a lot of preparation, but arose
from the intraday situation.

Figure 54: Light Sweet Crude Oil October 2020 (1 min chart,
CET)

On this slide we see the beginning of the Main Session. Again, I mean
"the busiest time" for crude oil, which results from the traditional pit
trading hours. This can also be seen from the volume spikes at 15.00
CET. After a long opening candle a trading range is evolved. This could
be drawn in after about 20 minutes.
At the same time you can see an accumulation pattern as it has been
described more often now. On the market profile a D profile was
formed. After 32 minutes you could see a false breakout downwards.
This reached exactly to the buying tail of the TPO on the left side. This
contains 4 single column rows. Ok, there was a pin bar to see which led
to this. But the view of the market profile is more compelling especially

for less practiced eyes. Now you can search for stacked imbalances
and find them exactly where I marked it.
In addition to key technical chart zones and reference zones, the end
points of a market profile can also provide helpful information. Such a
case is shown in the following example
Figure 55: E-Mini S&P September 2020 (3 min. chart. CET)

Once again a long candle announced a trading range. This was drawn
exactly after 4 visible swings. During the US lunchtime a short-lived
breakout from an inverse SHS pattern in the left half of the trading
range occurred. Afterwards the trading range was left upwards. It was
a false breakout. Then the price was brought back down.

At the upper end of the market profile you do not see a selling tail.
This was an indication that this downward movement was supported by
little OTF conviction. Furthermore, after the breakout you see a weak
high of an unfinished auction , which I marked with the arrow
(chapter 10.2).
When the price fell below the lower limit of the trading range, the
buying tail, which was formed in the first third of the trading range,
offered visible support. Now all you had to do was look for a low risk
entry on a 1 minute chart. Exactly there you will find the stacked
imbalance, which signals the beginning of an intraday trend. There
were several arguments to look for a stacked imbalance, which
resulted from the context. Only the spot marked here offered enough
reasons to look for an imbalance as a starting point of a potential trade.
The market profile helped to locate the beginning of an excellent
intraday trend.

17. Filtering the Ledge
Strong trends require the special attention of a day trader. In this
chapter I would like to briefly present a volume profile set-up that I have
developed for current market phases. It can be used from time to time
in case of very strong intraday trends. This Flex VP Setup has been
developed out of one of my older chart technical working methods
which I learned a long time ago. The prerequisite for this technique is,
however, that you have previously localized the beginning of a
significant movement on a higher time frame using the tools explained
in the previous chapters. I don't like to use the word trend, because in
day trading it can change faster than you think. First of all, here are a
few brief explanations.
Ross Hooks are called the temporary end points of a trend section.
They were named after my mentor and always arise when profit-taking
occurs within a strong trend (short covering in downtrends or long
liquidation in uptrends). If the trend is then resumed, a Ross Hook must
inevitably be taken out. This was called "Take out of the Hook" in my
apprenticeship. None of this should be difficult to understand, because
it is based on normal price action of an intact trend.
Ledges are parallel mini-congestion zones that form in strong trend
sections when the trend comes to a break. In my experience a Ledge
should not have more than 8 candles (usually 4-6). If you have a little
practice, you can quickly draw them in by connecting two absolute
highs or lows or even candle bodies with each other. One tick is not
important. A single candle can also have a completely different length
within a ledge.
With Ledges you should distinguish 2 types. With direct ledges,
there is no real hook because it does not interrupt the trend much.
Hanging ledges are the better ones, because they can only be created
after a hook has become clearly visible. They have more price potential
if the trend is resumed. The following intraday chart shows some direct
ledges on the Fdax in a strong intraday trend.
Figure 56: Direct Ledges Fdax

You can trade breakouts from a direct ledge, but that is not what I
prefer. The next chart shows two ledges hanging back in a strong trend
on a 1 minute chart on a volatile day of the Nasdaq 100 Future. I filtered
these with flexible volume profiles. In this case, the beginning of the
trend could be localized on a 15 minute chart beforehand.
Only a year ago, a 1 minute time frame would not have been
considered here. But the volatility in the year 2020 makes it possible for
day traders to trade in this time frame with regard to an intraday trend
or significant price segment. In general, however, it should be known
that downtrends are much faster than uptrends. You can choose a oneminute time frame as long as the chart does not form any angular, boxy
shapes or many spider legs. This was not the case on the following
Nasdaq chart.
Figure 57: Hanging Ledge Mini Nasdaq Future September 2020,
(1 min. chart, CET)

P profiles are normally bullish. However, in chapter 7 it was said that P
profiles are also found at the end of temporary upward movements.
This is the case here, if you look only at the small zones with the flexible
volume profiles. These were drawn in after a hanging ledge was "in the
making". Finally, a strong trend had begun and it was suggested that
this might be a short counter-trend movement, which would have to be
reversed in a strong trend. But who knows that in advance? At least the
resulting P profile suggested that the short covering process could soon
be over. With breakout of the Ledge to the downside, the POC of the
Flex VP is undercut. Exactly at this point it is a good idea to enter a
trade in trend direction, unless you were already positioned at the

beginning of the trend. There is not "the" one method, but always a
more aggressive or defensive behavior of a trader.
If in a strong intraday trend you see a Ross Hook followed by a
trailing Ledge plus P profile (b profile in an uptrend), then there is a high
probability that the trend has resumed before the Hook is taken out. A
starting point is always a drop below the Flex VP POC.
In the past, I used to try to deal with these situations from time to
time as well. But you always had to act more or less blindly. In the end,
you can never be sure whether a trend will really continue if you just
have a normal chart available. The trend is your friend till it ends.
However, if a P profile is formed together with the breakout from a
trailing ledge in the trend direction, the situation is different. In such a
case, OTF's (other time frame traders) step on the gas again after
taking a short break.
All this can be additionally secured with order flow signals, but it is
not necessary with P and b ledges on a 1 minute chart. In this case you
had six indications for a low risk entry.
- Established trend
- Hook
- Hanging ledge
- P Profile
- Passing below the POC
- Order Flow confirm if required
Ledge No. 1 on the left side of this chart scored 120 points or more,
Ledge No. 2 more than 70 points. After entry, there was no reason to
end the trade earlier.
Now you could say that you could have seen this with an optimized
moving average, a Keltner channel, an indicator, Bollinger bands or
"just like that" and so on. The problem with all these indicators,
however, is that they only prove to be correct in retrospect. If you are
honest with yourself, you have experienced many situations where a
hoped-for trend came to a halt exactly after you entered it. For this
reason there will never be trading systems that work, because they only
work with past values. In this case, however, you will receive hints from
the present. A
P-profile indicated short covering, a drop below the

Flex POC plus order flow signaled a clear action of the OTF's in the
here and now. This is the exact difference between this form of analysis
and indicators. Indicators always lag behind.
The maximum risk on both trades was 15 Nasdaq points. This setup
has to go into profit immediately as soon as the POC with closing price
is breached and the breakout of the ledge occurs. The stop is
immediately moved to break even if a follow through takes place,
because the entire trading plan was based on a strong trend. If there
had not been an immediate follow through, this plan would have
become obsolete in a few seconds. Now one can ask if this has
anything to do with scalping. In my opinion no, because everything was
based on the imminent expectation of a new trend section. Scalpers do
not go for 100 points on the Nasdaq. It was just a 1 minute time frame,
which was optimal under the given volatility conditions. Even in this time
frame clear and well filled candles were formed, but a situation that was
easy to interpret. In chapter 19.7 you find some more examples.

These special setups do not appear often. But they can
sometimes present real gifts to a day trader who knows
how to handle them.

18. Broadening Tops - a Warning Signal
Broadening tops are classic patterns which even today still have a
significance that should not be underestimated. They rarely occur and
characterise situations in which large market participants are beginning
to leave the market or have already done so. This results in chaoticlooking oscillations that are difficult to interpret. Broadening tops occur
at the end of long upward movements. They are characterised by five
diverging oscillations that are difficult for traders to interpret. A
retracement follows afterwards, which in most cases makes up 40 60% of the last downswing.
This pattern was first described in detail by Richard M. Schabacker. He
is regarded as the real father of Technical Analysis. In his work
"Technical Analysis and Stock Market Profits"(annex) he gives
examples from 1928 to 1936 and explained the fundamental
background. Broadening Tops always occur when liquidity is depleted
and large market participants leave the market. There are no bottoms
in the opposite sense to other chart patterns.
The following chart caught my attention in the afternoon of 20.2.20
Broadening tops are sometimes called "megaphones" but it is not
necessarily the same. A real Broadening Top is only created when both
the high and low of each swing form a new extreme. BT's are easiest to
locate if you number the beginning of each swing with numbers from 1 5

Figure 58: E-Mini S&P 20.2.20 (60 min. chart, CET)

With every new low/high the next number begins. The pattern is
complete when there is a downswing from point 5 which reaches below
the low of point 4. I have marked this with a horizontal line. Normally the
closing price of the last downswing must be below point 4. But the last
part of Downswing No.5 was so violent in this case, that it became
obvious that something special had happened here.
Afterwards the already mentioned retracement followed. This
reaches in most cases 40 - 60% of the price fluctuation from point 4 to
point 5. Often you can see two last upswings which form the
retracement. In this case it was a bearish zigzag. In the following days
the S&P experienced a sell off in a way not seen before. By the end of
the following week it had lost almost 600 points.
Grafik 59: E-Mini S&P end of February 2020 (60 min. chart, CET)

In this book, possibilities were shown how to work with flexible volume
profiles and keep an eye on the big picture. An order flow day trader,
who takes just a few important things of chart technique into
consideration, did not need to know anything about Broadening Tops.
All he had to do was plot a trading range plus volume profile, note the
false breakout upwards and extend the POC of the flexible volume
profile before the start of the following main session. Although a
ricochet only occurred here at the end of the main trading session, he
would have had a very good idea about the direction of the next few
days, as we were dealing with a 60 minute chart.

Figure 60: E-Mini S&P end of February 2020, (60 min. chart, CET)

After the fake breakout OTF Sellers acted highly aggressive. The time
volume spike in the sub chart shows this. Now the Broadening Top was
completed. I have taken this example to show how helpful flexible
volume profiles can be in combination with some technical knowledge.
Again I mean trading ranges. They are extremely important. This is
where the potential for future movements is created. If you know how to
plot and interpret them, you can get signals that are very important.
And it was the same here. The extended POC of the volume profile
indicated the beginning of one of the sharpest corrections in the history
of the stock markets. This example once again underlines the main
theses of this book.
Every major trend begins with turning points on a small time
frame (Got it now?)

If you observe the false breakout from the trading range shown in
the last chart more closely, then you will also see a broadening top
here, which would have been very visible at a smaller time frame. This
would have provided further confirmation.
A beginning trend is always the best starting point for a day trader,
but this is true for everything. When your neighbor starts to talk about
something, the trend is already old. In chapter 13 volatility thresholds
were shown, which in my experience seem to make sense. On this day
a volatility phase started, which forms the V and L optimum shown at
the beginning of this chapter. Only more than 14 days later the upper
limit of the volatility threshold was reached. At this point, day traders
ran into the fire of an exuberant volatility, which was fueled like a bush
fire by the dried up liquidity.

19. Complete Examples
The high volatility of the markets in 2020 makes it more difficult to find
reference zones resulting from past days. The overall trend is often not
clearly defined and can change quickly. Therefore, this book also
presented methods to use volume profiles highly flexibly within intraday
segments.
At the end of the main part of my book, I would like to present a few
current examples, which contain all the elements described in this
book. A daytrader should never act spontaneously or prematurely, but
always take as many probabilities as possible on his side before he
considers a trade.
He must always find a story that is made up of a puzzle and patiently
wait for promising situations. The art is to constantly switch between
time frames and profiles. It would be too easy if you always assumed a
fixed 30-60 minute profile based on the 5/4/3/2/1 previous days and
then constantly expected meaningful reference points for the current
day. But even with that there are good opportunities as you could see
over large parts of the book
All the following examples were analysed without DOM Ladder,
Smart Tape, Heatmap, VWAP, Multi Trading Screens, Tick charts,
Range charts, Big Trades, Speed of Tape, Betha xyz systems or other
feature. In order to localise the promising situations shown here, no
colourful basket of analysis tools was needed, but a few important
basic knowledges of charts, volume and market profile, delta and
footprints. However, this does not mean that everything was super
easy.
If you go to a forest to pick mushrooms, you don't need to
know all the varieties. Only the poisonous ones!
The focus should always be on an orderly approach, which includes
as many marginal factors as possible and tries to classify them.
Everything should be kept as simple as possible.

19.1 Yen

We will now come to a special form of reversal. This is a clash between
two major market participants. I have chosen the yen future as an
example. It corresponds to the JPY/USD currency pair. In forex trading,
this is usually shown in reverse as USD/JPY. The yen future requires a
little experience and is not a popular trading instrument for many
traders, but at times it delivers more dynamic movements than
EUR/USD. It can also be used to judge the authenticity of movements
in the stock market. The yen has a reputation as a crisis currency, but
this is based more on its carry trade function, another issue. In the
chapter on the characteristics of individual trading instruments, I forgot
to mention that this currency pair also reacts strongly at times to
changes in the US interest rate structure.
The following example is not for weak-nerve traders, but it was
clearly and safely calculable. The yen future had made a downswing at
the end of August, which was completely covered on the next chart with
a flexible volume profile on a 15 minute chart. The extended POC of
this profile showed a "normal" rebound movement after the opening of
Asian trading.

Figure 61: Yen Future August 2020 (15 minute chart, CET)

The rebound movement visible here through the arrow offered a good
opportunity for day traders based in Asia to take up a profitable short
position. The day before had already provided an opportunity when the
Yen Future made a quick recovery rally after bouncing off the lower
high volume cluster of the profile. The Yen Future is not a trading
instrument for every day, but provides dynamic movements every now
and then
On the new trading day on the right side of the chart, there was a
sudden sharp rise half an hour before US main trading hours. However,
this stopped near the 3 day high. The resistance of the high volume
area in the upper left part of the chart was also only broken
halfheartedly. A daytrader who has an eye on the yen would have
immediately switched to a 1 minute time frame now. In this case I now
show the Delta numbers, but it could also be the Footprint.

Figure 62: Yen Future August 2020 (1 min. Chart, CET, CET)

Here you can see strong institutional sales during the rise on the left.
OTF sellers sold into the rising market. However, other OTFs must
have bought. A clash of interests. A divergence formed on the Delta
chart. In such a situation it is important that this divergence is
resolved.This happened in the marked area (ellipse and cursor) At
exactly this time the POC (black window in the marked area) also fell
and many red delta numbers appeared on the main chart. On the
Footprintchart you would see a stacked imbalance at the same time.
OTF's started to sell aggressively. In such situations, an immediate
short entry should be made which is automatically linked to a stop-loss
order (bracket order). However, you should first switch on a news ticker
and check whether there is any "unscheduled news". You had about 20
minutes time for this. The economic calendar did not show any
publication of important data. In this situation you had several factors
behind you

- The resistance at the VP AND the 3 day high could not be broken.
- Footprint and Deltachart showed aggressive sellers
- Falling POC
- Resolution of a delta divergence
Such trades are not for beginners, but also not too difficult if you have a
timetable and do not react hectically. You had enough time to analyse
the situation. I show this example because there are different types of
traders and this book is also read by trading colleagues in Asia who
trade USDJPY. Every trader has to find a style and trading Instrument
that suits him or her best. More about this can be found in the bonus
chapter.
Again, a trader would not have committed a risk violation because
he would have checked the situation and would have been able to
control it with a stoploss when entering. The Yen is also tradable as a
micro contract. However, only the most liquid market phases are
considered for this. But it is a good trading instrument that can provide
quick intraday trends from time to time, if you know it sufficiently. I do
not want to advocate the yen, but it is an instrument which offers 3 peak
trading times during a 24h period, good for asian based traders.

19.2 E-Mini S&P
This example is somewhat easier to understand. On the following chart,
a trading range was once again formed, which was mapped out with
MP and VP. The use of the market profile is always very useful when
dealing with a situation in which mainly sideways movements occur.
OTF's are increasingly building up positions in trading ranges.
Tip:
The most important task of a day trader is to locate the end of a
trading range
Figure 63: E-Mini S&P October 2020 (15 min. chart, CET)

In the first phase of the new trading day the price reached a high
volume area. This is situated at the POC of the market profile. This
means that OTFs found plenty of liquidity here to call stops and initiate
a countermovement if necessary. This was not known at that time. But
the market profile gave an indication that should be followed. So you
switch to the smallest time frame, which shows clearly recognisable
charts, to observe the situation closel
Figure 64: E-Mini October 2020. (1 min. chart, CET)

Here, 20 minutes after the opening of the Main Session, a direct Delta
Divergence began to form. This meant that strong market participants
were selling into the rising market. While the mass of trend traders
welcomed a new high, OTF's sellers were ready to turn around the
market. When the divergence started to dissolve (grey circle), it was
time to take a look at the Footprint Chart, because just looking on the
charts there was no confirmation that OTF's were really active.
Figure 65: E-Mini October 2020, (1 min. chart, CET)

Here the assumption was confirmed. On the left side you can see a
large OTF selling into the rising market. 5 minutes after the false high
was formed, the large seller appeared again, this time massively (1173
contracts). Traders who had bought the new high were now trapped. A
stacked imbalance is immediately seen afterwards. This was the safest
point for a daytrader to take a low risk short position.
- The large picture indicated the presence of Other Time Frame Sellers
- Approximately 20 minutes after opening, an important resistance zone
(POC of the long-term market profile) was reached
- A delta divergence appeared on the 1 min. chart
- The Footprint Chart showed exactly when big players were beginning
to move the market aggressively.

This chart is not "cherrypicked". I just saw it by chance when I wrote
this chapter. A smart daytrader needed only a few minutes to plan this
trade. But he must have a method, work (and think) in an organised
way and develop "his" working routine. He doesn't have to sit in front of
the computer all day or look at DOM's until he gets a headache. He
must try to understand what the market is telling him, and not blindly
follow chart patterns that he has learned in his books. If the scenario he
expects does not come true, he will not act. And even if a trade turns
out to be a loser after entry, he has nothing to blame himself for
because he
- implemented its plan
- limited his risk

19.3 Fdax
In this example, the Fdax had made another leg down the day before
after a consolidation phase in a downward trend. The previous day's
market profile formed a selling tail, indicating that institutional traders
were still interested in holding short positions and bringing the market
down a bit more.
I have projected the market profile here once again with letters.
Actually you only need to remember the letters A and B. But the single
prints (imbalances) and the initial balance can be displayed in colour on
the block system.
Figure 66: FDAX July 2020 (15 min. chart, CET)

After the opening of institutional trading at 9.00 CET, the FDAX
remained within the previous day's value area. Now, yesterday's VPOC
is being extended, because a short trade in the sense of a ricochet
would perhaps be a good idea there. At 10.45 the price reached this
zone for the first time. The index was not able to overcome this
resistance. However, a review at a smaller time frame did not provide
any signals on the Footprint chart or the Delta chart Order Flow that
clearly supported a short trade. Now we can wait for a second
bounceback. This became visible 15 minutes after the opening of US
trading. Again a smaller time frame is switched on to look for a low risk
short trade.
Figure 67: FDAX end of July 2020 (3 min. chart, CET)

On the 3 minute chart you can see an accumulation set-up. Shortly
before the hoped for second bounceback took place you can see a
delta divergence near the zero line. For the Dax the cum Delta zero line
plays a preferred role. Smart money started selling just before the US
opening, but at the same time staged a false breakout from the trading
range upwards to catch the stops at the round 12,500 barrier. This is
not uncommon with the Dax, as it is the most "optioned" index in the
world, with thousands of warrants that are knocked out when important
levels are crossed. This kind of procedures can trigger unpredictable
fluctuations (not so “unpredictable” for the sellers of knock out
products…lol). This is what foreigners (I am German) who like to trade
the Dax should know, because it is a different situation compared to
other main indices. Apart from this the later afternoon the index no
longer has a life of its own.
With the opening of the US market the Fdax. US Opening phases
are usually volatile. OTF`s sold immediateley after the POC of the

previous day war reached again. It was a good indication that this zone
had held. What else could be observed? The POC of the flexible
volume profile did not even start to rise when the price made a false
breakout before the US opening. OTF sellers were still in control. After
the volatility had eased, two candles were seen near the arrow that
could be considered for a trade. Now take a look at the Footprint Chart,
as further confirmation is needed.

Figure 68: Footprint FDax (3 min. chart, CET)

The double-digit numbers of sold contracts show how little liquidity this
future really has compared to the E-Minis or Hang Seng.
On the small time frame, the Footprint showed stacked imbalances
for both eligible candles and afterwards one larger seller for each. The
POC of the second candle fell (black window). This pointed to further
weakness. Now nothing hindered a trade entry. All criteria had pointed
to a profitable trade. The initial risk was 20 points, the profit about 200
points, because the order flow tools gave no reason to exit earlier. It is
worth waiting for this type of trade. You do not have to trade every day.
To much trading is a big problem for many daytraders. In this situation,
a given scenario had been worked out, which had bee planned before.
If this would not have happened, one would not have acted at all.

- The big picture had indicated the market direction
- The small picture had confirmed this
- Orderflow tools confirmed that Other Time Frame Sellers were still in
control

19.4 Bund Future
In this book you could learn that after 1 - 2 long candles you should
think about a possible trading range. This is exactly what you see here
at the Bund Future. The trading range extended over three days. This is
a crucial point, when it comes to assess the further situation. In the
morning of September 1st you looked at the 30 min. chart with a triple
bottom exactly two hours after the opening. Enough time to evaluate the
situation and think about a trading plan.

Figure 69: German Bund August / September 2020 (30 min.
chart, MEZ)

As always you would switch to a smaller time frame now. As Bund
Future is a slower market a 5 min. Time frame would serve.

Figure 70: Footprint German Bund August / September (5 min.
chart, CET )

At 10.55 CET (CET) the 5 minute Footprint Chart showed a clear
stacked imbalance. By this I mean that it was precisely in this zone that
buyers outperformed sellers by far more than three times (lift the ask).
Prior to this, a delta divergence can be seen, which dissolved at exactly
the time when the imbalance emerged. You can also see that the POC
had now risen (ellipse). 15 minutes later a very large OTF buyer
appeared. An upward trend began, which continued until the end of
trading. In the afternoon there was another opportunity in the form of a
follow-up set-up (chapter 10.1)

19.5 A Day with Crude Oil
Figure 71: Light Sweet Crude September 2020 ( 1 min. chart,
MEZ)

The liquidity of oil improved in the second week of September. A
downward trend became stronger. On the 8th of september 20 a new
down move took place in morning of US trading. This was recorded
with a Flex VP on an intraday basis. In chapter 8.2 it was explained that
flexible volume profiles should be used especially if you do not get
indications from the big picture of the previous days. For example,
when the market is in a strong downtrend like here.

If you see coherent chart structures on the small intraday time
frame, which are generated on the same day during the main trade,
then you map them out with volume profiles. In this case it was another
continuous downward movement during the first hour of trading in a
bearish environment.
In the centre of this profile you can see a double distribution profile
pattern. The balloon on the left is the buffer zone. In chapter 9 it was
said that with double distribution patterns the price does not always
have to come back completely to a high volume cluster where the
balloon was inflated firstly. It depends on the respective trend strength.
It was also said that the strongest movements logically take place in
thin profile zones. With oil in particular, you should remember to draw in
the thinest profile zones as well. These were called "low volume
nodes" in chapter 5 and were marked here with a horizontal line. A first
rebound took place exactly there.
It is always important to put yourself in the situation and thinking of
the mass of chart traders. What could be observed here? At the lowest
point in the middle of the chart, retail traders initially saw a break in the
trend line (or a "channel") to the upside. Now it seemed that the
downtrend had come to an end. Subsequently many of them took a
long position. Afterwards a textbook inverse SKS pattern formed, which
lured other chart traders into a long position. In order to sharpen your
awareness for such situations you should read the chapter about fake
moves in the bonus chapter. It was no surprise that the hoped-for
upward movement came to a halt. On the Delta Chart, a divergence
with absorption now formed. A possible short trade became visible. It
was confirmed by a stacked imbalance on the footprint chart.
Afterwards the market made a smooth profitable downward
movement. 40 ticks of oil on a 1 minute chart with an initial risk of less
than 10 ticks and a total trading time of 15 minutes is more than
satisfactory. The following chart shows this on the left side. However,
this trading day offered a second opportunity.
Chart 72: Light sweet crude September 2020 (1 min. chart, CET)

On the left side you can see the course of Trade 1. As this was a new
continuous movement, the profile of this part of the day is shown here
as well. The POC of the volume profile in the lower area gave an
indication of an exit of Trade 1, as a strong support had now formed
here.
With the recent excessive down move left (Trade 1), the market had
apparently gone too far. It initially went into a sideways phase. This is
normal. The extended POC indicated a possible second trade about 60
minutes later. When the potential entry zone on the right side was
reached, a setup of the usual kind (delta divergence, stacked
imbalance, big buyer) formed again. I marked this zone with the circle
Graph 73: Light sweet crude September (1 min. chart, CET)

But here you had to be a bit more aggressive as a day trader. The
market had accumulated a lot of potential for recovery and when the
divergence dissolved, a really big buyer stepped in. He bought 98
contracts initially and 138 contracts after a stacked imbalance.
A day like this can offer a day trader enough for a whole week or
much longer. Oil had now fallen for several days. Large buyers entered
the market. Everything was clearly visible to a VP and Order Flow day
trader. Normal support lines would not have provided any concrete
indications. The market rose by 50 ticks in the following 10 minutes.
The initial risk was below 10 ticks. 50 ticks means $500 per contract.

19.6 Gold

Among commodities, crude oil and gold are the main trading
instruments. Unfortunately, the popular product silver is not as well
tradable as gold as a future because it has insufficient liquidity.
There are good filters for precious metals that can be displayed in
charts in an uncomplicated way. In the case of precious metals, it may
also be a good idea to buy first-class mining shares via CFD and keep
them longer if situations arise that point to a resumption of the trend.
Gold is also traded as a forex pair.
On 26th of August 20 gold made a new bottom squeeze similar to the
one described in chapter 8.2 (Fig.19) Here the strongly traded
December contract was used as a basis.

Figure 74: Gold August 2020 (60 min. chart, UTC-1)

After an all-time high at the beginning of the month, gold made its usual
sharp correction. The market profile showed a buying tail and a single
print zone pointing to OTF buyers. These initially pushed the price
upwards. Gold then went into a seasonal summer break. A D profile
was formed. Its significance was discussed several times. Here you
can see alternating bounce backs of value area high and low. At the
end of August a 3-week low was triggered. A bottom squeeze pattern is
also characterized by falling highs but no lows. This was roughly the
case here before the start of Comex main trading hours on 26.8.
Chartists now saw a descending triangle, which according to the theory
of classical technical analysis is a bearish signal. Now that the false
breakout occurred, the following picture is presented on a small time
frame.
Figure 75: Gold August 2020 (5 min. chart)

Here a situation arose which I have tried to describe in more detail in
the important chapter 12.3.2. Power Delta Setups with absorption are
the best signals in Bottom Squeezes, because here many trend
followers are trapped before. How do you see this in this situation? The
price is already making new highs, but Delta's willingness to buy is
hanging back. As always, we are looking for a final confirmation on the
Footprint, the last link in the chain!Figure

76: Gold August 2020, 5 min. Footprint

After the delta divergence had resolved at 15.00 CET, a stacked
imbalance (window) can be seen. Shortly afterwards a strong buyer
entered the market. Gold moved in only one direction on this trading
day and posted a gain of $36. Almost too much for a daytrader.

19.7 Broadening Top and Ledge Filter
This book also mentioned Broadening Tops and one of my filters for
strong trends. The following examples show situations where these
special setups provided important information. On 23.9.20 you could
see at the E-mini S&P that a Broadening Top had developed in a
smaller time frame. The following graphic first shows the overall picture
of this day.
Figure 77: E-mini S&P September 2020 (5 min. chart, CET)

After a strong intraday downtrend had developed, a long liquidation
with a Ledge and P Profile took place. With the breakout from the
Ledge the downtrend continued. We also see a strong trend on the next
chart. After a Ross Hook had formed, a flexible volume profile could be
drawn with a Ledge. A follow up trade was possible to improve the
result.

Grafik 78: E-Mini S&P October 2020 (1 min. Chart, MEZ )

19.8 EURUSD
The following chart shows a current example of a typical EURUSD
setup as shown in the first part of this book.

Figure 79: EURUSD October 2020 (30 Min. Chart, CET)

In October, EURUSD bottomed out over a period of two days. No new
low was reached. At the beginning of day 3 there was a second bounce
back. MPOC and VPOC were briefly undercut at the start of trading. An
SHS pattern was faked. Delta gave a long signal. On the Footprint,
from 9.15 onwards, you could see imbalances and large buyers, a
simple trade.
Do not get stressed in day trading, just wait for these
opportunities.

Figure 80: Footprint 3 min. chart

19.9 Weekly Profiles
In chapter 8 I mentioned the importance of weekly and monthly profiles.
This set-up provided a very profitable opportunity for crude oil on
21.10.20. All other filters described in this book gave further signals

Figure 81: Light sweet crude October 2020 (5 min. chart, CET)

20. Summary
So much for this overview of the many possibilities that profile and
order flow analysis can offer. I hope that the last chapter in particular
will help you understand why you cannot and should not always follow
the same pattern. All approaches shown here require a thinking trader
who does not shoot from the hip like the mass of day traders. The big
advantage of the methods described here is that you follow a step-bystep plan. Although this is day trading, in all cases you have enough
time to eliminate as many risk factors as possible and not to trade
blindly. It is the secret of this book.
All other forms of investment always have excuses when it comes to
justifying erroneous assessments in retrospect. Experts in particular
tend to be reluctant to admit a mistake and always have excuses at
hand. They would only have made a mistake at the time, something
unforeseen had come up or they would have made a mistake but "for
the right reasons". They are often blinded by their brilliance
(Kahnemann, annex).
The methods described here leave less room for excuses, because
you do nothing without a concrete confirmation. Furthermore, you find
out the result of your efforts after only a few minutes. Your own opinion
does not count, because it is not the retail trader who determines the
direction of the market. Of course, prediction errors will also occur with
the methods described here, because the world is anything but
predictable. However, a subjectively colored opinion when trading is far
more dangerous. It is not an indicator of correctness. Unsystematically
accumulated knowledge leads to wrong decisions. It tempts people to
get an increased illusion of abilities, which can easily lead to
overestimation.
Perhaps for this reason the loser rate of academics who try trading
is disproportionately high. They want precise reasons for everything
and tend to put their opinions in the first place. Day trading is not a
science in which you always work according to the same pattern. It is
an art of relating certain situations to the right time frame. There is no
generally valid pattern, because markets are constantly changing.

As a trader today you are confronted with a task that traders of past
years or even generations hardly had. In 2020 volatility has returned to
the markets and I see no reason why this should change now. What
used to happen in a month can now happen in a day. There is no
doubt that the entire financial system is heading for change at some
point. Nobody knows what is coming.
Looking at the history of evolution, it has always been the small and
most adaptable species that have survived. Day traders, who master
their craft will be among them. Day trading is one of the very few
possibilities to adapt to all market conditions in a highly flexible way.
In this book I discussed the weak points of Technical Analysis.
However, this is not meant negatively and I will continue to substantiate
this in the bonus chapter with excerpts from my trading library. It is an
undeniable fact that no method is able to work forever and ever when
fundamental factors have changed. You can't steer a car if you just look
in the rear-view mirror.
If you follow the approaches shown here then you should definitely
adapt them to your personal style. This is also discussed in the bonus
chapter. This makes you independent of a stereotypical mass of retail
trader’s right from the start. Without VP and order flow analysis, day
traders will always dig like a mole in the dark. If you apply them, you will
at least avoid trades that do not provide OTF confirmations and thus
reduce your potential loss rate. This brings you closer to an essential
basic idea of trading. All good traders distinguish themselves by putting
as many probabilities (odds) as possible on their side in their trading
decisions. Only this enables them to be successful in the long run.
And this leads to the most important point that applies to trading
yesterday and today in general. If you can't find a method that gives you
an edge over others, you can act with motivation and discipline. You
will bleed out. I mention this point because you keep hearing voices
that claim: "Everything is just money management and mindset". If this
were really the case, the percentage of losers would be significantly
smaller. There are also many absolutely disciplined traders who have
no money management or mindset problems. They simply cannot find a
constant path to success.
In principle, VP and Order Flow offer an advantage from the start,
because they reveal the traces of dominant market participants. Only

those players move the market. In bonus chapter 23.1 I tried to explain
why the myth of self-fulfilling prophecies has long been dead. It is the
main reason for the high loser rate among technically oriented amateur
traders. How do you know if big traders have really entered the market
or are about to let the mass of traders run into a wall? And how else do
you know whether you are dealing with a real or fake breakout? With
VP and Order Flow you will always have an objective advantage.
Recently, other terms such as VWAP and Heat map have been
making the rounds. I don't use them, because they either generalize too
much (VWAP), are not very tangible (Limit Order) and distract from the
actual event. It is not the mass of tools that produces success. The
strategies described in this book are largely based on a rather simple
principle
If something is supposed to happen according to all known
methods of analysis, but does not happen, then opportunities
arise.
Also the way in which you design your analysis offers enough
variation to find strategies that best suit your personal style. For
example, I work a lot with flexible volume profiles and Delta If I don't see
opportunities that match my view, I simply don't act. That's it!
Accordingly, you don't need to spend money on level 2 data - feed of
the US markets.
No matter what individual approach you take to profile and order
flow trading, it doesn't change the fact that you look at the market from
a different angle than the mass of traders. But the most perfect method
only works if it is adapted to the respective market situation. This book
clearly shows that a correct interpretation of context can make a
decisive contribution here.
Order flow trading also offers the possibility of specialization:
Absorption, false outbreaks, trading ranges, double distribution profiles,
weekly profiles, monthly profiles, liquidity zones, top and bottom
squeezes, fake moves, individual markets, specific trading hours,
different time frames, etc. It is you who decides for how long you are
willing to pay attention to the market.
Do you really want to trade every day or would you rather wait for
good opportunities? Do you prefer to trade more aggressively, or are
you a very defensive type? Or do you do both depending on the

situation. With which trading size do you feel most comfortable? How
many sub-positions do you prefer to work with? It can also be about
simple things like: Can I concentrate better in the evening or in the
morning? When am I undisturbed? All this may sound complicated for a
beginner.
But if you are able to experiment and make a few notes, you should
be able to find out if day trading is the right thing for you. There are free
trial subscriptions available on every charting software. Once a
prospective trader has understood the basic principle and knows his
instruments, he will have to go his own way from a certain time
onwards. This alone gives him the necessary self-confidence and the
strength to implement a trading plan. In the bonus chapter you will find
a bad examples of this. I learn it the hard way! At that time there was no
one I could look over the shoulder of.
There are day traders who sit down in front of the computer in the
morning, have no plan and do things that just come into their heads.
Let's see what the day brings. In addition they also run news channels
with "daily outlooks" or consult with others. Then they spend the whole
day in front of the screen and if they fail, they say: "I should have done
this and that. I knew it." The next day they make the same mistakes.
They sabotage themselves. They save on software and don't know that
in the end they lose much more money with free tools because they
don't look any deeper.
It is therefore impossible for me to answer question No. 1: "How
much can I earn with it? It is better to ask yourself questions like:
-Am I able to understand and learn certain things and follow a few
rules?
-Do I manage to free myself from assessments that are presented
non-stop on news channels by beautiful faces and smart tie-wearing
people?
- Why are there successful traders and why are there losers?
Trading is a business. Why do enterprises fail? Because they do not
have the right concept, do not have sufficient knowledge, do not do
research, do not have ideas and visions, are inflexible and much more.
You can also fail with other things. And today this happens faster
than you think. The same rules apply to day trading. If you are

seriously interested in this field, you have to decide for yourself whether
you spend a lot of time learning outdated theories.
The work on this book took several months with interruptions,
because I wanted to document various stages of the important year
2020 and present as many highly topical examples as possible. At the
end of this main part, you might wonder whether the methods
described here would at some point become more widely known.
This is not to be expected. This book is completely insignificant in
view of the hundreds of thousands of retail traders who follow trustfully
chart patterns that are beyond an old age. The human brain tends to
follow "tried and tested" methods and behaviors, even if they lack a
logical foundation. Gustave Le Bon wrote in his well- known book about
crowd psychology (annex)
“It takes a long time until theories get implemented in the heads of a
crowd. But even longer to disappear.”
In addition to this, it is a fact that the actions of retail traders are by
no means directional when compared to the total volume.
The year 2020 is now slowly coming to an end. Also in the day
trading sector it brought big changes that were not visible when I
started writing this book. Nevertheless, I have tried to adapt all
strategies to a new reality and to develop some additional ones that
take into account the current situation.
If you have read this book so far, thank you for your attention. I hope it
could give you an insight into how a day trader works, integrating MP,
VP and Order Flow Analysis into his work. It is not always the most
complicated methods that lead to success. But also not the easiest!
Questions can be directed to
j.forthmann@futuretrade.ch
You cannot learn professional trading from books. For readers who are
interested in acquiring further knowledge, I offer an affordable online
course. For further information, please visit
www.vmo-trading.coachy.net
My best wishes to all readers of this book.

Bonus Chapters

21. Questions that could be asked
If you consider day trading, there are many unanswered questions. Day
trading is certainly the best of all professions if you love independence
and can find a method that works. But you also have to have certain
prerequisites that are not present in every person. The following three
complexes should help to give answers to perhaps the most important
questions that beginners ask
themselves.
Is it possible to do day trading as a working person?
It depends on which time zone you live in and how you can organize
your time.
If you live and work in Europe, you can regularly watch the last 120
minutes of the US markets. If you live in the American time zone, then
you will not have any opportunity in the evening, unless you are
interested in Asian markets. In Asia you have European markets at
noon and US markets in the evening. The greater the choice, the more
selective you can work. The number 1 location for part-time and fulltime day traders.
It is often said that swing trading is ideal for working traders.
Whoever analyses and trades over 20 currency pairs and stock indices
on 4h charts with an expectation horizon of several weeks or months
must be aware that the uncertainty factor increases. Prop traders would
never do this. Nobel Prize winner Daniel Kahnemann clearly proved
that the significance of forecasts changes fundamentally in relation to
the forecast period.
I have made the same experience and would never consider swing
trading as a single discipline. What looks comfortable superficially can

be the most difficult. Securing existing portfolios is a completely different
and very appropriate matter. But in this case I am talking about trading.

How much money do I need to get started?
A motivated trader can start with a trading account of 10,000 USD and
initially trade the smallest possible units in the form of micro futures.
This book is not about scalping. Accordingly, you can also trade CFD's
that offer transparent matching.
There is no need to emphasize that especially beginners should only
trade with money that is not needed. In view of the current economic
crises this is difficult for many. Most traders fail due to
undercapitalization. But even if you can raise this capital, the first thing
you should do is to check yourself if your knowledge is sufficient. A
great number of losses is caused by avoidable beginner's mistakes.
Simulation training can help here. At least it can give you a feeling for a
trading instrument and risks. You should also make sure that you do
not get a drawdown of more than 25%, because then the risk of
wanting to get everything back with one trade increases.
You may hear from time to time of day trading wonder kids who
multiply their account in a year, but this has nothing to do with healthy
risk management.

So what should I know?
You can get tons of free information about the leverage of futures and
CFD's, tick sizes, order types, margins etc. from any broker, financial
sites or stock exchanges. The purpose of this book is not to give an
introduction to basic knowledge, which can be acquired and free of
charge in a few days almost everywhere. Do not listen to information
telling you about day trading other metals than precious metals. Same
applies for sugar, coffee, meat,... If you really want to day trade liquid
markets, stay away from Krypto Currencies as well. May be one day,
who knows the future?
With regard to the duration of a learning phase it depends on how
motivated you are and what kind of perceptiveness you have. Technical
analysts learn over several years. A large part is not needed as a
volume trader. Prop Trading companies train professional traders for
about 2 months. My online course contains things that go beyond that,
because they have matured in 20 years of experience.

Is Day trading the right thing for me?
On the Internet, day trading is associated with the illusion of fast
money. If you do not do your homework you will fail for sure. The actual
trading is only a small part. By far the biggest part is to make
preparations, carry out error analysis and develop a systematic working
routine. If you manage this, it is the best job in the world.
If you are interested in financial markets in general, then you first
have to decide whether you want to spend your time with TV-rounds of
stockbrokers and their "wisdom" or not. In my early days I sat in front of
the TV every day and CNBC commentators were more familiar to me
than my acquaintances. But if you do day trading, it is a waste of time.
Another option is to entrust your money to others. The last stock market
scandal in Germany, however, showed that many renowned asset
managers shone with incompetence. It has become cozy out there.
In my early days I thought that people who work on the stock
exchange were smarter. I made friends with professional Frankfurt
stock exchange traders who also carried out proprietary trading. I soon
found out that they were not. Once I had a conversation with a US floor
trader. He was a very nice guy who told me that he had built himself a

technical system that worked. But since he was also working on the
floor, he was exposed to the chatter of colleagues every day. Again and
again he was tempted to follow tips and failed.
If you are interested in day trading, you should also ask yourself why
you would like to become a trader. There are many good reasons.
However, if you only do it for fun or for a change, then you have not
understood something basic: Trading is a profession and a business.
Every successful business requires commitment and passion.
You should also be aware that you will always remain an
individualist. It is not easy to find the right personal environment. A
qualified exchange with experienced traders offers advantages, social
trading in my opinion none at all. You have to recognize mistakes
yourself. Only this way you can learn. In your circle of acquaintances,
you should not even talk about it when you start day trading. Most
people associate day trading with reckless gambling and betting
without knowing that the real gamblers are sitting on completely
different floors.

22. Fake Moves
In this book, situations have repeatedly occurred in which classic chart
patterns have been reversed. Such setups are called Fake Moves. In
view of the described fundamental change of the markets, fake moves
in the shape of false breakouts are part of everyday life today and turn
many traders into losers following classic breakout strategies or trend
systems described in thousands of books. Stop running is another big
problem, which causes many traders not to set stop losses anymore. I
generally advise against this.
Fake moves often take place in advance of clear movements. This
chapter is intended to illustrate why it can be very useful to put yourself
in the mindset of the vast majority of retail traders and then use VP and
order flow tools to check whether this is a fake. If this proves to be the
case, then you are faced with very promising opportunities. From this
point of view, technical chart knowledge can be used to find important
reference points, albeit in a contradictory sense.

22.1 The Dying Myth of Self-fulfilling Prophecies
The golden age of Technical Analysis lasted until the end of the
1980s. At that time the markets were populated by a large number of
different groups. For example, there were many individual brokerage
firms that received orders from their commercial or private clients and
passed them on by telephone directly to the Open Outcry Pit. Electronic
commerce and globalization was in its infancy. Futures markets were
relatively isolated and difficult for small traders to access due to high
margin requirements. Intraday charts were hardly known. The trading
volume was negligible compared to today. Seasonal influences were
much more important for traders than today. In other words, activity in
the markets was made up of a large number of parties, often on an
equal footing.
Chart patterns were less popular but were gratefully accepted and
some traders even drew them by hand. Progressive traders who dealt
with charts recognized an advantage early on. They could easily
identify important zones before the mainstream became interested. If a

breakout occurred, it was then carried by the majority of market
participants and took its course. After that, trends developed that lasted
weeks and months and brought great success to some technically
oriented traders of commodity and currency futures.
They traded real breakouts from trading zones using daily and
weekly charts, moving averages, Donchian channels, and later
Bollinger Bands. Indicators came into fashion. One particular pioneer
was George Lane, the founder of the Stochastic Indicator. As a simple
man from the Midwest, he traveled across the country like a preacher
and convincingly substantiated his theories of three runs to the top
when others knew nothing more than double tops. Traders who
followed his indicator were successful. It was the golden age of
technical analysis.
At the end of the 80's a change took place. The financial industry
became the leading sector. Everything became more and more
centralized and fell into the hands of a few large institutions. This
development has continued until today. The legitimacy of Technical
Analysis is often justified by self-fulfilling prophecies.
However, self-fulfilling prophecies can only be increasingly
fulfilled if a multitude of smaller market participants are actually
able to move the market.
This is no longer the case today. The myth of self-fulfilling
prophecies has long been dead. If classical patterns appear in a
textbook form that is recognizable to everyone, then many traders are
often lured into a trap. This does not always happen, of course. Even
classic chart traders have their sunshine hours. Casino visitors do not
lose every time.
The only way to check if breakouts are real or fake is to use order
flow analysis. The most important fake patterns often consist of a few
basic elements that occur again and again. If you don't want to be a
loser right from the start, it makes sense to ask yourself in certain
situations:

Who is winning, who is losing?
22.2 Backfire Pattern

A common type of fake breakouts I have called "Backfire" patterns for
simplicity's sake, This Fake Pattern is based on the fallacy that double
tops or -bottoms are reliable formations. Even the fathers of Technical
Analysis seriously doubted this.
“Double Tops and double bottoms are of but little value in
forecasting the price movements and have proved to be deceptive
more often than not. In summary, it may be said that “double top” and
“double bottoms” have not the significance which nine out of 10
speculators give them.”
Robert Rhea, 1932
„Neither Double Tops nor Double Bottoms are as reliable in
forecasting major reversal of trend as the surface authorities might let
us to believe. Probably not more than a third of them signaled
reversals.”
Richard M. Schabacker, 1936
The great pioneers of Technical Analysis were quite right. A test is
easy to perform. If you simply cover the right side of each trading range
afterwards, you would get similar results.
And finally, it was John Bollinger who once wrote that there are well
over 30 forms of so-called M and W patterns. Nevertheless, the term
double top and bottom became the epitome of many mainstream
analysts and retail traders. The first fake pattern simply means that in
many cases a faked DT or DB pattern is seen before large movements.
These patterns appear in several variations, but the basic principle
always remains the same.

Figure 82: EURUSD July 2020 (5 min. chart, CET)

At the beginning of this downward movement, several groups of traders
were deceived. I numbered them in the order of their failure. Group 1
consists of traders who suspect that the upward trend channel visible
here will be broken and left downwards. The trend channel widened in
the last third. This is seen by technical traders as a signal for an
imminent end. Group 2 now saw a double top and also took short
positions. This type of trader usually places their stop loss orders above
the top of the suspected double top. Now we have two groups that
expected a price decline and were positioned accordingly. Group #3
consists of breakout traders who saw a consolidation in the uptrend
and took long positions because a new high was reached. This group
consists of two subgroups. The organized traders who entered a buy
stop order above the range and automatically went long when the

breakout occurred. They are joined by traders who had seen the
breakout and now excitedly pressed the Buy Market button to not
"miss" another trend section. Group 4 includes traders with a long
position who were trapped and hesitating. They were hoping that the
trade would move in their direction after all.
What all these groups did not know was that in this situation an
eagle eye was watching over them, watching their actions closely and
gladly serving their stop loss orders, buy stop and market orders over
and over again. After the trend line and double top traders (short group)
were stopped first, they were followed by long traders on the losing
side. Every long position must be liquidated with a short position. This
group thus became the involuntary helper of large market participants,
who in this situation pursued a short scenario in ice-cold fashion. Only
big players can clearly move a market like the Mini S&P. Their raid had
been worthwhile. All four groups of traders described here had been
pushed out of the market with a single stroke and the positions of the
long traders had even been used as a tool to provide additional
momentum (long coverage = short momentum).
For beginners I can only advise to think through these and similar
situations again and again, because they occur constantly in all
markets and are the daily bread of a thinking day trader. If institutional
traders are planning to steer the market in one direction, they will do
everything to lure small traders in the wrong direction and force them to
cover their positions this is the only way they can build large positions.
That's where chart technicians come in handy, because everyone
knows what they see and expect.
But it gets even worse. Large market participants have systems that
provide them with precise information about where and how many stop
loss orders from small traders are in the market and whether it is worth
triggering them with a fake move. Institutional traders are not charity
organizers. If they have a certain market direction in mind, they want to
see as few other market participants as possible, because this would
reduce their profit. In this case, it was the short traders who were right
in their assessment of the market direction, but were pushed out of the
market by OTF´s before the actual movement began. The long traders
even provided them with a tailwind liquidating their positions.
Furthermore, there is another group here that is worth mentioning.
This is a group that could be called a reverse trader . Every day trader

has perhaps gone through something like this before. Double top
traders who were stopped here may have thought: "I'm wrong. The
market is breaking up. So I am making up for my loss by switching to
long now." But they were wrong for the second time in a row. After this
the start losing control. Such Blackout phases fall more into the area of
scalping.

Variant 2
Now we have look at the second Backfire Pattern variation. In the
following example, traders who follow diagonal trend lines and double
tops were caught on the wrong foot.

Figure 83: Fdax Future September 2020 (5min. chart, CET)

If you look at the left side of the chart, you will first see another wellknown chart formation that did not come true. This was a pictureperfect bearish zigzag formation, which is considered by many traders
and chart technicians to be a significant reversal formation. A trend line
can also be drawn on this chart, which in combination with an incipient
double top looked enticingly like a short position for followers of typical
chart patterns. And not only the broken trend line and the beginning
double top gave confidence to chart traders. Shortly before the double
top was completed, another descending zigzag pattern appeared. If
you now look at the candle I marked with the arrow, you can see that it
gained excess length exactly when the two peaks of the suspected
double top were crossed. This is exactly where the traders' stop loss
orders were triggered. This type of momentum candlestick is a good
confirmation that many traders were involved.
Now let's look at the pairs of candles that started the counter
movements on this chart (circle). In both cases these were so-called
Inside Ranges. In this type of combination the last candle is inside the
previous one. Inside Ranges have no meaning in isolation? However, if
they occur in situations like this, they indicate that the market is hesitant
to follow its previous direction. The inside candle on the left at the

beginning of the trend line is a doji. Dojis have a similar meaning when
they become visible at the end of a movement.
However, these combinations should not be given a general
meaning. This is a 5 minute chart. If you would switch it to a smaller
time frame, you would see a different pattern. Then it would be an
ascending Zigzag pattern. This would also have been acceptable here.
In this case it was trend line, double top and zigzag traders who were
on the wrong side.
The more groups of retail traders there are who are fooled, the
greater the subsequent movement.

22.3 SHS Fakes
The shoulder - head - shoulder pattern is, along with double tops and
bottoms, the best known reversal formation in chart technique. Just like
double tops and bottoms, this formation was already defined 100 years
ago. In the following decades it became so extremely popular that some
traders still try to get a meaning out of it even if it is similar to a Hydra.
This is often subject to a purely subjective perception and can lead to
adventurous trading decisions.
The high degree of popularity also often makes this chart pattern the
plaything of large market participants. In principle, the interests of smart
money do not necessarily need to differ from those of retail traders with
regard to the future direction of the market. In such a case, they simply
try to throw as many competitors out of the race as possible. For many
traders this leads to highly frustrating experiences, which sound
something like this: "I knew that the market would fall. If only I had put
my stop a little further!"
Now next time the trader tries to "give his trade more room" and is
wrong again, because the situation in this case may be completely
different and the trade may turn out to be a smooth mistake from the
beginning. This topic is discussed in the bonus chapter. Frustrated
again, he now turns to a fashion indicator like the ATR, which
"calculates" where to place his stop, independent of the specific trading
situation.
In doing so, he neutralizes the superior ability of the human
brain to link connections in a contextual way and transfers the

responsibility to a system that can only count trees but cannot
see the forest.

Variant 1 - Hunchback Pattern
Similar to the Backfire Pattern, traders of SHS patterns tend to place
their stop loss points above/below the last shoulder tip. Often this is
stopped out, only to return shortly afterwards to the direction that was
expected when the original pattern appeared. In this way a hump is
created visually on the chart.

Figure 84: Fdax Oktober 2020 (5 min. chart, CET)

After formation of the right shoulder many amateur traders went short
they "suspect" the formation of an SHS pattern. Market makers
observe this on their systems. If there are enough traders, then they
create a second shoulder that is higher. Now chart traders are snooped
out, because they usually put their stop loss over the right shoulder.

Grafik 85: EURUSD, September 2020 (5 min. chart, CET)

Here you can see a SHS pattern running diagonally upwards. This
variant is very popular with supporters of this chart formation, because
it allows an early entry. However, afterwards a second higher shoulder
was formed. This ended with an inverted candle and was enough to
scare off traders who believed in an SHS pattern. The following black
long momentum candle emerged at the exact moment when traders
panicked to cover because "their" pattern seemed to be destroyed.
Now a clear trend line break to the downside occurred. Again the joy
did not last long. With the beginning of the institutional trading, the
tables were cleared once again. This became visible on the order flow
in the form of a clear rejection with stacked imbalance. Once again,
several groups of traders were involved, who took different entry points.
SHS traders, trend line traders who saw a break in the trend line
downwards, but also double bottom traders who suspected an end of
the correction.
The repeatedly appearing strong momentum candles when breaking
typical stop loss points prove that there are surprisingly many traders
who apply chart patterns in isolation.

Variant 2

Figure 86: Gold September 2020 (5 min chart, CET)

In this case, market makers initially faked a breakout, but immediately
went aggressively in the opposite direction. Such patterns are very
common and can offer very good opportunities to day traders looking
for fake patterns confirmed by VP and order flow. If SHS patterns
appear particularly easily recognizable in textbook style and do not
show a follow through, then you can think of the opposite direction
when you see candles pointing to a reversal. Again you can see an
Inside Range. Added to this is the fact that millions of retail traders
prefer to follow trend lines. The combination of a broken trend line and
SKS pattern made this situation particularly attractive for a large mass
of retail traders.
The clearer an SKS formation, the greater the probability of a
fake

22.4 Bottom- and Top squeeze

The most significant and therefore most profitable opportunities for
traders always occur when a final movement reaches a new
mainstream high or low and a trend continuation is faked. Bottom
squeezes are particularly interesting in bull markets, because in this
cases you have a big fundamental factor in your back from the start. In
a bull market, you should always pay attention when significant
corrections take place.
Gold has seen increasing trading liquidity over the last 18 months.
Significant movements occurred not only during the main Comex trade,
but also with the beginning of the European and especially Asian
trading period.
Oil is also a typical market for bottom squeezes. However, this has a
completely different fundamental reason. While in gold, increased
demand was the main reason for a price increase, in oil many hedgers
liquidate their short positions when their objectives of hedging against a
price decline are achieved.

Figure 87: Bottom Squeeze Comex Gold June 2020 (60 min.
chart, CET)

A bottom squeeze pattern is characterized by the fact that a series
of downward movements initially occurs. Then it looks as if the market
has found a bottom. Suddenly a new sharp and surprisingly rapid
downward movement occurs without fundamental reasons or news. A
new mainstream low forms. In this case, we were dealing with a
correction of $100. Here all lows of a 5 week period were triggered. At
the same time a large and clear SHS pattern did not continue.
Technical analysts usually "project" the length of a movement after
breakout to be twice the length of the entire pattern.
Even as a short term oriented trader it is sometimes worth
looking a little further left on the chart to find good reference
zones (long-term resistance).
Bottom squeezes are not only to be found at higher time levels. They
also occur in smaller time frames during European and Asian trading
hours. Let us now look at other recent examples of bottom squeezes
that go into more detail.
Grafik 88: Gold Future October 2020, 5 min. chart (MEZ)

Here we see a squeeze pattern at the beginning of the European
institutional trade. A similar pattern can be found at the beginning of
Asian trade. Only a few years ago squeezes in gold could not be
observed in this frequency.

Grafik 89: Gold October 2020 (5 min. chart, MEZ)

Here we see a clear SHS fake pattern shortly after the beginning of the
Asian trading period, which also leads to a typical bottom squeeze. The
most powerful bottom squeezes in stockmarket history consisted of
failed SHS patterns like this. That´s why I show them here. This pattern
is worth to keep in mind, when looking for a Bottom Squeeze Trade

Power Bottom
A Power Bottom occurs when there is a truly explosive and profitable
movement. This can be caused by a cover of hedges or by a
fundamental demand. In the following example monetary policy reasons
could also play a role, but this is irrelevant for a day trader, as long as
he does not trade at the same time as the publication of news.

Figure 90: Gold (15 min. chart, CET)

Here, a particularly well defined zigzag pattern stands out, which led
many market technicians to take short positions. As the stop loss points
of these traders were exceeded, great momentum candles were
formed. Again 3 components come together here.
- Traders trading a breakout down
- Traders who follow a well-known chart pattern
- Price has fallen below a low point of the previous day

Top Squeeze Pattern
Top Squeeze Patterns are the most spectacular Fake Patterns,
because downward movements often occur many times faster than
upward movements. Many normal traders are overwhelmed with the
timing of such patterns. This has several reasons.
- Top squeeze patterns require good timing
- Research shows that 90% of all traders have never traded on the
short side.

- Most textbooks and even "stock market wisdom" say that you should
never try to get the top or the bottom of a movement.
A day trader who specializes in fake moves is not well off with these
advices. Top squeezes require great attention and excellent timing, as
in many cases they are not as easy to spot as bottom squeezes, which
are less explosive. Like all current examples shown in this chapter, top
squeezes in particular are preceded by classic chart patterns that
deceive the mass of traders.
Figure 91: E-Mini S&P September 2020 (15 min. chart, CET)

This chart is particularly suitable for showing the unreliability of trend
lines. In this case we were dealing with a big top squeeze where all the
stops were taken. First of all, you can see here an exactly pronounced
tend-channel, which had developed in the off-peak period (1). This is
where the roots were laid for the traps, which then snapped shut during
the main session.

Around the low volume European midday a new daily high was
formed, which then changed into a clearly visible SHS pattern on a
higher 15 minute time frame (2). After this pattern broke downwards as
expected by many traders, a breakout from the trend channel followed,
which brought more traders on board to take short positions. With the
opening of the US markets this expectation was disappointed. But
there was another hope. At the weak US lunchtime a new SHS pattern
was forming on a larger scale.
Again, many traders went short when this pattern was broken and
were wrong, because a few sharp movements in the opposite direction
immediately followed. Last but not least, there were traders who saw a
breakout from a trend line (3) and went long. A several day high was
quickly reached and drove all traders holding short positions out of the
market. A single rapid upward thrust had driven them out of the market.
Afterwards the longs of no. 3 were the last victims of their trend line
theories
Typical for Top Squeezes is the speed of the final movement
before changing direction.
Again, in this case, it was several classic patterns that failed in
advance and provided clear indications that many traders were on the
wrong side of the market. The false breakout to a new high about 90
minutes before the close of institutional trading.
Highs or lows lasting several days or even weeks are the zones
where most market participants meet. In the golden age of technical
analysis, these were points where more breakouts occurred. Today,
however, these are points that can also develop a strong momentum in
the opposite direction. Regardless of this, it does not fit well into the
concept of dominant market participants buying "above value” at
extreme points.
Each of the situations shown here has its own history. What they all
have in common, however, is that they were identified by fake moves
and occurred in important liquidity zones. The following large picture
shows another situation of a top squeeze.
Figure 92: Euro FX Future, September 2020 (30 min. chart, CET)

The large picture here showed a new multi-day high in the early
European morning. This gave a day trader enough time to analyze this
situation and to consult the profiles and order flow. Do not forget to plot
the market profile in these cases.

22.5 Natural Support and Resistance Fakes
Another rule that every prospective trader learns is to place stop loss
points near "natural" zones. On the following chart you can see such a
situation.
Figure 93: German Bund, September 2020 (15 min. chart, CET)

Here a SHS pattern was formed, which for friends of this pattern could
hardly have looked nicer. At first a breakout downwards was faked.
Institutional traders had placed themselves long. Brave day traders
could have followed them and would have been in the market with a
stop loss below the absolute low of this deception. Look at the
momentum candle which formed when the SHS Pattern became invalid

22.6 Trend line Fakes
Trend line fakes are another way to lure retail traders into a trap. As you
have seen, they usually occur in combination with many of the fake
patterns shown here. Furthermore, trend lines bear a great
psychological danger for a trader. If they do not meet the expectations
of a trader, then they are simply adapted to the new circumstances. If
this does not fit either, then you simply look for another fix point. The
same applies to so-called trend channels. Depending on the current
situation, they simply slip on one side, a dilettante way of manipulating
yourself.

After all, trend lines are drawn by most retail traders. It is so simple
and sounds logical to connect three points and then conclude that a
trend has formed. And then, breaches of the trend line are traded. If
these take place and have no follow through, then you wait for a
pullback. If this does not take place either, then the position is
abandoned.

Double Trend line Fakes
On the next chart everybody has being fooled, who draw “something”. I
have used this example to show that market makers also like to use
geometric shapes such as triangles, pennants, wedges and flags to fool
as many traders as possible who think they can use a ruler to predict
the future direction of the market. This was an SHS pattern, a triangle
and trend lines. None of them brought success. But what was the only
pattern which worked after the tip of the triangle had been reached?
(Tip: Chapter 18)

Graph 94: E-Mini Nasdaq (5 min. chart, CET)

A Day trade in Asia
Just like other patterns, trend line fakes occur in all time frames. To
show this, I have taken a day trade from my Asian trade archive, which
I made in 2019. This is the Mini Hang Seng Index Future. This index is
my favorite among all stock index futures, because it has good liquidity
and offers excellent day trading opportunities in its first trading hour, if
you follow a few rules. If you have understood the example shown so
far, my illustration should be almost self-explanatory.

Figure 95: Mini Hang Seng (1min. chart, local Hong Kong time)

Here too, at the best trading time, several groups of day traders who
were wrong in their assessment were forced to cover. The first group
seemed to have drawn a trend line on the left side of the chart and had
gone long on its break. They had placed their stop loss under a pin bar,
which appeared just before the break of the trend line to the top. Pin
bars are described in countless books as reversal signals at the end of
swings.
However, if they do not appear in a suitable context, as here, they
have no meaning as do candlestick patterns. Another group of traders
had afterwards seen a double bottom pattern or an ascending zigzag

pattern with doji. As usual the double bottom traders set their stop loss
just below the two bottoms.
The double bottom was now completed, but the market stopped
after only 40 points afterwards. A black reversal candle became visible.
At the same time this candle formed an outside range. A fast short entry
with only 30 points stop loss was possible. A Momentum candle also
appeared shortly afterwards. I have called this candle "Bull Squeeze".
This formed exactly when the "wrong" pin bar was undercut.
This was no coincidence, but a further confirmation that many
traders had set their stop loss here. In this case, you could set your
stop loss to break even just 3 minutes after entering, because it was
clear that a bull trap had been snapped shut. As a result the Mini Hang
Seng lost 300 points in about 20 minutes. Trading does not need not
be complicated.

22.7 Fake Breakouts
The well-known stop fishing zones are:
-Daily Highs / Lows
-Previous day Highs / Lows
-Multi-day Highs / Lows
These have already been shown in the main part. There is also another
zone that is the preferred target.

Non institutional Highs / Lows
This refers to the highs and lows that have been formed since the
end of the previous day's institutional trading. In Europe these would be
the zones formed during the evenings and the Asian trading period. At
the beginning of US trade, zones formed during European trade should
also be considered. In Asia, the situation is somewhat different. Here,
important zones of the US Main Session are often respected and used
by professional traders as starting points for trades.
Stop running of liquidity zones is more common in relatively thinly
traded futures such as the Dax. Beginners or traders who are not smart
enough should avoid this index. As a day trader, you should specialize
in stop running and close all your books on the Dax.
Figure 96: Dax Future September 2020 (15 min. chart, CET)

Here we see on day 2 that at the beginning of institutional trading all
stop loss points of the non-institutional trading hours of the previous day
and night were triggered. Once again a "promising" SHS Fake Pattern
appeared first. Afterwards a daily rally of about 200 points developed.
On day 3 you see the same game with reversed signs. Now all stops
from 17.30 of the previous day are cleared and the market moves down

200 points without interruption. Who were the victims? Amateur traders
who have no knowledge of appropriate trading hours and who had
gone short either because they saw a double top or long because they
suspected a breakout to the top.
Figure 97: Dow Jones September 2020 (15 min. chart, MEZ)

As almost always, a trend line fake (upwards) preceded the event here.
But this did not bring any loss. Afterwards all stops of non-institutional
trading were cleared in one go. The Mini - Dow Jones Future fell by
about 500 points during the course of the day.

Take out Yesterday's High / Low - the Classic
This is the classic among the Stop Runners and appears in every
index. The following also contains a mixture of Backfire, Hunchback
and Trend line Fake
Figure 98: Nasdaq 100 Future September 2020 (15 min. chart,
CET)

Summary:
Fake moves are a wide area. Markets can at times present themselves
in a chaotic shape. But there are also market phases in which classic
chart patterns or breakouts from key zones can be seen, which in
combination attract a large number of retail traders. In these cases you
should definitely take a closer look at the overall context and look for
further indications in the Profiles and Order Flow. A day trader who
specializes in such situations does not need to be active every day.
However, every now and then he gets the best of the best presented. A
further advantage is that he gets an immediate answer on the
correctness of his actions, because stop running maneuvers are
characterized by an increased speed and sharp reversals. A

Momentum candle gives quick confirmation in all cases and can offer a
second chance to traders who prefer a more defensive style

23. What is a Trend?
Trend is the favorite word of traders, but also of investors. The
definitions of a trend are numerous. Diagonal lines with three points of
contact, channel, moving averages with crossovers depending on the
point of view, double tops/bottoms, broken SHS neck line, breakout
from a trading range, zigzagging, primary trend, secondary trend, test
of top, test of bottom, confirmed, unconfirmed...
What can a day trader do with it? Very little. Even if one of these
definitions reveals itself as a trend, it is by no means in the realm of any
human being to predict what will happen next. Why should a realityoriented day trader deal with the ballast of calculations and projections
of all kinds if nobody can predict the future anyway? Is it not difficult
enough to recognize deception?
William Dunnigan was one of the outstanding spirits of the Golden
Age of Technical Analysis. During his long creative period he was in
contact with the greatest analytical minds of his time. (Livermore,
Jackson, Schabacker, Rhea…) His book "One - Way Formula for
Trading in Stocks & Commodities"(10) was published in 1957 and is
considered one of the shining examples of the technical view of price
fluctuations.
After decades of trying to find trend definitions such as the always
controversial Dow Theory tried, Dunnigan came up with an amazingly
simple definition of a trend in his last work, which he regarded as
universal for all markets. He believed that you shouldn't make a
mountain out of a molehill and defined the possibility of a beginning
trend in two ways. He left it up to the market to decide which of his two
main options it would take when starting a new trend and gave equal
importance to both.
- A market makes a rising bottom from and closes above the top of
the last secondary movement. He called this ASC = Ascending Bottom.
The trend is valid unless ASC gets nullified. With a top reversal this
would be a descending top (DES = Descending Top).
- A market penetrates two previous peaks from a mainstream low
and closes above them. He called this P2T = penetration of 2 tops
(bottom reversal). A possible top reversal is defined when the market

penetrates two previous bottoms from a mainstream high and closes
below. How this ultimately looks like on the chart is completely
irrelevant.
Dunnigan implemented his ideas with weekly charts and only used
HLC bar charts (High, Low, Close). For him the law of inertia (=
momentum) was the most important thing. He was absolutely right,
because without Follow Through any form of clear price action is
impossible. Considering the fact that the trading volumes at that time
were negligible compared to today, Dunnigan's principles based on
HLC weekly charts can easily be transferred to today's intraday charts.
I will save myself showing variation A here, because this is a
common ascending or descending zigzag pattern that appears at the
end of a movement. My mentor also shared this idea. He asked for
another correction to confirm a trend.
Actually, this idea of a beginning of a trend in the shape of zigzags
originates from Robert Rhea, who was the most prominent
representative of the second Dow Theory generation. He referred to the
Dow Jones Industrial and believed that the probability of a reversal was
highest in the case of a lower second peak (top) and vice versa (rising
bottom).
If you follow this trend definition, it was always a problem for me to
decide whether to trade a simple zigzag formation or to wait for another
confirmation in form of a mini correction as my mentor suggested. If you
wait for all kinds of confirmation on a chart, you quickly lose track of the
market participants you want to follow. Now to Variant
B
Figure 99: Variant B

This is a beginning intraday trend of EURUSD on a 5 minute chart. Of
particular interest on this chart is the fact that each time the momentum
develops its greatest strength when the last two tops of a previous
movement are crossed to the upside. In the lower part, trend traders
cover in panic, creating additional momentum, when the two tops were
taken out. Regardless of this, this common example also shows that
over 70% of the total price action takes place in sideways zones. It is
just interrupted by two powerful moves.
Similar situations can be observed on countless charts in this book.
In some examples I have called this situation a squeeze. If it occurs,
you can speak of a power bottom or power top, which is confirmed by
the increase in momentum when the marked tops are penetrated.
These are the stop losses of those traders who are wrong and get
stopped out. In many cases they give the momentum an extra boost as
seen in the middle of this chart.

Dunnigan referred to follow up trades as "repeat signals". These
occurred when a price, after overcoming new resistance, made a
correction that did not close below the starting point. His operational
plan comprised two parts. Fund L (longer term profits) remained in the
market until a trend was nullified by regaining an ASC, DES or
mainstream High (Low). Fund S was used variably for repeat signals
and liquidated when small profits were available.
When I read this book about 15 years ago I switched my day trading
charts to HLC bar charts for a while. I found out that results with simple
HLC Bar charts where the same if not better. Hence I never felt any
need to learn about the special meaning of all these exotic names of
isolated candlestick formations. I only use candlesticks anyway
because they are simpler to understand when looking at a chart.
I once talked to a younger trader who enthusiastically followed
candlestick formations. He explained a pattern to me, which he had
recently learned. To me it looked like a simple rounding bottom, but he
called it “Frying pan pattern.” I did not dare to ask him why it wasn´t
called “inverted cucumber formation.”
The concept discussed here are not applicable to every situation like
everything else in trading. But it should give you a fairly good idea
about evolving trends. Dunnigan's ideas from 70 years ago will still exist
in another 70 years from here.

24. Trade- and Risk Management
There are many theories about trade- and risk management. These are
more reminiscent of the story of the hunter who sells the fur of a bear
before killing it. Of course, when trading futures, you should only ever
use a very small part of your trading account. This should never exceed
2%. Legends such as Larry Williams and Richard Dennis, the founder
of the Turtle Trader, used 25% or more of their trading capital for a
single trade. These times are past and would ruin any trading account
in a very short time.
But if you follow today's theories, you quickly get the impression that
every success is based solely on trade management and psychology.
Apart from that, it is basically irrelevant which methods are used. Yes,
there is the endowment effect, disposition effect, loss aversion and
other problems. Every trader suffers from some kind of weakness,
some of which is even innate. But these are not the only factors that
determine success or failure.
A trader needs a method which enables him to be absolutely
convinced that what he is doing has a hand and foot. This is the only
way he gets the ability to intuitively recognize promising situations.
Good traders know after a short time whether a trade will bring success
or whether it will remain a pipe burst.

Take Profit
In this context, I would like to touch briefly on the take profit issue.
Instead of the clumsy CRV air formulas of classical analytical thinking.
Flexible volume profiles offer an intelligent help here. In this book it was
explained that volume clusters are important support and resistance
zones. Low Volume Zones (Thin Profiles) are therefore the zones of
accelerated movement. After passing through these zones the
momentum will automatically decrease. A take profit order should be
placed there. The following slides should give you an idea about this.
Figure 100: ES May 2020 (5 min. chart)

In this respect, it must be said that there are instruments that at times
react less well to previous low volume clusters. The reason is that stock
markets in particular often change direction several times during the
course of the day. Beginners are recommended to enter a take profit
target with three times the initial risk. If you have a trained eye, you can
judge whether a trade is gaining momentum right after it has started. It
is especially important to reach the zones where retail traders are
increasingly stopped out. If you see in these zones that a follow through
with a simultaneous increase in volatility is taking place, then you
should try to trail or build a trade. The following charts should give you
some more ideas. In this respect, it must be said that there are
instruments which at times react less well to previous low volume
clusters
Figure 101: EUR USD low volume areas May 2020 (15 min. chart)

The low volume areas on the right side of the chart were quickly
crossed downwards after two typical ricochets.

The 3 most important Rules of Risk Management
Some day traders believe that it is not important where you start a
trade. This may all have been right in times when prices have moved at
a snail's pace as with few interruptions until 2020. Here the carriage is
harnessed to the horse. Especially in view of today’s generally
increased volatility, it makes a big difference whether you are 50 points
or more off the Dax or whether you start from the right foot. The longer
an initiated trade remains without follow through, the higher the risk
becomes. The main focus should always be to keep losses as small as
possible, but also not to choke off a trade (see next chapter). For this
purpose you need a trading plan with an entry as exact as possible.
When it comes to timing, order flow strategies offer an irreplaceable
help.
Every day trader also makes bad trades. However, if he recognizes
this as soon as possible, then he is a winner! He has traded completely
correctly. Day trading is not an investment. I will gladly pass on the
three most important rules of day trading free of charge. They are not
mine anyway, but from Market Wizard Ed Seykota:
1. Cut loss

2. Cut loss
3. Cut loss
- If you start a long position and the price makes a higher low but not a
higher high, you should become suspicious
- If you start a short position and the price makes a lower high, but not a
lower low, then you should also become suspicious

Where to put a Stop Loss?
One of the most frequent questions regarding trade management
relates to the stop loss. This is where complicated calculations are put
into practice. The ATR indicator has become an absolute fashionable
term. Once again, the fundamental error in thinking consists in the fact
that traders assume that they can calculate the future behavior of the
market with formulas from the past. In this book a first answer was
given. A stop loss should definitely not be set where most retail traders
set it, based on known chart constellations.
Intraday volatility changes several times a day, especially today.
Just think of the "fast and slow zones" of the volume profile (high / low
volume areas). In other words: volatility is relative. It cannot be preprogrammed, at most it can be made visible. This is shown in my online
course. The task of a day trader is to enter into phases of "relatively"
low intraday volatility and to leave the market after volatility has
increased significantly thereafter.
Another possibility is to set the stop loss just above / below the price
level of the POC located near the entry point. POC's can be identified
by a window at each individual candle as shown in this book. This
feature is called "maximum volume level" in the Atas software.
There is no point wasting time brooding over stop loss points or
trying to calculate them using indicator formulas. It is often forgotten
that every decision should be based on a well elaborated strategy. For
a day trader this begins with a trading plan. This must be coordinated
in such a way that a trade moves quickly in the desired direction after
entry. In this book many setups were shown. Each setup required a
stop loss, which was adapted to the respective situation.

Setting a stop loss is only a secondary process that is
automatically derived from a good trading plan.
There are many traders who let a trade that has been started drift
around. This book does not contain strategies that accept such a way
of thinking. A simple method is to first set an initial Stop Loss in order to
completely hedge against a significant loss. Then you set yourself a
time stop. This could be: "If this trade does not show a follow through
after 3 more candles, then I skip it, no matter if with a small loss or
profit". This forces a correct trading decision from the beginning. If a
trade does not work out according to your trading plan within a fixed
period of time, then…Bye, Bye
You can also practice something like this outside of trading. It
saves a lot of frustration.

Trailing Stops
Here again there are many theories that have little to do with reality. Of
course, trades with a quick follow through without pullback are best, but
unfortunately it is not always the case. I only trail my stop after a clear
movement in the planned direction or as squeeze has taken place. I
have tried to explain this in various sections of this book. It often
happens that even a good trade snaps back, especially in the early
stages. This has been particularly visible for years on EURUSD with
the start of European trading. Whoever trades this instrument knows
what I am talking about.
If, on the other hand, I see that a trade is just "fiddling around", then I
prefer to leave the market immediately, whether with a small profit or
loss. Once you have developed a feeling for an instrument, you will no
longer want to become a slave to mechanical systems that only serve
the broker. In trading, nothing is as good as the human brain. If a trade
shows no more power, you get out or close a partial position. There will
never be an optimal solution.

25. Short Term Trading - A Trade Example
Day trading as defined at the beginning of this book requires the
closing of a position on the same day. Swing trading is generally
understood to consist of holding a position overnight. In general, a 4hour time frame is used here.
From this point of view, short term trading is a hybrid that
corresponds to both trading styles to some extent, but can be used
more effectively depending on the situation. For example, a day trade
started in a short time frame with minimal entry risk can, under optimal
conditions, turn into a forex position trade, which then runs over several
days. In such cases, currency pairs or non-European stock indices,
which are traded around the clock with sufficient liquidity and thus
guarantee better risk management with regard to stop losses, are a
suitable option.
In order to describe the aspects mentioned here more clearly, I
would like to show here a real trade that I made in February 2017. This
trade does not fit into either of the two drawers mentioned above. But in
certain way it undermines one of the main aspects of this book
Every trend starts with micro inflection points
The following EURUSD trade was started in a 3 minute time frame with
5 pips risk. This was held for about 3 days and then ended with a
dreamlike risk /return of 16 : 1 (average value of all 3 partial positions).
The entry points of three partial positions have been marked here.

Fig. 102: EURUSD on 17 th of February 2017 (3 min. chart, CET)

On the top we see a pattern, which I have called Backfire Pattern , on
the left side 3 or 4 double tops that fail one after the other. On the right
side you can see that this trade was decided long before the European
institutional trade started. For this reason, I also project EURUSD in
volume profiles generally from 8.00 CET. This trade was made in 2017,
but situations of this kind have arisen in the same way ever since the
euro was introduced 20 years ago. At some point I thought that this
would stop, but it hasn't. Each trading instrument has its own
characteristics (chapter 15)

The further Course
On the following hourly chart I have shown the entire three-day trade
process.

Figure 103: EURUSD from 17.2. - 21.2.17 (60 min. chart, CET)

Perhaps real day traders have done the beginning of this trade on day
1 in a similar way, and thus have booked a nice daily profit. However,
the second day of this trend would have presented them with the first
big problems, as it was only characterized by a whipsaws. In the best
case it would have resulted in a small daily profit for day traders.
A European day trader would have completely missed the biggest
part of this overall movement on day 3, because it was already initiated
at the beginning of the Asian trading hours and completed with the
beginning of the European trading hours. Swing traders use larger time
frames by definition. However, if momentum suddenly increases, these
can be an eternity and cost valuable time before any entry is made.
They also would have been severely disadvantaged.
A position trader who only trades on daily charts would have had to
stay in the market for months to achieve a similar net result if the chart
had been exactly related to his time frame. However, for a professional
short term trader such a time horizon is light years away.

A final word
A day trader, as described in this book, does not need to fear Algos
or the hyenas of the markets, which take a tick off in a fraction of a
second with high frequency trading systems. He trades like a leopard.
This animal is known as a loner. A leopard can compete with any other
animal at its speed. But it is patient and only acts when it is sure of its
prey.
Welcome to the Jungle

Literature:
1. J.F. Dalton, E.T. Jones, R.P. Dalton, Mind over Markets,
ebook
2. Trader Dale, Volume Profile, ebook
3. Richard M. Schabacker, Technical Analysis and Stock
Market Profits, page 110, 137, Pearson 1997
4. Daniel Kahnemann: Schnelles Denken, Langsames
Denken, page 243, 272, Sieder Verlag 2011
5. Gustave Le Bon, Die Psychologie der Massen, page 43,
Kröner Verlag 1982
6. Robert Rhea, Dow Theory, S.95, Snowball Printing 2012
7. William Dunnigan: One - Way Formula for Trading Stocks
and Commodities, page 218 ff. Harriman House Ltd. 2005
Chart Software:
-

Atas
Sierrachart
Tradeview

